Wednesday, 20th December 2000

Parliament met at 12.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance. I had two questions for oral answer, which have been pending for the last two weeks. One was on the East African General Insurance on the issue of the repossession certificate to wrong, dubious Asians. The other one was on the Golf Course Hotel development.  

The two questions, I am told, cannot be answered because the specific Ministers, who assumed to have answered those questions, are not present. Is that the way we are running business? Don’t we have a functional framework, which can enable an Assistant Minister or a Minister of State to answer the same questions? 

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr. Kajura Muganwa Henry): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I informed the hon. Member, in fact twice this morning, that I shall be prepared to answer the question tomorrow, and indeed I have also informed your office. So, we shall be ready to answer the question regarding plot 67, Y. K. Lule Road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apparently, we do not have any Minister from the Ministry of Finance, but if your question is about repossession under the Expropriated Properties Act, the Minister carries out that function, and currently hon. Gerald Ssendaula is not here. He is the one who made the decision therefore, nobody can answer for him. It was a personal decision by the Minister.  

Secondly, you have been told that the question did not pass through the right channels. As far as the Clerk is concerned, he was not aware of the existence of that question. We do not know whether it went to hon. Ssendaula or not. So, the best we can do is wait for the return of hon. Ssendaula, who will be required to answer your question. And since he is not here, what you can do, you cannot duplicate the work. Channel the question through the Clerk, and maybe by the time he comes the Clerk will have shown the question to him.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we hear from the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee on the pending work?

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ben Wacha): Mr. Speaker, this is the Committee’s report. I am sorry the copies for Members should be here any time. They are being cyclostyled. I do not how long it will take, but I can read mine. 

The amendment proposed by the Minister to clause 24 of the Political Organisations Bill, 1998 was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on December 7th this year for reconsideration. If I can refresh Members’ minds, the proposed amendment by the Minister was as follows:
“24. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, and in conformity with Article 73 of the Constitution, during the period when the Movement political system is in force-  
(c) a political party may not hold a public meeting 
(d) a political party or political organisation may - 
    (i) own newspapers, radio stations and organise indoor seminars at national and district level. 
    (ii) subject to Section 20 of this Act and provisions of any other law for the time being in force, raise funds from any sympathisers.
    (iii) hold national executive committee meetings and national council meetings.
    (iv) hold delegates’ conferences; and
    (v) open offices at national headquarters.”

That was the Minister’s proposed amendment on that day and. Then (e) would read as follows: “subject to Article 73(2) of the Constitution, no political parties or political organisations or any member thereof may carry on any activities that may interfere with the adopted political system for the time being in force.”  

The Minister appeared before the Committee and proposed a new amendment to his proposed amendment. He proposed that clause 24 be deleted and the following formulation be inserted therein: The marginal note for the proposed amendment is “prohibition of certain activities during the Movement period” 

The new amendment reads as follows: “notwithstanding anything in this Act, during the period when the Movement political system is in force, political activities may continue, except that no political party or organisation and no person on behalf of a political party or organisation shall -
    (a) sponsor or offer a platform to or in any way campaign for or against a candidate in any presidential or parliamentary election or any other election organised by the Commission.
    (b) use any symbol, slogan, colour or name identifying any political party or organisation for the purpose of campaigning for or against any candidate in any election referred to in paragraph (a).
    (c) Hold seminars below the district level. 
    (d) Open offices or branches below the national level 
    (e) Hold public meetings.

I think there was an (f), but it was deleted.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I stand on a point of procedure on behalf of the people of Lubaga South.  When the chairperson was beginning the presentation of his report, and knowing very well that he is supposed to have made sure that we get the copies of the report, he said that any time we would receive copies. This takes me back to what Obote said, “you will find your copies of the Constitution in your pigeon holes”. Can I be assured that we are getting the copies, because this is a very important amendment and we have to speak to the people who sent us here before we deliberate effectively on a matter of this magnitude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed with your report.

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Sir. The Committee resolved as follows: In the preamble to 24, we propose that the words “and no person on behalf of a political party or organisation” be deleted. The justification for that is that the phrase went beyond the constitutional outlines given under Article 269 of the Constitution. 

I have talked to the Minister and he has agreed that this phrase should be deleted from the preamble to clause 24.  We also resolved that (f) should be deleted, because it is too general, and the Minister has agreed. So, there is no (f) now. Originally, (f) read as follows: “carry on any activities that may interfere with the adopted political system” The Minister also felt that this was too general and too vague, so it should not be part of the Bill.  

There was a general feeling in the Committee that the proposed restrictions by the Minister appeared too severe and unjustifiable if read side by side with the provisions of Article 73 of the Constitution. Somehow, we never resolved this empathy. Therefore, the Committee proposes that the House votes on each one of the proposed paragraphs. Sir, I beg to report.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Sir, my contribution is related to the hon. Chairperson’s except that there is one word or two words, which have been left out of 24(d). It reads as follows, “open offices or branches below the national level”. I had indicated to the Committee that I would like to say, “open or operate…” These are in Article 269 of the Constitution. Otherwise, I have agreed to everything else.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Justice over two pertinent issues related to the activities of political parties during this time. What explanation is he giving for his suggestion that political parties should not be permitted to hold seminars below district level or open offices below the national level? What is the intention of that suggestion? Why do you want to stifle the activities of political parties if you are living in a society where political parties tomorrow could be in Government? Why are you so shortsighted? Why are we selfish as to think only of the present? What explanation are you giving us?

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We are Members of Parliament and we have the responsibility to guide this country to stability. The Movement system has been in force for 15 years, and I support the Movement system, but I feel we are over doing it when we try to suppress the activities of the other parties. What we are really doing is breeding trouble ahead. 

I personally do not fear to compete with multi-partyists in the field. I think time has come for us to free the parties totally. Let them hold their meetings as they want, let them fly their flags as they want, and let us go to the field and compete. If we start working against the parties now, it might backfire in the future, and then there would be confusion.  

I really do not see why parties should be restricted in any way. Perhaps the Minister might give us an explanation for that. It is high time we freed the parties. 

My vision of the Movement system in future is that they should continue. This referendum should not end the Movement’s operations in the next five years or so. Let us make the Movement a continuous choice in addition to the parties. But if we try to restrict the parties, then the Movement is going to die when the parties come into power. Let the Movement be consistently part of the choice that the people of this country have got to make. Even when the parties come back, we should keep the Movement system alive. Let the people of this country have the choice to elect a party or the Movement system.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WANGUBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just want to respond to the query raised by hon. Lukyamuzi.   The idea behind this is just to safeguard the political organisation that is in place. Otherwise, if we allow the political parties to fly their flags and carry out other activities below the district level, then you would be interfering with the management of the system in place. What colour would the Movement fly if you allowed it to fly a flag? The Movement has no party colour like other parties have. So, if you allowed this, then you would be allowing them to fly a particular colour, and therefore, you would be turning it into a party. So, that in essence answers what hon. Lukyamuzi had raised. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we are debating this law because of the command of the Constitution. The question of no restriction in the present set-up does not arise.  The yardstick or the weighing stone is Article 73(2).  If you bring up the question of no restriction, then there is no purpose for making this law. So, let us consider the restrictions in light of Article 73(2). Let us see what kind of restrictions we can put. Let us not say that there should not be any restrictions, but let us measure the restrictions with Article 73(2).

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My contribution is with regard to the restrictions. I would like to compare it to a medical case where one of your organs or many organs are defective and therefore you rely on outside support, and you hope that those organs will recover. In fact, as you keep getting that external support, the other organs actually forget that they have a role to play, and they moreless go to sleep. They actually die.  

You can relate this to companies in Uganda competing with companies, which are importing things. These companies normally ask the state to restrict the importation of other things from outside so that there is no competition. That is protectionism. So, these companies are protected, and they think they are doing well, but the reality comes in when the restrictions are removed. Those companies collapse. 

So, as a person who supports the Movement, I get concerned that we have many restrictions. The fewer the restrictions the better for us in the Movement. We can then develop mechanisms of survival in a world, which, whether we like it or not, will have to have multi-parties, multi-organisations, and so on. Whether you like it or not, that is where we are heading. You just have to look around the region and the world and you will see that this is a reality of life.

So, I would like to see as few restrictions as could be allowed by Article 73. The fewer the better, because it is good for the parties themselves. I would like those parties to develop internal democracy so that our people have a choice. If the parties are so bad, we can tell them that they are so bad. If the people do not have that choice, if the parties are tied and guarded, and yet for us we have this support from the state, we shall think that we are doing well and yet we have that blanket support from the state. 

As a Movementist, I tell you that this will be very dangerous for the Movement and for democracy. The time will come then we will be like Swaziland. The King was there for 83 years and people had forgotten all the traditions. When he died, they did not know -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we should be specific. When you are addressing this issue, you should target the restrictions, which the Minister has proposed. Your contribution should be on whether this restriction measures up or does not measure up to 73(2). That is how we should proceed, instead of a general debate.

DR. NKUUHE: Okay, I would not like the restrictions to say that the parties cannot open branches below the district level. I do not see what we fear. If Article 73 allows that, sure, we should remove them and then see.  We can actually learn from what will happen when they open branches. If we do not allow them, we will never know, and when the time comes for them to open branches, we shall never know what has hit us. 

On that basis, Ladies and Gentlemen, I appeal to you to promote democracy. Let us assume we were on the other side, because time may come when we will be on the other side, we might have to face this very hammer we are putting in place. I think that is very dangerous. So, let us treat others as we would like them to treat us, and the beneficiaries will be the people of Uganda and the democratic process in Uganda, including the Movement. I would like to live in that world where the change is so smooth that we do not have to have these armed struggles again. I thank you very much.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to seek some fundamental clarifications, and then I may make some observations on the provisions read by the chairman of the Committee.  

I am under the impression that we made the Movement law under a particular provision of the Constitution and in that law we did not specify what restrictions to impose on the Movement and its activities when the multi-party political system has been adopted. I am finding it entirely difficult to appreciate that when we are now making another law provided for under Article 72 of the Constitution, to regulate the financing and organisation of political parties, it should be necessary to provide for restrictions on its activities when the Movement political system is adopted. I consider this particular provision discriminatory. It is sectarian as and if it were to appear in this Act.  

Consequently, my own view would be that we restrict, like we did for the Movement Act, the making of this law on the regulation of political parties to Article 72. Afterwards, we can make a general law applicable to both the multiparty political system and the Movement political system using Article 73 of the Constitution.  We really would have prescribed what each system we are obliged to have when one system has been adopted, and then we would not be making a discriminatory law. As it is now, this particular clause 24 imposed on the Political Organisations Act without its counter provision in the Movement Act is discriminatory, as far as I am concerned.  

Unless we are really pretending, I would like the hon. Minister to clarify to me why it was necessary to come out with a discriminatory provision in the Political Organisations Act. And I would like to know whether it is impossible to make an independent Act to apply or to operationalise Article 73. 

There is another issue I would like the hon. Minister to respond to. If it were to be said that when the multiparty political system is adopted then it should be its function to define the kind of restrictions to apply to the Movement system, I would like him to clarify to me in what Act such restrictions would be imposed. Would it be imposed as an Amendment to the Political Organisations Act? How else would it be done? If we do not make that general provision here, when the time comes and you want the multi-party political systems to impose that restriction, where would it be made and in what context?  That is the second clarification.

Thirdly, both the Local Government Act and the Movement Act makes any adult of Uganda of 18 years and above a member of the Movement. Supposing at that time a restriction is imposed by the multi-party political system, which would have been adopted, to the effect - and this is a very important statement I am making here - that this will no longer be applicable, where would the membership of the Movement come from? -(Interruption)

MR. BAKU: Thank you, hon. Okulo Epak, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform my Brother, hon. Okulo Epak, that under the Movement Act, Section 39, it has been provided that the Act shall only have effect when the Movement political system is in force in Uganda. Therefore, by the time the people of Uganda choose to go to a multiparty political system, the Act governing the Movement system will elapse.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you for that information. In other words, even the Movement political system will elapse. That is very good information.  

So, fourthly, in effect by intending to operationalise Article 73, this Bill is actually transferring the provisions of Article 269. That is what it is in effect. What is in present Article 269 of the Constitution is being transferred en masse into the Bill on the pretext that we are making a law to operationalise Article 73 of the Constitution. Mr. Chairman, may I make my observations after seeking those clarifications.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have taken five minutes. That was a contribution I suppose. Well, I will give you one more minute.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you Mr. Chairman. Let us be serious. Restrictions on colours are very serious restrictions. Maybe you can restrict flags but not colours! Supposing I am a UPC member and I am wearing a shirt, which is red with black, or a shirt, which is red with blue, and somebody says you are displaying your party colours, how will I respond to that? We have colours displayed on the flags and we have colours, which people wear as part of their garments.  Which colours are we talking about? 

There is absolutely nonsense in imposing restrictions to party activities below the district or in the village level! Where does each party member live except in the village! Who does not live in a village? Do we live in a place called ‘district level’ or in a place called ‘national level’? We all live in villages, and that is where we can exist and act. 

If we are talking about conferences being held at district level or at national level, that would be genuine, specific and understandable. But if you are talking generally about activities at district level and I am a villager and all the members of the party are from the villages, and you say they should not have activities, what sort of restriction is that?  It does not make sense. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you appreciate, we had a general debate, which we concluded, and then went to the Second Reading. We only received this report to tell us the position that the Minister and the Committee have reached on the two clauses that we postponed, that is 20 and 24. Now you have heard the report and you have also heard a brief comment from the Minister, and the few comments from Members.  

If there is now an impasse between the Committee, the Minister and also the Members, the proper procedure should be for somebody, at an appropriate moment when we are considering the clause, to move an Amendment as they may wish or to reject certain provisions. We go on like that. So, I suggest that this general debate ends here and we go back to clause 20. If you want to take action on 24, you will do it when we reach 24. Now let us go to 20.

Clause 20

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. With due respect to you, I have an outstanding amendment and I would like to move it. I propose that clause 20 be amended by inserting the following new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (6): “political parties, which were represented in the Constituent Assembly and were recognised at the passing of the 1995 Constitution, shall be entitled to be funded by the state for any such amount of money as may be approved by Parliament.”

MS. EGUNYU: Mr. Chairman, I have heard the amendment being proposed, but I have not heard it being seconded.  So, the proposed Amendment is not on the Floor. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the real sense, this is an amendment moved during the Committee Stage, so it requires no such secondment. It can be seconded, but it may not.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr. Chairman. We all need the co-operation of political parties in the remaining period. So, if we fund specific political organisations, you are going to get maximum co-operation from parties, and the management of society shall become easy for you.  

Two, Article 72(1) of the Constitution of Uganda guarantees the formation or the creation of political parties. It says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisations is guaranteed.” 
These political organisations are not trading companies. They are specifically directed towards improving Government. If you invest in them, you do not lose anything. So, I propose that Members of Parliament look at this very seriously.  

There is no constitutional provision which guarantees that the Movement arrangement shall be here to stay as much as Article 72 (1) talks about the political parties.  In this Constitution, the Movement is looked at as a temporary measure and the parties are looked at as a permanent establishment, and Article 72(1) justifies my statement.  

Lastly, if we are serious about the conception of democracy, we should know that democracy, among other things, implies institutional building. This country has gone to the dogs, partially because we have not sufficiently invested in institutional building. If we are institutionally building the Movement for the good of all, why don’t we also invest in the other option, which are the parties? 

I propose, strongly, that we support the proposal that as we invest in the Movement for the good of all of us, let us also invest in the parties. We have been making a lot of noise saying the parties are disorganised, they were not organised very well, and they have damaged us. Why don’t we invest in them so that we improve their quality, operations and organisation? I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, are you saying that the parties, which were represented in the Constituent Assembly, namely Uganda Peoples Congress, the Democratic Party, Conservative Party, Labour party should be funded, but those registered after this law has been passed should not be funded? I think you should clear this so that we know.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, we have to begin somewhere.  Otherwise, if you said that, one could as well say that the new wing of the Movement headed by Besigye should equally be funded. We are saying, have some limitations for the good of all. The fact that those parties were represented in the Constituent Assembly is evidence of some specifications of establishments that we should harness. In order for us to stop the influx that could possibly emerge, we must put specifications and limitations.

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Chairman, I think we are introducing an element, which is likely to be negative in the whole process of the present debate. We know that there are two major parties, which have existed in this country, that is UPC and DP. And thinking that UPC did not participate in the formation of the Constitution, as hon. Lukyamuzi tends to imply, is counter productive and on the verge of being dangerous! We are trying to correct ourselves. We have made mistakes in the past, but let us correct those mistakes. 

The future of this country depends on two major parties, UPC and DP, –(Interjections)- the other parties, in my opinion, are irrelevant. Did the Conservative Party come up with a conservative agenda as an economic system?  No.  UPM – (Laughter) 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I would like to say, with the greatest respect, that in 1980 we came out with a definitive system on economic, political and other issues, and I campaigned here. You were still in America. You were not here.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much. I will summarise it this way, let political parties look after themselves.  Let us remove the clause, which restricts their raising of funds. I think that is the solution to the problem of funding political parties. In which country does the taxpayer fund political parties? If the political party cannot survive by raising funds, let it die.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I am indebted to what he said about the issue of new parties. I think it is time for us to pass a law deliberately excluding new parties from coming up, and they are coming up. But having said that, I really wonder whether hon. Lukyamuzi’s motion does not in fact run counter to Article 93(b) of the Constitution. It reads as follows: “Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 
(b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article.”  

I read this amendment or proposal as seeking, in a really covert way, to make a charge on the Consolidated fund. This is what I see. And if he wants to do that, then of course he has got this against him.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to the motion moved by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. 

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 20, agreed to

Clause 24

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you remember that we had dealt with (a) and (b), now we are moving to the rest

MR. WACHA: Yes, we had pronounced ourselves on (a) and (b). The next one, (c), reads, “hold seminars below the district level.” But before we go there, Can I move that the words “and no person on behalf of a political party or organisation” be deleted from the preamble?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I have no objection, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WACHA: The next one is (c), “hold seminars below the district level”. 

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the record, I just wanted the Minister to clarify to the House what a seminar at the district level is and what a seminar below the district level is. Are we talking about location?  Are we talking about the invitation list? What are we talking about? 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, we are talking about level and location. I will tell you what I know. While I may have a seminar at Masaka headquarters, that is the city, I may not have a seminar in Kanyogoga, which is a village in Kalungu County. This is what we are saying. You may have all the seminars with whatever numbers and with any people, but do not go down to the village. The fear is that once you go right down to the grassroots, where the LC.1 and Movement structures are, then you are likely to cause a problem. That is really the fear.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, following what the Minister has said “below district level” could also be interpreted as actually freedom to hold a seminar anywhere in the district. To avoid that, we should say “hold seminars below the district headquarters’ level”. I wish to move that amendment.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is an amendment on formulation. Now I am going to put the question to the amended formulation.  It is on the restriction that seminars cannot be held below the district level or any other level. For purposes of clarity, he was improving on the formulation by the Minister. The Minister’s proposal was that we make that restriction. Now I am asking you to measure that restriction with Article 73(2). So, if you agree that it is properly placed, it measures with 73(2), you allow it, if you do not, then you disallow it. 

MS. EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to seek clarification as to when we can distinguish clearly between a campaign rally and a seminar. How do we distinguish the two, because some seminars may tend to be campaign rallies? I want some clarification before I vote on this. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe let us get all the points of clarification and then somebody will answer.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a problem with what hon. Kayonde was raising. When you talk about district headquarters, one may understand that this would be a Government installation. Now, do you think a political party will come to the RDC’s office and say that they want to hold a seminar there?  I would like clarification on that. I do not know whether my perception is wrong, but once you talk about district headquarters, I could think of the City Hall, for example. I would like clarification on that, because I thought the Minister’s provision was a better provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will give you an example of when we created new districts. I think in that motion they named certain towns as the headquarters of a district. It is not the building but it is the place, like a town, a municipality or a city that are the headquarters.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. That issue is very complicated and I need clarification. In Kumi, for example, I know that we normally conduct seminars, and sometimes because of the availability of facilities out of the town headquarters, we go out of the demarcated township and we go to the villages. I want to find out how we shall be able to differentiate these, because you may go to a primary school in a given village and that is the facility, which is available. Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, why should the organisation of seminars below the district level be seen as a source of discord? Could the Minister answer that question? Maybe what you perceive is contrary to what should be done? 

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Chairman, I was of the view that the Minister is proposing a seminar instead of a rally in order to avoid the commotion, which we are talking about.  I find this very difficult, knowing the geographical location of the district headquarters of some of our districts. The headquarters are very far away, so how can one bring the population from where they are to the district headquarters? I think this particular restriction is misplaced, and practically, it is impossible. 

If you are talking about commotion or any conflict, let that come in with the case of rallies. But when it comes to seminars, it is perceived that they will be well organised meetings where the people who are going to participate are known. They will register and they will make sure that there is some kind of discipline, because even the police would have been informed 48 hours before the meeting. So, I feel that this particular restriction is misplaced. I therefore propose that it should be deleted. Thank you.  

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I would like clarification. When we speak of a seminar, some people think that we are going to organise these seminars in a hall, but most of our places have no halls. Shall we go on building halls before we start a seminar? I may get a very big tree where we can hold it. But when we speak about a seminar, the police officer will start asking us, ‘have you got a hall where you are going to hold it?’ So, I do not know whether the Government is undertaking to put up halls in every area, because you are giving us something, which at the same time cannot be practical.  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu knows very well that halls are not mentioned anywhere in this proposal.

Secondly, I would like to inform him that it is perfectly in order to hold a seminar under a tree. We have even given formal lectures in the open. So, there is nothing wrong with holding these seminars under a tree.

Thirdly, I would like to advise him to move very quickly and get some development done so that there are halls, if we need them, for him to hold his seminars – (Laughter). I thank you, Mr. Chairman 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am now going to put the question to this particular restriction.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.BEN WACHA: Sir, the next one is (d). I want to mention on the onset that this is one area where the Committee and the Minister did not agree. I am just being a mouthpiece. The Minister wants (d) to read as follows: “open or operate offices or branches below the national level.”  That is the Minister’s formulation.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Before hon. Ben Wacha moves in, I thought it would be prudent for the hon. Minister of Justice to answer the queries, which were raised in the House just now. I thought he should do that before we go to the next provision or even before we vote.

MRS. BALEMEZI: I have a problem, Mr. Chairman. We are passing a very important law, but I wonder whether my Colleagues got copies of these reports in their pigeonholes. We are going to vote without actually knowing what we are voting for, and this is a law, which we cannot just be passed like that.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not voting on a report. We are in a Committee stage, and we are dealing with a Bill, which had a Second reading. It has nothing to do with a report.  This is a question of considering the restriction measures with the yardstick being Article 73(2) as I told you. If you do not think it measures up, you do not accept it.  

We had a Committees’ report, which was read and debated during the general debate. This matter was only referred to the Committee to find out whether they could agree on a common ground. That is all. Otherwise, we are continuing with the Committee stage, which started some time ago.  So, now you have heard what the Minister is proposing, namely “open or operate offices or branches below the national level.”  And the Chairperson has said the Committee has got some amendment they want to propose.  

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee would like to substitute the word “national” with the word “district”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, now the Minister is saying it should be the national level, but the Committee is saying no, let us go down to the district. 

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Chairman, I just want clarification from both the Committee and the hon. Minister. The Minister is saying that branch offices should be opened at the national level, but how do you arrive at the national level? How am I going to ask a Karimojong from Kotido to open a Karamoja branch at the national level? I am talking about the practicability of this particular provision! And if you are to say that they open at the district level, you will also find that in a district there are so many sub-counties, which will require their own branches where they can operate as a party!  

Can I be clarified on how these people are going to move from the furthest corner of the district to a particular place in the district where they want the branch to be opened? Are they opening up just one branch for the district or several branches in the district? How practical is it going to be? I see some confusion arising.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, my answer to her question is that, the Committee felt the district was better than the national level.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We have just said that political parties can hold a seminar in the headquarters. If they do not have a hall for holding the seminar and they have constructed a kind of hall in the district where they decide to hold their seminar, can you call that an office? Can they have that to hold their seminars? Won’t it confuse us? What is an office and what is a seminar hall? Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Baba Diri, we have already finished with the seminars, and the House has accepted that you can hold seminars at the district level. Now we are on branches. The Minister was saying that they should stay at the headquarters. The Committee is saying no, they should go down and open branches. So, we shall start with voting on that amendment of the Committee, unless you are proposing another amendment. 

MS. BABA DIRI: Are they allowed to construct a hall at the district headquarters?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MS. BABA DIRI: Won’t we confuse that with an office?  They may construct a hall for holding seminars and at the same time they put their books there and turn it into an office.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If that is your fear, the best you can do, since there is a proposal to allow branches at districts, is to vote against it. If you are not convinced, if you think that this is going to offend Article 73(2), you will vote against it.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, I find a problem with this sentence. If we leave the word “branches” in both amendments, what we are actually saying is that at national level, here in Kampala, you can open branches in Nakawa, in Kololo, and where it is allowed, even if it is interfering with the LC system in these areas. I would have actually supported the amendment by hon. Kaggwa if it stated as follows: “open or operate offices below the national level”. We leave out “branches”, because what would they mean in Kampala?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, as far as the Minister is concerned, he says there should be an apex office for a party. It need not to be in Kampala. It can be in Fort-Portal, it can be in Jinja, but it would be a national office where the president or the secretary general would sit. That is the apex. But now they are saying they should go below to district level, so, you also have an apex for a district office. That is the proposal.

MR. KWERONDA RUHEMBA: Mr. Chairman, this sentence is not saying exactly what you have explained. Maybe we would rather break it into two, because if you leave it the way it is, “open or operate offices or branches below the national level”, it says otherwise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we say that in the first one they will have a national office and the in the second one district branch offices? We can do that. Would it cause any problem? 

MR. WACHA: Sir, you have to read the sub-clause with the preamble. If you read the preamble, then you will be running into trouble if you start categorising them. The preamble says that the parties may not do what is listed. So, you can say, “the parties may not have national offices”.  But what the Committee is saying is that the parties may not open branches below the district level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay. Why don’t we vote on that?  Read it again, hon. chairperson.

MR. WACHA: “…political activities may continue, except that no political party or organisation shall- 
(d) open or operate offices or branches below the district level.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, (e) is another area where the Committee and the Minister did not agree. The Committee also has another formulation it wants to bring forward.  

MR. KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, we had a problem with this provision. While the law has defined holding public meetings, we had a problem as to how members of political organisations will raise their delegates to the national conference, now that they can hold it. 

It was the view of the Committee that when it comes to choosing those delegates, they should be allowed to go and specifically choose the delegates coming to the national conference. That was the problem that arose in the Committee meeting. Now they are allowed to have a delegates’ conference, but they are not given a way of picking those members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So now, what is the proposal? Are you suggesting that holding public meetings means that you cannot have delegates meetings?

MR. KAGGWA: Apparently, it would appear that a public meeting means a general public meeting. But here you are organising people to have members elected to go and represent their colleagues from below, at the national conference. That is the impression I got.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, we should not assume that all political organisations have the same approach in constituting their delegates’ conferences. Some may choose, but the hon. Member is also introducing the other element of elections. So, I think it is better to leave it open so that a party whose method does not fall within the provisions of the law will have to improvise if it has to call a delegates’ conference. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, the Committee ran into bigger problems than have been stated by the Minister for Local Government. The way the Minister formulated this sub-clause could even stop political parties or organisations from holding delegates’ conferences, because they are bound to be public meetings! It could even stop political parties from holding national level meetings, because they are bound to be public meetings. So, we wanted a formulation, which would take care of the good intention of the Minister, and exclude the possible areas of restriction, which the Minister wanted to bring in.  

The following formulation could maybe pass: “a political party shall not hold public meetings, save for delegates’ conferences, national meetings and meetings meant for purposes of choosing delegates for the delegates’ Conferences”. 

The new formulation is in the negative. When the Minister was proposing in the positive, all these things I have stated were there. Parties could hold delegate's conferences, parties could hold national meetings, like central executive committee meetings, national council meetings et cetera. For the avoidance of doubt, the Committees added this so that those who are going to implement the law do not find a lacuna, like hon. Mukula likes saying, in the law and then try to implement it in a negative format. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you read it.

MR. WACHA: "(e) Hold public meetings save for delegates’ conferences, meetings of the national executive or national council, or meetings meant for choosing delegates to their delegates’ conferences."

MR. KWERONDA: Where do you hold the meetings to choose those who are going to the delegates’ conferences?  These meetings can only be held in the villages. Where else would you hold them? You can only hold them in the villages at the gombolola level and parish level. And that precisely depicts what the Minister intended when he said that the restrictions are made in good faith, and they are not supposed to disrupt the LC system down there. I would like the last bit of that sentence removed.

MR. WACHA: Maybe the problem is that Members do not know how political parties operate. These delegates’ conferences are held only once a year. So, you are holding these meetings, whether at the branch level or the village level, only once a year. What the Minister does not want is for political parties to start holding public rallies, and you cannot restrict public rallies. I can decide today that I am going to hold a public rally in my village called Anyeke, and the Minister does not want that. But if UPC, which is my party, calls for a delegates’ conference for 2001, I will go to the LC chairman and say, for my branch of Anyeke, I am going to hold a meeting for purposes of choosing delegates who are going to the district to be chosen as delegates of UPC in the delegates conference’. And that is once a year.  

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to say that what the chairman of the Committee is proposing is already built in the provision. He has made it clear, and I have no problem with it. Those who are saying that you cannot have these meetings to elect people, who are going to delegates’ conferences, are creating a problem. You would be providing for a conference and not the mechanics of electing members to that conference. The result will be people violating, because they do not know how they are going chose their members.  

Secondly, people will actually fail to choose members to the delegates’ conference, in which they will say that you put this to deliberately stop parties from ever holding delegates’ conferences. So, as the chairman said, even if this meeting is going to be held in the village, it is held once a year and just for purposes of choosing a delegate. That is all!

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Chairman, what we have done today is only to legalise what has been happening. We are aware that these parties have been holding delegates’ conferences even without the law, which we have put in place today.  I know quite well that the parties that exist now know their methods of getting their delegates. They do not need a meeting at all. They have been doing it. How have they been doing it?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If they have been doing it contrary to the law, such activities have been unlawful. Our intention is to enable parties to have certain authority to do such activities lawfully. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to add some emphasis on what hon. Toskin has said.  I do not want to impute wrong motives whatsoever, but I think even multi-partyists should realise that it is absolutely necessary for everybody to move towards the end - (Interjections) - For the first time I am speaking too softly for my Colleagues to hear, but I was saying that it would be appreciated if everybody really moved on a consensus.  

As I have said, I do not want to impute bad motives on anybody’s party, but I just sympathise with the view that once a year may not hurt. But you can take the whole year to prepare for that once a year meeting! We are talking about the real political world. As hon. Toskin said, surely we know how we can identify villages. If I may choose an experience in life, in 1980 the UPM, which I belonged to and I still belong to, held a very successful delegates’ conference, but we had no branches, and we did not hold those meetings. 

I think the constitutions of the parties should be complaint to the law of the country. In other words, if the party constitution says you must go to the village and appoint delegates, there ought to be a way of getting these delegates in compliance with the law. My fear about the proposal by the chairman is how people will take advantage of this loophole to spend the whole year identifying people who will come to that meeting. So, I think the chairperson of the Committee should withdraw his proposal.

MR. KWERONDA: Actually, this sentence is loaded with problems, just listen to this, "hold public meetings, save for delegates’ conferences…” Those are meetings, which are perpetual! You cannot stop them once you pass this Bill. They will be there anytime we are preparing for a national conference. 

It goes on to say  “…save for delegates’ conferences, meetings of the national executive or national council, or meetings meant for choosing delegates to their delegates’ conferences.”  That is where I have another problem. As you can see, they will be quite penetrative. They will have to go to the villages. So, I think the Minister and the chairman should sit down and re-define what they actually mean.  

MRS. OGWAL: Mr. Chairman, we went through this provision at length, and I think both sides appreciated that indeed the Government is nervous that if we were to have meetings everywhere by every party, there may be some commotion. So, we agreed that meetings should be clearly specified. And if they are clearly specified, the leadership of that particular party must use its authority, and must co-ordinate with the police so that nobody causes any commotion in that meeting.  

We also agreed that this particular provision is necessary, because very many meetings have been held, including meetings by Uganda Peoples’ Congress, but they were not covered by the law. This time we want them to be covered by the law for the purposes of trying to calm down the political nervousness. We felt that this particular provision was necessary, because there are several meetings, which have been called by parties at the national level –(Interjections)- I am talking about UPC meetings. 

Members who are known to be members of other political parties have turned up. When you ask them when did they join the party, they cannot quite clearly sort out themselves. So, we feel it is very important, and it is also necessary for the Movement Organisation. It is very necessary for the leadership to be screened at the lowest level, and the lowest level is the district level and the parish level. 

It is important for such meetings to be allowed so that we sort out ourselves out, so that when they arrive at the national level, we know who is legally supposed to represent this particular party. We felt that this was necessary. We must exercise responsibility, and we must make sure that when we do these things, we do not cause any commotion. So, I beg that this proposal be taken seriously.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would it be helpful if we said that these meetings for choosing delegates should be held at district headquarters, so that it is not at the lower level? Would it make a difference? 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This formulation says that they shall hold public meetings save for those listed, which then means that they shall hold public meetings for those purposes. Now, public meetings have been defined between the Committee and myself. And I think there was a formulation by hon. Kaggwa saying that a meeting is public if it invites anybody at all. Now, this might bring problems, if it goes beyond the purposes of the chairperson. 

I understand that a meeting to a select delegates’ conference of CP, for example, is not going to be have anybody at all. They must be members of CP.  So, in that sense, it is not a public meeting. 

The hon. chairperson might also want to look at his second reason. He said that this is opened only once a year. So, somewhere down, the formulation might say, annual meetings for purposes of that sort of thing, and then towards the end, you could also say, “choosing delegates for delegates’ conferences save that such meetings shall take place at district level”.  

MR. WACHA: I just want to answer hon. Mondo Kagonyera.  I think Members should be well advised to read section 29, which we have already passed. It is the penalty section. It is the source of the penalty for contravening clause 24, which we were dealing with. I am saying this because the idea that a person can keep on holding a meeting everyday for one year for purposes of choosing a delegate is outrageous! It will be covered by a provision under the law. But as for the formulation suggested by the Minister, yes, we can re-do it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you read it please! 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I did not formulate, I was proposing that he could say that a party should not call public meetings for sometime. I also said, for those purposes, they call a public meeting, and it is defined as such. So, you go and look at this and see how you can actually fit it.  

You could really have these two groups. And then he said to assuage our fears it is only once a year. So, somewhere down there he could say annual meetings.  And then towards the end, where he says, “for purposes of choosing delegates to their delegates’ conference”, he could add, “except that such meetings should be held at district level.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, he brought a formulation, you are improving on it, let it be your motion now so that you can read it and then we vote on it. You could take one minute or two to get it together.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, maybe the following formulation could help: “save for delegates’ conferences, national and central executive meetings and annual meetings held at the district level for purposes of choosing delegates to their delegates conferences”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 
  
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 
  
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to

The First Schedule, agreed to

The Second Schedule, agreed to

The Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)
    
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 24 of the Political Organisations Bill, 1998 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I notice that this is a very important motion, which should be passed after we have checked whether we have a quorum.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going to put the question that the Political Organisations Bill, 1998 be read a Third Time and do pass.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I rise under our rule 108(1), which reads as follows: “If any Member desires to delete or amend any provision contained in a Bill as reported from a Committee of the whole House or to introduce any new provisions in the Bill, he or she may, at any time before a Member rises to move the Third Reading of the Bill, move that the Bill be recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular amendment or amendments.”  

I beg to move that clause 7(3) and 19(c) be recommitted. Clause 7(3) is on the registration of the existing parties, requiring the existing parties to go round two thirds of the districts collecting signatures. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was one third. Didn’t we pass one third?

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: The parties exist and they are recognised in our laws. Now, to say that after the coming into effect of this law, we say that they do not exist, so they should go round and prove their existence, is too much. My amendment is that they should just be registered. They should just be registered without the requirement to go round one third of the districts, because they are already there. They are known in the law! So, there is no need for them to go round again.  

My second proposal is on the age of officials of political organisations. This is based on 19(c), which says that anybody 75 years or over, or both, should not hold positions in a political organisation. Political organisations are voluntary and private associations. I think it is unfair for Parliament to determine who should keep the money in my organisation. We have already got a limit for the President in the Constitution. But these are private organisations, and I do not see why Parliament should come in and regulate who should hold positions in those organisations.  

My proposal is that we delete that provision and leave it to the organisations to decide who should be their office bearers. It does not make sense! We have provided for that and there is no penalty. What if they do not follow this law, what are the penalties? What shall we do?  When you provide an offence, there should be a penalty for it.  So, I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think you have explained the purpose of your motion for recommittal. The best I can do is to put the question for recommittal of two clauses.  7(3) is about registration of existing political parties.  You remember this matter came up and we drew the attention of whoever was making this query to Article 270 of the Constitution. Article 270 explains the existence of clause 7(3).  

The other clause is 19 (c), which puts a restriction to holders of political offices. It says if you are 75 years, you cannot hold office. So, he wants us to recommit these so that we reconsider them, and see what happens.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose that we split the amendment into two, one dealing with the old political parties and the other one dealing with the age, so that we deal with them. To subject the old political parties, particularly Uganda Peoples Congress and the Democratic Party to go about soliciting support, would be as if we were rewriting history. I think it is unfair because we already exist, and there are all signs and symptoms to prove that we are in every place in Uganda. And you also know that we have just been passing a provision right now where we were scared that if we are going to move around calling meetings to get this support, it is going to cause some problems.  We may be accused for nothing. 

So, I feel that the old political parties, particularly those that are recognised by the Constitution, must remain as political parties, but we can go through the process of registration. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, before hon. Members vote, it is my duty as Minister for Constitutional Affairs to read the Constitution as I see it. Now, the parties recognised under Article 270 are so recognised until Parliament makes laws relating to registration of political parties and organisations. That is what Article 270 says. The recognition thereafter ceases for those purposes.  

Secondly, Article 71(a) says, “a political party in the multi-party political system shall conform to the following principles- 
    (a) every political party shall have a national character.”  

We can take it that the UPC and DP have a national character as defined in the law. Maybe Members might try to feel that this is an empirical fact, but the fact is that they are constituted. They have got a national character to conform to this Article. So, I am just pointing this out for Members to vote after having been informed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a motion to recommit clause 7(3) and 19(c). 

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am really sorry. I have been advised that the Minister had not moved for the adoption of the report. This recommittal issue should only come after we have adopted a report.  I think the interruption by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi put us off. Can the Minister move!

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we go to the motion by hon. Okello-Okello to recommit 7(3) and 19(c). I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a motion under Rule 108, which reads, “if any Member desires to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are aware of it, just move the motion.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a motion for recommittal of section 24 of the Bill, which we have just considered, particularly the section dealing with establishment of branches at district level.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, there is a motion that we recommit clause 24. Is it the entire clause or just part of it?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: It was not circulated, but it is 24(e), Mr. Speaker. Whereas it is expedient for political parties to operate at national level and have their offices established at national level, for them to have branches at district level would contravene the existing political arrangement. We have recently voted for the Movement political system for the next five years or so. In this case, when we have branches, the political party branches will interfere with the smooth operations of the Movement political system at the district level.  

It is also true that we have passed a provision, whereby the political parties can organise seminars at district level. I think seminars are quite acceptable, but having branches is actually opening full activity of a political system or political parties at district level. This will definitely cause a disruption, which will not augur well with the current democratisation process, which is in place. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have substantially debated this matter. I am now going to put the question to the motion to recommit 24(e).

(Question put and agreed to)

(Consensus not reached)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us put up our hands. 

43 Members voted in favour of the motion
24 against
15 abstained

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the motion is carried. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, I would like to challenge the counting by the clerks. We do not have a quorum!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until next year.

(The House rose at 2.07 p.m and adjourned sine die)


