Monday, 20 December 2004

Parliament met at 10.43 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you have been complaining that a lot of questions have not yet been answered. So this morning I think let us start with question time and then we shall go back to the other business of the two Bills, which are due to be considered today.

10.36
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I am glad that my motion on NSSF is on the Order Paper. But pursuant to rule 17(3), which provides that by your leave, Madam Speaker, the order of business set out in the Order Paper may be altered, I request that at an appropriate time, when we are able to vote, this motion could be put to vote. Otherwise if we are to deal with it after we have dealt with the Seed and Plant Bill, it may never come. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the reason I am also moving the order of things today is really for that problem. I did not want to say it but you have forced me to say it.

10.37
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am a little bit worried and I beg for your indulgence that I raise this issue under Rule 40.  

Madam Speaker, there is disturbing news in this country to the effect that the medicine which we are receiving from the United States and previously researched in Uganda has not been authorized internationally for human consumption. I am referring to Neviraprine, which the US has stopped from the use to human beings.  

Madam Speaker, I am requesting that Government comes up with a statement on the matter of neviraprine; it is an HIV RV. Madam Speaker, not only that, but not long ago, the matter of re-exporting of HIV anti retroviral ARVs – I do not know the medical term – is becoming rampant to the extent that certain clinics are now in collusion with certain despicable doctors to give HIV positive certificates to people who are not sick in order to go and get free medicine and then sell it on the black market.

Madam Speaker, I wish that this Government comes up with a statement on this serious matter before Christmas.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what the Leader of Government Business would like to say in connection to this.

10.39
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you Madam Speaker. The statements that hon. Awori has made are fairly serious statements. Serious in the sense that if there are true they would mean that our people may be taking medicines which are dangerous to them.  

So, while I have no doubt that Government can come out with a very authoritative statement, I want to advise that when colleagues get information like this, first there should be some basic research.  Because it is possible for any Member of Parliament reading a newspaper or talking to a concerned citizen to do some ground work by way of visiting the Ministry or talking to some professionals.  Because any time we speak here these things are picked by the press and could cause unnecessary concern.  

Secondly, I think as you have guided us before, Madam Speaker, a loaded question like that one is better handled by requiring a written question so that you get a written answer. The Minister concerned needs to do research and come back to the House appropriately.

So, much as I would be in a position to give some information, I propose that our colleague puts this question on paper and I have no doubt that even before we go it can be answered.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, again your permission I would like to react immediately to the hon. Minister’s statement. Number one, it is terrible for you think that a Member of Parliament especially of my calibre can come up with a mere report from the press.

This matter came up in the US Senate last Tuesday and I had hoped that through our Embassy you would be knowledgeable on the matter. As a matter of fact it is extensively covered in this paper and nobody has denied it.  

So, this question of saying we cannot go by press reports, I have known madam Speaker, from your own professional capacity you can sue a newspaper on the account of a report if it is defamatory or misleading. Why would you go to court on the account of a report from the media and yet in the August House when there is a report in the media you discount it? Double standards!

So, I stand by my allegations that we need an immediate statement, more substantive than just brushing aside my concern by my hon. colleague.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Clerk transcribe what hon. Awori has said and transmit it to the Minister for Health this morning with a view to having him answer probably tomorrow before we break.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 12/04 TO THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

10.44
THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Question 12/04 from hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka, Member of Parliament for Bukomasimbi is as follows: 

“The President in 2001 made a promise to Members of Parliament concerning the establishment and maintenance of the Constituency Development Fund.  This promise has not been fulfilled. Is the Government making any arrangement to have the Constituency Development Fund in place? And if so, when will such a fund come into operation?

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House as follows: Government is developing an idea of introducing a constituency development fund in pursuance of this in July 2004 government sent hon. Bakkabulindi and myself to study the operation of the constituency development fund of Kenya with the view of drawing insights and lessons from the experiences to help shape a similar scheme here in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, we successfully undertook that study and I am due to present to Cabinet our findings. It is therefore, the outcome of Cabinet consideration of our report that will determine the next course of action, which will be communicated to this Parliament as soon as practicable. I thank you.

10.43
MR ODONGA OTTO: Supplementary. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would have been impressed if the minister had tackled very briefly how she would imagine such funds could come in place because there are several schools of thoughts. There are those who are totally against it because government might find a leeway of pointing fingers on Members of Parliament who have got constituency development funds yet actually there is no development.  Personally I believe the development of constituencies can come through Members of Parliament. If it is do to so, then such amount of monies which are to be directed through Members of Parliament would be so huge which would automatically mean accounting officers might have to be attached to every other Member of Parliament.  

So is the hon. Minister in position to tell us whether this fund is such that it will shift the burden of proving the access of development from the Executive or from local government to Members of Parliament? Thank you.

10.47
MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, although it was mentioned in this House, the steps which the hon. Minister has taken on the constituency development fund are not satisfactory to me, because I know what is at hand now is the road map of how we are going to handle the 2006 campaigns. I do not think there will be anybody who will be able to tackle this problem and be able to solve it. I think we may discuss it for implementation for the 8th Parliament but I do not think it will be for this Parliament.  

As you remember, Madam Speaker, in government they do not have a policy of how they can develop a municipality. For instance, the infrastructures, the roads, power, water and so on and so forth; especially the roads. How will a municipality ever be developed to a city status when we have too many portholes in town? You cannot move to any municipality in Uganda since independence that will develop to a city status. I think if such a fund was available, it will enable the government together with the Members of Parliament and the authorities within the municipality to be able to develop that constituency so that it is habitable, usable, and has got a future for growth.  

But as we stand now I particularly think that the statement of the minister is taking us nowhere, especially as far as the 7th Parliament is concerned. Thank you.

10.48
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am perturbed that Government is just developing an idea of establishing a constituency development fund.  Madam Speaker, the issue of a constituency development fund started in the 7th Parliament and I remember the head of state was against it. But eventually we managed to convince him and he committed himself that he would work towards establishing this constituency development fund. This was way back in 2001. 

Hon minister, something, which was agreed to in 2001, this is 2004, and you are telling us that Government is just developing an idea! Therefore, July this year government sent a delegation to Kenya to study how they are organizing and operating their fund? Hon. Minister, are you serious, given that this is a third year of the 7th Parliament? We have less than effectively one year.  As hon. Otto said, is this not going to be like an escape route because to have an affect to start early 2001 you put your programmes in place by 2005 people are seeing the fruits. But even if you give us this, which I do not think will happen 2005, the maturity period of this fund, really the benefits constituents might not be for whatever we would do.   Hon. Minister, if government is serious, can this fund be set up next year? What is the road map for this fund? I do not want to be given money in 2006 when it will not make much sense in my constituency. Thank you very much.

10.51
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has just told us they went to Kenya in July and this is December. My question is; why has it taken so long? Because, if I understood her well, she has not herself reported to Cabinet her findings. Can it take so long, six months? As my previous colleague has said, this matter started almost at the beginning of this Parliament. But more importantly–(Interruption)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, actually it started in the NRC.

MR ANANG-ODUR: So it is a long, long time ago, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, more importantly, can the minister tell this Parliament whether from her own analysis or what they have studied in Kenya, bearing in mind our economic situation and what is happening here, whether such a programme really is feasible because we waste our time to talk about this when in fact they might know it is not feasible.

Madam Speaker, if she has not done anything in analysing this to find a feasibility of this scheme for the last six month, is there any reason why the minister should continue wasting our time on this matter in this House.

10.52
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very sceptical about the proposal of the minister, especially when I pose the following questions: One; much as you have conducted a study tour of the Kenya Republic, I have a perception that you should have first studied the case point of Ugandans. What research did you conduct within Uganda to understand comprehensively what the situation is like? I do not even know why you went to Kenya because all you need are the logistics to ensure that you implement the endeavour towards the constituency development fund, you need the money. So if you only need the money you have to map out how that fund will best benefit the people of Uganda. 

I said at the beginning, Madam Speaker, that I am very sceptical about the operation and success of that fund because of the following: One, don’t you think what Ugandans need is not necessarily a period fund masterminded by the MPs?  They need an infrastructure where they can benefit through their own struggle. This Government has totally abandoned that sustainable success which used to reign so many years ago. 

For example you have scrapped the cooperatives, you have scrapped marketability in terms of responsibility to promote cash crops like tea, coffee, and cotton, and you are leaving the people of Uganda to be cared for by Almighty God. In terms of government responsibility, you have abandoned the people; it is only the Members of Parliament, who are trying woo those people back to bring them on board so that they can begin working. But every responsible government I have known of worldwide, and I have travelled, Madam Speaker, takes trouble to ensure to map out how its ordinary people will survive.  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, how is that related to the constituency development fund?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Constituency development fund means development, there must be a programme. I am asking the Minister to explain to me whether what Uganda requires today is the constituency development fund as for the Lubaga South mapping. What we require is an infrastructure of survival for the people you and me represent, and that is why at the beginning I said I was very negative about the success of that fund, and I have a right to express negativity from the style of Lubaga south.  Thank you very much.

10.55
MR AAGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker, supplementary to my hon. colleague’s concerns. I also like to raise the following questions:
One, hon. Minister before you went to Kenya to study the situation, did you look at the Hansard of the Uganda Parliament? There was such a programme in this august House from 1968 to 1971. Every Member of Parliament got Shs 150,000 for the purpose of assisting him or her in the constituency projects, which were not within the development plan of the country. Madam Speaker could you protect me from my hon. colleague on the Front Bench. It was long before the – Madam Speaker, could you continue to protect me –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Minister stop intimidating hon. Awori.

MR BEN WACHA: Can I give hon. Awori information so that may be he could pass it to hon. Minister Kutesa that this programme was long before the Common Man’s Charter?

MR AWORI: Thank you, my hon. colleague. I hope that will temporary silence my hon. colleague in charge of Investment.  

Madam Speaker, my concern is that really before we go flying all over the place, let us look at our own records. There was such a fund in this country for every Member of Parliament at that time; it was a UPC government but even DP members had access to that money. So, really going aboard to look for information is superfluous. I call upon you, hon. Minister, to look at the Hansards from 1966 up to 1971. Madam Speaker, can you protect me? –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please do not intimidate hon. Awori.

MR AWORI: They know I have the capacity to defend myself, but I respect the procedure of the august House, and especially when the august House is chaired by a very able Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, the dates may not be exactly correct, as I said at first, but I know the first time it came to Parliament was in 1966. It was not for the purpose of promoting THE Common Man’s Charter, the same way we received Shs 5 million to promote the lifting of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, this is a misnomer; I wonder if the hon. Minister would consider changing the fund from development to auxiliary facilitation fund for the Member of Parliament.  For the purpose of other things like paying rent for the office of the Speaker, of the Member, support staff and other expected expenditures. Development fund! Even if we got Shs 20 million per annum, what can you do with a miserable Shs 20 million in terms of development? 

So, really look at this as a facilitation fund rather than a development fund, a development fund has got to be based on a development plan and how many development plans are we going to produce for this country? There has only been one development plan nationally. So, for us in our little constituencies - Please consider an auxiliary facilitation fund to assist the ordinary Member of Parliament who does not have ministerial facilitations to meet the unexpected costs. 

Last but not least, how are you going to handle the matter of women Members of Parliament who cover a larger area than the ordinary constituency Member of Parliament? You will have to look into that; I wonder if you considered that. So, for going to Kenya, they do not have district women Member of Parliament, they only have ordinary Member of Parliament and nominated Members of Parliament. You need to look at this information before you submit your report to the august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.00
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for accepting that the constituency fund be established and be chaired by the area Member of Parliament. I would also like to thank those who are entrusted with the implementation for what they have done towards the establishment of this fund. However, I would urge them to speed up the process. 

For example, as I talk now quite a number of Members of Parliament are using their own funds to try to make an impact on economic development in their constituencies.  To try to meet some of the little promises they might have made whether willingly or otherwise for the development of their constituency. The amount each Member of Parliament is paid is not for that, to say nothing about how small or how big it is.  So, most Members of Parliament are now extremely financially exhausted because of trying to do what does not belong to them. As if that was not enough, Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I am a firm believer in the building of institutions and we cannot build institution if we do not respect our own rules. I have great respect for my hon. colleague, but I think what we are required to do under rule 33 is not to debate but to raise supplementary questions and during which we should not raise new matters. So, I would like to know from you, Madam Speaker, whether the way my colleague is proceeding is in tandem of this rule?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members you are supposed to ask supplementary questions or get clarifications on matters raised by the minister, which you think are hazy. Just ask her if you are not satisfied with her answer. Ask supplementary to what she has said.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, madam Speaker. There is always a preamble and it is an English word. The supplementary question that I am asking is; when will this be implemented, particularly in light of the fact that there is decentralisation? With decentralization the LC V chairperson feels he is in charge of what actually Members of Parliament pass every year as a budget and be sent to them. So, they say the Members of Parliament have nothing. We are the ones in charge of your finances up to the LC III chairperson who is also in charge of funds. So, the Member of Parliament is said to be having extremely nothing. 

So through you, Madam Speaker, I am asking the hon. minister, when is this going to be implemented?  We are now completing the fourth year of our stay in this Parliament, and we are left with hardly one year, a year which is likely to be as red-hot as possible.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to know also from the minister whether that fund is going to be effective by way of the amount that will be released.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.04
MR OKOT ALEX (Moroto County, Lira):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are usually salient issues, which every country believes government has the responsibility of informing the nation about and how they want to act about them. It is a surprise to me that most of these salient issues must come through questions for oral answers. I would rather think government should take steps and begin to be more responsible and not to wait for question for oral answers.  

Madam Speaker, this issue was in the 6th Parliament; it came again in the 7th Parliament and consultation is still taking place. We have heard from the hon. Minister that they went to Kenya over six months ago. I would like to find out whether the team has also made its consultation with the stakeholders in Uganda, because I think it is very important that they also consult with the people of Uganda.  It is not that better information can be got outside the country. We need to work with our own people, with our own problems, because if we import solutions, we may fail in the programme.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is this constituency development plan going to be uniform as my colleague hon. Awori has mentioned; because, we have disparity in development. You may find that the urban areas are more developed than the rural areas.  You may find that some have bigger constituencies, more sub-counties than others who have smaller constituencies. How are they going to institute this development fund? (Interruption) 

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very such, Madam Speaker. I think this is a very important issue. Unfortunately I was not around when the minister was explaining because I was part of the team that went to Nairobi about this issue.  The hon. Member is raising a question of either the whole constituency are going to get a uniform figure. Through you, hon. Speaker, if they could wait for the details of whatever is going to be presented to the House, they will get all these details. 

First of all, there is a percentage over the gross revenue, then there is a uniform figure for all the constituencies, then consideration of different parameters of either a certain constituency has got certain calamities, or it has got a special problem that can be considered differently; all this will come in one package if the Members can be patient.  I thank you.

MR OKOT ALEX:  Madam Speaker, this is the issue; when committees are established and they have six months to work and they cannot even report to Cabinet, they cannot even report to Parliament and expect Members of Parliament to be informed miraculously on what they are doing.  

Madam Speaker, my next question is, in this country fundraisings in almost all the constituencies. I have noticed that during these fundraisings, in some constituencies accidentally, or not accidentally ministers do not report when they are invited, so that there is a sort of discrepancy in the way fundraising takes place in different constituencies –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Okot, how is fundraising related to this? These are completely different.  Fundraising is a voluntary action; we do it on a friendly basis. You invite me, I come to Erute, it is not a policy. It is just something we do to help one another.  

MR OKOT:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to bring the relationship. These are development programmes which concern our constituencies, and this development fund we want to establish are constituency development fund and when people go for fundraising, they want to help the constituency in its development. If there could be a sort of relationship as a matter of policy, why should certain constituencies have the favour and others do not have the favour of having a minister responding, either responding by saying no, I am not coming, but saying I am coming and never at all giving a reason why they have not reported. I wanted to relate these because all of them are development funds for the constituency, Madam Speaker.  I thank you.    

11.10
MR TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I appreciate the establishment of the constituency fund, I feel that this is a very, very wrong timing.  Madam Speaker, this should have come at the beginning of the term of this Parliament.  As of now, we are having about one year and a half to go and no Member of Parliament has drawn up any development plan. I really do not know how Government is going to ensure that in this one year –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: It can be backdated if you are worried about the future. The fund can be backdated and we get it in arrears.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I think let me give my hon. member this information.  The experience of the Kenyan Government was not raised during this Parliament, the current Parliament of Kenya, it was from the previous Parliament. So, once the principle is set, either you are a Member of Parliament or not, whoever comes will find the principle in place and that spirit will continue. So, whether the period of this Parliament is soon expiring is not an issue, the most important issue is the principle to be passed and whoever comes in Parliament should proceed with that principle.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I think I did not oppose the establishment of the fund, I was only saying that if it is to be established, and then it cannot begin with the 7th Parliament, because none of us even has a programme to start working on. But my question is; how would, in this short time, if it came during the 7th Parliament, Government ensure that actually in one year something can be felt on the ground?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this is another wrong period for establishing this fund or for making it operational, if ever it is established. We are going to a transition, we are going for campaigns and there are likely to be lots of misunderstandings about this fund. I really do not know whether everybody else is seeing it like me, but what I foresee is that there might be misunderstandings from some quarters that this is a chance for Government to try and facilitate some Members more than others. How will Government ensure and convince everybody, that everybody is getting the amount? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.12
MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you Madam Speaker. Hon. Otto raised a lot of issues in respect of where the funds will come from, how the funds will be operationalised, as well as the burden on the Members of Parliament as far as accountability is concerned. Madam Speaker, of course the funds will come from Government and those are the issues we are still grappling with. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Omodi Okot is not Government, and I need your protection, and hon. Owori knows that very, very well and it is not part of the constituency development fund.  

So Madam Speaker, actually many Members of Parliament raised issues and not questions as such.  Hon. Wasieba was saying that the steps we are taking, that they are not satisfactory. I do not think that they are not satisfactory as such, because the procedure is that we have studied a constituent development fund. It is not true that we have only looked at the Kenya experience; we have actually looked broadly at available experiences as far as constituent development funds are concerned. Therefore, we have made recommendations to Government and the way Government works is that I will present a Cabinet Paper, which I have already done, though I am yet to be given time to present it officially in Cabinet. Therefore, many of these questions you are raising, I cannot answer them categorically, because many of the recommendations I have made could be altered in the Cabinet. However, I believe the steps we are taking are in the right direction.  It maybe slow but I believe we will reach there. Obviously this fund, even if it may not come now, it is going to be institutionalised. Therefore, any Parliament that will come in place will benefit from. But I will work hard towards ensuring that we also benefit, because I am also a beneficiary much as you are.  

As far as the infrastructure is concerned, hon. Wasieba again, in Kenya, they actually identify projects within their constituencies, work together with their people and prioritise the project that they need to work on. But of course ours is likely to be slightly different in a sense that our political system here is highly decentralized. In Kenya they do not have this high level of decentralization and as such, you actually find that in many constituencies, what Members were talking about like, “There is no equitable development” and that was why they had to push for that fund so that they could equalize development. Yet here in Uganda, as you all know, because of decentralization all the districts get equitable access to the funds and therefore, to development.  

So what we have recommended actually is that ours should look at household incomes, because there is likely to be a clash between ourselves and the Local Government. Therefore, we are looking at, how do we increase household income? If that will become agreeable, then of course in constituencies, Members of Parliament will sit with their people and look at the specific projects of increasing household incomes.  But if they want to do the roads, that will entirely be up to them, but of course they will be working hand in hand with the structures that are already in place.

Hon. Kabakumba is saying that we are just developing an idea. Developing an idea is a process, indeed it started in the –Interjection)- Yes, but it is a process. I am trying to say that it is not that we are just thinking now. The thinking has been on since the 6th Parliament and now, and will continue. So all that is part of developing the ideas, and of course what the Members are raising here will take them on board as we discuss in Cabinet.  So to answer you precisely, we are very serious, hon. Kabakumba, in setting up this fund.

The other issue was on the road map again.  I cannot tell you the road map for this fund. As I said, I will be ready to tell you when my Paper has passed through Cabinet. You know very well there are financial implications involved. So, as soon as Cabinet pronounces itself, I will come back to inform you.  

The other issue is that the fund is taking too long; that I have not yet reported to Cabinet.  I said no, my Paper is ready, and I am waiting to be allotted time. 

On whether or not what was studied in Kenya was feasible; I think it is feasible and it can be implemented. And indeed, to respond to what one of the honourable Members of Parliament raised, that Members of Parliament in a way do not look as relevant in as far as their constituencies are concerned; that the chairpersons of the districts, the councillors because they are the ones involved in projects, seem to be more relevant to the people.  That is one of the reasons we are trying to assist and support the Members of Parliament so that they become extremely relevant in their constituencies.

Hon. Lukyamuzi asked, “Why should we have a development fund?” I thought this was a demand from the Members of Parliament right from the 6th Parliament as everyone else is saying, and I think hon. Lukyamuzi was in the Sixth Parliament.  So, we are actually responding to the need expressed by the Members of Parliament.  

Why we went to Kenya: We should have gone further than Kenya, but Kenya was the nearest and we thought that we should cut down the costs. We thought that Kenya, being an African country and very near to us, had almost circumstances like ours. It was not a question of merely liking travel; it was a question of duty and also trying to learn from those who are already implementing it. In fact, they are having some of these problems you are talking about. 

The accountability issues, the Members of Parliament wanting to use the money politically, we looked at some of the things you are raising and therefore, I believe that those experiences will help us to develop a scheme that perhaps will operate much better than the one that preceded ours.  

So the issues raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, obviously hon. Aggrey Awori, when we are doing research, we are not limited. We looked at all useful experiences, I really do not know how useful that experience otherwise, it should have been replicated in the 80s, I do not know why it was not, but we looked at it. (Interruptions)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my hon. colleague, that hon. Sam Kutesa was a Member of Parliament at that material time; maybe he could give us an answer. The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs wanted to know why we did not have that programme in the ’80s.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Aggrey Awori took the Floor to inform me, and as he is telling me that it should be hon. Kutesa to inform me, is he therefore in order to start misinforming me and this House when I really gave him the Floor on the basis that he was going to inform me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling, and I now turn to hon. Aggrey Awori’s question. He said that it is a misnomer to have a constituency development fund, that we would rather have auxiliary funds for MPs.  But as I stated earlier, this constituent development fund has been demanded by the MPs and as far as an auxiliary fund is concerned, perhaps that could have been demanded as well if they so wish. But I believe that could be taken up by the Parliamentary Commission and not me.

Madam Speaker, there was a question on Women MPs and other MPs representing different and bigger constituencies perhaps. That will be answered with whether or not the funds will be the same. We looked at all these different types of MPs.  Obviously I would be the last person to forget the Women MPs. Perhaps that would have been my priority. So we looked at all the people represented here, the youth, the workers, persons with disability and the women, and in our recommendations to Cabinet, we recommend for all the interest groups. But obviously every MP in their capacity as MP, once passed, will benefit from the Constituency Development Fund.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of clarification.  Madam Speaker, thank you for giving an opportunity to raise a clarification.  The Minister should have directly answered my question.  Did you carry out any research from within the Republic of Uganda?  Why do you avoid that question? It is very important, other than smiling at me, you should –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, what is your problem this morning? 

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I have not smiled at hon. Lukyamuzi and I have no intentions absolutely for doing that. Indeed, we studied, and looked at what is available. I thought I mentioned that when we are doing research, we definitely look at whatever is available including what is available in the country. So rest assured when the report is approved, perhaps then we will see how to move together with some of the ideas we may wish to advance.

Hon. Okot said that Government is not responsible. I sincerely disagree with you; I think this government is extremely responsible and what we are trying to implement the need you expressed to government. 

Hon. Okot went ahead to say that why should we have questions for oral answers?  Madam Speaker, I would like to state categorically that questions for oral answers are provided for in the rules of procedure of this Parliament and all Parliaments world over have sessions for questions for oral answers. Therefore, I think we take opportunity to exploit this time of questions for oral answers so that whatever questions are available with Members can be put across to the ministers for answers. 

He went ahead to say that committees are set up but they never report. I should state here that this two-person committee of hon. Bakkabulindi and myself, was actually not set up by Parliament and therefore it had no obligation to report to Parliament. It was set up by government and therefore the procedure to report is to report to Cabinet, and that is what I mentioned earlier, that I am due to report to Cabinet.

For the issues of fundraising and whatever, I thought really as you rightly ruled, Madam Speaker, that was not my issue. But perhaps I would encourage hon. Okot, whenever he has invited some ministers, he could liaise with me so that I help him to follow up so that the ministers can go to his constituencies to assist in fundraising, and I invite every one else to do so. I have been working closely with many MPs following up the guests they invite. If they fail, I go personally where I can.

Hon. Twarebireho said that this is wrong timing. I do not think it is wrong timing because really it is for the institution of Parliament. So at whatever level it comes, it will benefit Parliament be it us or those who will come after us. And the issue of backdating it suggested by hon. Awori is not tenable.  

Whether or not we will be misunderstood, I do not think it will be misunderstood. Of course it may need some resistance, like in Kenya, the experience we got from Kenya that fund got resistance mainly from the donors actually. But once they kept on talking to the population about it, explaining it with the donors, and people realized that it was not money to be eaten by the MPs but rather it was money for the project, in fact the MP is not even a signatory to those accounts. 

In the Kenyan case, the signatories are still the government officials, but the MP working with the committee, supervise the implementation, to ensure that implementation is done well, they plan with the people, they mobilize the people. So once it is talked about and it is understood clearly, it is not likely to be misunderstood. Madam Speaker, I beg to thank you and thank every one that has raised questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Okot, I do not see the Minister here. We shall keep it on the Order Paper. When he or she appears, we shall revive it.

MR OKOT ALEX: Madam Speaker, this question is very urgent because it concerns school fees. I would really request you to work with the Minister and make sure that it is answered so that the parents have a settled mind.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, you remember last week and the other week there was concern about the money for school fees for the IDP children, and the Minister had said he is first reporting on the strike and NTC’s and that later he would come with – I do not know whether you have the current position.
 
MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I will ensure that the Minster answers this question tomorrow because it is really urgent as the member is saying.  Thank you.

MR BEN WACHA: Madam Speaker, I want to draw the Speakers attention to Rule 90(1) of our Rules of Procedure. Headlined, “Attendance of sittings by Minister.” It reads, ”For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, the Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Minister’s interest in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.”  Article 90(2) reads, “The Leader of Government Business shall ensure that sub rule (1) is complied with.”  

Madam Speaker, it is becoming a tendency for Government Ministers to ignore sittings of this House without notifying the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business.  I do not know whose fault this is, but if a question of that magnitude cannot be answered because the Minister concerned is not around and that the Minister concerned has not requested another Minister to represent his interest in this House, I think some punitive action should be taken against that Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were here last week and the urgency of this particular matter and the absence of a number of ministers on many occasions have been mentioned in this House.  Can we know, for instance, why the education people are not here; they are four of them?

11.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the ministers are not here, actually all of them are attending meetings somewhere and when I recollect the deadline for this question is 21st December.   So, Madam Speaker, I still pray for your indulgence to allow the Minister to respond tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the ultimate problem is the absence of representation from many ministries as per the rules.

11.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES)(Prof. Kagonyera Mondo): Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do not intimidate the Minister.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  First of all, not withstanding what my colleague has said, I am called Mondo Kagonyera, Member of Parliament for Rubabo County, Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, as duly appointed by His Excellency the President and confirmed by this House.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

I was saying that I really would like to appreciate the concern raised by hon. Ben Wacha. There is no question about it, there is no excuse whatsoever and the Prime Minister has said it. I am just echoing what the Prime Minister has said before. So we will take notice of this concern legitimately raised by Parliament and why the Prime Minister could not anticipate any Minister’s absence, you get the point. If we knew that Minister X would not be available then we would demand that they comply with that Rule 90(1), but we usually discover that when we are already- (Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, it is not for the office of the Prime Minister to anticipate. It is the responsibility of the individual Minister to know that today I will not attend Parliament and therefore, so and so should represent my interest there.  Why is that Minister jumping up and down?

MR OTTO:  Thank you honourable member for giving way.  I wanted to know, as of now who is the Leader of Government Business, is it Minister Kibirige Sebunya or Prof. Mondo Kagonyera?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is hon. Mondo Kagoneyera. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: In fact, Madam Speaker, I would again like to confirm to this House that this morning I conferred with the Prime Minister and he duly charged me with taking charge while he is away.  So I really cannot say any more than this.  The concern is legitimate and we have no excuse not to respond to questions raised.  

The Order Paper dictates the business of the House and we on the frontbench should abide by that order.  We should not do otherwise because those are the rules.  So we can only take note, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, and really charge our colleagues to make sure- and indeed it is in order for Members of the backbench to continue to raise these issues because it is your job to oversee the Executive Arm of Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SEEDS AND PLANTS BILL, 2004

11.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE (AGRICULTURE) (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.  I was in Nalweyo last Monday in Kibaale and I received a call from the Clerk of Parliament requiring me to be in Parliament that day at 10.00 O’clock allegedly to attend to a debate that was to do with cotton prices.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, we are taking a second reading of Seeds and Plants Bill.  Can you please move the House?

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, when I was entering my office this morning in Entebbe, I received a call.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, this august House consists of duly elected Members of various constituencies in this country; we are very serious people. Is it in order for the hon. Minister to come in the House unprepared? Two; using very un-parliamentary language, for instance, saying “permanent members”?  We do not have permanent members. Three; saying “allegedly”, is he in order to use such non-parliamentary language being almost sarcastic and almost ill-prepared to appear before the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.  Honorable Minister for Agriculture, last Wednesday we had a meeting with the Business Committee and we agreed what business must be accomplished before we go for Christmas. Your ministry has some of the Bills that have been outstanding in this House and we agreed to give time to your ministry to accomplish these Bills. Today we are not dealing with cotton; we are dealing with the Seeds and Plant Bill, another one on tea. Please go to the Second Reading of the Bill.  

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Seeds and Plant Bill 2004 be read for the Second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I think the procedure is that before you give the Floor to the chairperson, the Minister should tell us exactly why he needs this Bill, the rationale for the Bill, the necessity, the urgency, why it should be read a second time now etcetera before he passes it back to the chairperson.

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, those matters were addressed when the Bill was presented for the first time.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we have an established procedure for conducting the affairs of this august House. Now, the hon. Minister who seems to be totally unfamiliar with the procedure wants to confuse the august House. We know that on second reading, as my hon. Colleague, Ben Wacha, has put it, you are supposed to give us the substance, the content and the purpose of the Bill. Now, the hon. Minister stands up to tell us, “no, that only happens the first time”, we know the procedure.

Madam Speaker, really if the hon. Member of the Cabinet is not ready for a session of Parliament this morning, he can beg your leave and get out and get ready or sober up, whatever.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Is it in order for the hon. Member to begin to respond to the queries raised before your ruling? He seems to want to respond before you have ruled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable Minister when you come for a second reading, you give us objectives of your Bill and why you think we should now proceed to the second reading. Are you ready?

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in terms of Parliamentary language. Is it in order for hon. Awori Aggrey to say that the hon. Minister should go out and sober up? I see this as very un-parliamentary and as if he is drunk. So, probably he could substantiate or withdraw the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think from where I am sitting, the Minister appears to be sober.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  According to our Rules of Procedure, Rule 104(1) on page 133 of our Rules, it states, “subject to this Rule the Vice President, Minister or other Member in charge of the Bill shall move that the Bill be now read a second time and may speak to the motion”. Therefore, if I understand the language, “may” is not mandatory – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know today is Monday and it is not yet lunch time but apparently our hon. colleagues in the Cabinet seem to be totally oblivious of the Rules of Procedure in the august House. It is an established procedure in the august House that once the Speaker has ruled on the matter, no member shall follow up on the same issue. Is my hon. colleague, the acting Prime Minister, Deputy Assistant Prime Minister, in order to contravene the procedure by bringing up the same matter on which you have ruled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order.  Honorable Minister, move the second reading and speak to your motion and the chairman will now respond.

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I have already moved that the Seeds and Plant Bill of 2004 be read for a second time. 

The object of this Bill is to make the provisions for the promotion, regulation, control of breeding, variety release, multiplication, conditioning, marketing, importing and quality assurance of seeds and other planting materials.  

Madam Speaker, the Bill in particular makes provisions for the fuller application of the Act to cover all types of seeds and other planting materials instead of just patchable entities only as it exists in the current legislation. 

It also creates a board to be known as the National Seed Board whose major function is to advise the Minister on matters of seed policy.  

The proposed composition of the Board includes a number of relevant private and public stakeholders.  The Bill also seeks to reduce the period for variety seed tests from three growing seasons to two growing seasons but takes into account data generated by breeders. It also provides for the regulation of genetically modified organisms and this is very important. It also provides for appeals to tribunals for those aggrieved by the decision of the Board. The Bill is presented by I, Dr Israel Kibirige Sebunya. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister of Agriculture.  

11.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I also thank the hon. Minister for defending the Bill as it appears for a second reading. 

The Bill was read for the first time on the 23rd of March 2004. It was then referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries. But the committee could not proceed urgently because the certificate of financial implication was lacking until the end of June when it was dully laid on Table.

The committee now presents its findings on the Bill for debate and adoption in according with Rule 103(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology  

The committee held discussions with major stakeholders in the seed industry which included: 

(i) The Minister of agriculture, animal industry and fisheries, 

(ii) The Minister of state responsible for Crop sub sector, 

(iii) The Permanent Secretary and the under secretary in the same ministry, 

(iv) The Director General, National Agricultural Research Organization,
 
(v) The Vice President and the Chief Executive of the Uganda National Farmers Federation, 

(vi) The Principal Agricultural Inspectors and Commissioner for crop protection, and 

(Vii) Seed company representatives.  

The background to the Seed and Plant Bill good quality seed plays a key role in agricultural production and productivity. As government emphasizes commercialisation of agriculture, the need for improved seeds continues to increase. In 1996 there was only one seed company, and this was really government company, the Seed Project. But over the years the seed industry has expanded to 10 seed companies which are basically privately owned and these include:
 
(i) The Uganda Seeds Ltd, 
(ii) FICA Ltd 
(iii) Harvest Farm Seeds Ltd, 
(iv) NASECO Ltd, 
(v) Victoria Seeds Ltd, 
(vi) Otis garden seeds Ltd, 
(vii) General and Allied Ltd, 
(viii) East African seed (U) Ltd, 
(ix) Mt. Elgon Seeds Ltd, and 
(x) Mukwano Seeds Ltd.  

The tremendous growth of the seed industry has been due to government policy reforms especially the liberalization of the economy.  

Challenges facing the seed industry
The seed industry has faced several challenges notably: 

(i) The lack of accreditation of the National Seed Certification Services Authority to the International Seed Testing Association (ISTA) and the Organization for Economical Co-operation and Development OECD. 

(ii) Quality and compatibility of the seeds: The seed intended for international trade must be high quality, competitive, and compliant with the international protocols that were provided for under the international seed testing association ISTA and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD. Uganda’s National Seed Certification Service is yet to be accredited to such international bodies. This limits the facilitation to private seed companies wishing to engage in international seed trade. The ministry is fully committed in building strong partnership with private seed sector. 

The ministry also initiated efforts to accredit its regulatory body to ISTA and OECD to enable it facilitate the private sector for the seed industry. Meanwhile, efforts have been made to facilitate seed exports by the private seed companies through regional bilateral arrangements for joint inspections and certification of seed crops with the Kenya seed certification services, which is already accredited to the international seed bodies for trade. 

(iii) Funding: Inadequate funding of the ministry pauses a serious constraint to the effective performance of the regulatory service. 

(iv) Personnel: Limited inspectors to cover various aspects of the seed inspection and certification. In addition to grain seed crops, the mandate of national seed certification services meant to cover vegetatively propagated planting material such as fruit trees, in addition to coffee and cotton.  

The above challenges facing the seed industry have forced the national seed certification service NSCS to review the agricultural seeds and plant statute that was enacted by Parliament in September 1994. The review therefore, addresses the areas in the statute that were unclear and ineffective. The review also takes into account the requirements of global changes in the seed industry. Provision has been made to harmonize the seed laws and regulations in East African and the international testing association.  

Observations

The committee made the following observations: Madam Speaker. The title of the statute was changed from “Agricultural Seeds and Plant Statute” to “Seeds and Plant Bill” to include forestry seeds as well. The definition of seeds also covers both plant and forestry seeds.

The object of the Bill

The Bill is in within the armpits of the Constitution and it seeks to make provision for the promotion, regulation, control of breeding, variety release, multiplication, conditioning, marketing and quality assurance of seeds and other planting materials. Clause 2 of the Bill, for instance, covers all types of seeds and other planting materials instead of agricultural entities as the current legislation provides.  

The National Seed Board

The composition of the board was amended to include the national agricultural research organization (NARO), The solicitor General, and Faculty of Agriculture of a recognized university in Uganda and the Registrar of Plant Breeders’ Rights office.  

The title of the technical committee was changed to the national variety release committee. This composition was altered to include technical people whose chairperson would be appointed by the board. 

This committee once established shall review and maintain the national variety list and approve new varieties. It is important to appreciate the underlying obligation and responsibility of the national variety release committee.  

The national certification services as established.  The functions of the national seed certification services were increased to reflect the issues of accreditation and activities of field crop inspection, seed sampling and seed testing. The committee observed that the National Seed Certification Services was not given the autonomy to work because it is still embedded in the ministry of agriculture, animal industry and fisheries.  The committee observes that there is no policy in place for an independent body charged with seed inspection quarantine and certification.  

Variety Testing, Release and Registration

Section 9 of the existing statute provided for varieties being tested for three seasons before release. The statute was not clear on who would test the varieties, especially, in view of the liberalized seed industry where private breeders may be expected to enter the industry. However, the Seeds and Plant Bill, 2004 makes it clear that NSCS will be responsible for variety testing and granting plant breeders rights.  

The Bill further reduces the period for variety field tests from three growing seasons to two growing seasons and takes into account data generated from breeders. 

Clause 3(2)(k) provides for plant breeders’ rights while clause 9(5) also provides for the Board granting breeders right for a variety on the recommendation of the registrar. The committee noted that such registrar does not exist and there is no law establishing the existence of the registrar. This apparent in consistency should be harmonized by vesting the responsibility of planting and registering plant breeders’ rights to a recognized and established body. 


The appeals tribunal

A new section was provided to establish a tribunal, which shall be responsible for appeals from the people aggrieved by the decision of the board. 

The National Seed Board: Clauses (3)(4) and (5) establish a National Seed Board comprising of private and public stakeholders whose major function shall be to advise the minister on matters of seed policy. Most importantly, the enactment of the Seeds and Plant Bill, 2004, repeals the Agricultural Seed and Plant Act cap. 28.  

Recommendations
The committee recommends that Government should come up with a policy that would allow for an independent seed certification service that is responsive to the private sector as opposed to the one, which is embedded within the structures of the ministry. 

The committee further recommends that Government should take serious consideration to establish the office of the registrar of plant breeders’ rights.  This will facilitate the patenting and protection of any innovations.  

The committee also recommends that, as a guiding principle in national policy formulation, Government should divest itself from the operational matters in respect to the sub sectors that are primarily private sector driven. It should preoccupy itself with the regulation function at policy level and leave the rest of the functionalities of the sector to independent agencies.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the legal and administrative framework under the Seeds and Plant Bill 2004 should be put in place to ensure high production and quality in the plant and seed sector. 

Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to move that the report be adopted with the following amendments to the Seeds and Plant Bill, 2003. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are free to debate.

11.59
DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the thorough report and especially on an issue of agriculture, which is the backbone of the development of this country. I stand to support the motion moved by the Chairman of the Committee.  

Madam Speaker, I am quite concerned when we as a country know very well how much this country depends on agriculture and agriculture depends on seeds. Uganda gained its independence in 1962 and 40 years down the road this country has not yet managed to accredit the seeds industry with the international organisation. 

This becomes an alarming issue when we depend completely on agriculture, you are talking of cotton, you are talking of sim-sim, you are talking of different kinds of seeds and we know how much we depend on that. This Government should really stand up and make sure at the earliest opportunity this accreditation is done so that we get into the feel of development. This country is not going to develop if we do not set our priority right and if you do not take steps to make sure that these priorities are given the right place in our rules or in our laws. 

Madam Speaker, there is always this issue of inadequate funding. No government will always have enough funding, that is why we talk of economics to economize the resources we have. But, it is so important that each government sets its priority and the reason why you set priority is because you have inadequate resources. You cannot have a government crying of inadequate resources in all its activities as if it does not have priority. I think it is time we begin setting what are our priorities and making sure that adequate funds are available for those priorities areas. 

Madam Speaker, I think one of those most needed areas is agriculture where enough fund should be provided. We are talking of poverty alleviation, making sure that the people have resources in their hands and reducing poverty. How are we going to do that when 90 percent of the population of Uganda does not have the capacity to improve on agriculture and, therefore, on that resources? I think this is an urgent issue, which we need to deal on immediately. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.02
MR ZACHARY OLUM ((Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this very important bill and I would like to thank the honourable Minister to bring this bill to Parliament and I also like to thank the committee for a very well written report and very well researched.

Madam Speaker, I have one or two points to raise on this very important matter. I think the importance of quality seeds cannot be overemphasized but we do not like good seeds in this country. There are a lot of good seeds in this country but when you go to the rural areas you find that farmers are planting seeds, which they have recycle over and over and over. The reason they give is that these seeds are too expensive; the seeds are not available to the farmers. I think while we talk about the need to produce good quality seeds in this country, we must also talk about the need to make these seeds available to the farmers who produce our crops.

There is what we are having in the budget, the strategic invention for agriculture. While we are providing good seeds for coffee and tea, I think it is as well important to look at how best we can assist the ordinary farmers to plant improved seeds, because if you improve seeds and you manage it well, your yields can go over by 3 or 4 times. I think it is important for the ministry and Government to see how best we can assist our rural farmers to access these improved seeds. 

The second point I want to talk about is the need for us to preserve our genetic potentials of many of the local crops. The more we are getting involved with these big seed companies, we have to be very carefully to preserve our germ plasma in this country and I think this certification of autonomous bodies should be very much concerned with how to preserve our germ plasma. Many of these big companies are not concerned with preserving this; they are more concerned with profits. 

As breeding becomes more and more complex, we are going to run into a problem of losing some of the very good quality of our germ plasma, which has maintained this country over the centuries. We do not want to lose them because they have certain qualities, which you do not find elsewhere and I hope that the minister will be able to handle this matter effectively.

The last point, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about is the need for technical people to supervise this bill and to implement this bill. We can have very good laws and I think we have a lot of good laws in this country, but they are never implemented because of lack of resources. I think this being a very important bill regarding the survival of this country which is based on agriculture, we should do everything possible to put in place the technical know-how, the laboratory equipment to really ensure that this bill when it becomes law it is implemented for the benefits for which it is intended. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.06
MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important bill. Uganda as we all know, is an agricultural country and the role that is displayed by correct seeds is second to none. Madam Speaker, if I can give the example of a cotton seed. For a long time we were planting seeds, which were not delinted, and in one hole a farmer would put up to 20 seeds because they were not delinted. And when came to time of thinning, you would find that the roots would be affected. I am happy to note that now in the whole country we have delinters and the seeds that are being given out are all delinted and, therefore, you need to put only four, maybe to a maximum of five and at the time of thinning one does not actually disturb the roots.

Madam Speaker, still on the cottonseed, you find that the cottonseed, for instance, that we are using in my constituency of Jonam, each ball has only six to eight seeds. The cottonseed that is being produced, for instance, in Kasese, each ball has between eight to 12 seeds. And so the farmers there end up with a bigger harvest because of the seeds being more, therefore, the seed cotton would weigh much heavier. So, giving the right seeds at the right time to the right people would be very important.

The second issue is on the genetically improved seeds. Already in Uganda we are having a lot of genetically improved seeds and with the genetically improved seeds, Madam Speaker, the yield per acreage if agronomical practices are correct, immediately is much higher. However, we have realized and noted with concern that a number of the genetically modified seeds, after the first planting and if you try to replant the same stock, they do not germinate or if they try at all, they will give extremely poor output. And we need to address this issue to ensure that whatever seeds are going to the farmers, the farmers are told exactly what they are and therefore they are able to put in the soil seeds that are good.

The third issue, Madam Speaker, is on the issue of agronomical practices. First of all, the seeds that are going to be given out to the farmers should have effective and clear instruction to the farmers so that they know exactly what to do with them, they know how to store them, they know the spacing, they know when to plant, they know their expiry date because some of the seeds do not indicate the expiry dates, some of the wrapping does not allow the seed to continue to breath and all this must come out clearly. And I believe, Madam Speaker, that through this Bill we should be able to address all these and including likely pests that may disturb them.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, on page four of the report, it is indicated under 4.16, variety testing release and registration. And it is being said that the Bill further reduces the period for variety feel tests from the three growing seasons to two growing seasons and I would like to understand why this is being done. In Uganda here, one can do feel testing throughout the year. Why is it being restricted to only growing seasons? I support the Bill and I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.11
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome this Bill because in the absence of this Bill, our farmers have been practicing agriculture in darkness and we cannot afford to practice agriculture in darkness and still call it the main stay of the economy of this country.  

The gap between those who know and the farmers is so big that even, for instance, our farmers learn by a lot of cost by try and error. Like hon. Omach has said, you take the Nalongo maize seed, you plant it, the first yield is fantastic but trying to save part of that yield for the next planting season it will be a total failure. Nobody communicates this to the farmers, they just find it out by themselves that this thing cannot perform second time round. So, the information gap is so huge. You know, we are still practicing the same old way my mother, my grandmother used to do. You know she harvests groundnuts, keeps one sack for the next planting season. This is a terrible thing. 

And without accreditation to the international bodies, how are we going to advertise our quality?  Who will know what to expect to buy from Uganda?   You know, we have a problem now with beans. You literally have to sit down and sort them out by colour, by size, by what have you yet if the seed processing had been done properly, then you would know that that acre would give me yellow beans and this acre will give me the other type of beans.  But we have burdened the farmers so much, they are doing their own seed multiplication. Even when they go to buy seeds, nobody gives them the proper information. 

And with failing weather, it can be very expensive.  You have Shs 4,000 to buy two kilos to plant. You buy the two kilos, you plant but nothing comes out because rain has failed. Then you have to run again to the shops to buy another lot. But all this is because of the information gap -(Mr Kutesa rose_)- oh, you want to fill the gap. (Laughter)

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Mwondha for giving way. I really want to say that what hon. Mwondha is raising is a very serious matter. From my own experience, this gap in information between the farmers and what they should be doing, I found in my constituency that although we have an extension worker at every sub-county, there is hardly any work these people are doing.

It shows to them that because of decentralization and the way these people are appointed, and supervised, the Ministry of Agriculture at headquarters hardly has any role with regard to these people. I think the point hon. Mwandha is raising is of fundamental importance and we may have to look into who supervises extension workers to be able to provide information to farmers. 

Recently, I was in my own constituency, when I was consulting about this White Paper and the extension worker in one of the sub counties was present, but the farmers did not even know who he was. So, I think there is a need to take this matter seriously and look into ways of supervising the extension workers. They are there, they are paid all the time, but I do not think they are giving this information and the gap hon. Mwondha is talking about is enormous. I thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give this information. Government recognized long ago the inadequacy of extension services provided by salaried government employees and that is the very reason why we set up the National Agricultural Advisory Services system. 

Under this system which unfortunately has not spread to all parts of the country, and my colleague hon. Kutesa knows it is due to lack of money, we would be allowing the people themselves to appoint their own extension workers. The assumption here is that, these people with the advise of the National Agricultural Advisory Services, they would be in a position to appoint good extension workers and they would make sure that either these people work or they do not get paid or even they are dismissed and in some incidences, it has worked reasonably well. 

But we do recognize it is a very difficult problem and unfortunately our people do not get the services they deserve.  In other words, if you have a farmer like hon. Dr Nkuuhe, he will know what he deserves and he will demand and probably get it.  But if on the other hand you get someone else who has no idea, then they do not even know what to demand and, therefore, it is a process. 

I totally agree with hon. Mwondha Patrick and hon. Kutesa, it is a big problem, but the Government is already aware of this and we are trying and any input by Members of Parliament and other leaders would be very useful for us to refine the circumstances under which these services are provided. But we are making sure that it will no longer be possible for anybody who does not do his work to be paid government money. Farmers themselves will appoint and sack anybody who does not deliver.

MS NAMAGGWA: Just one point, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to find out whether the Ministry of Agriculture has not had an opportunity to get a report that was done by FOWODE or NAADS. Where NAADS has been especially in Luweero, six percent of the funds are spent on administration and it has not assisted the farmers at all. I just want to find out whether Government has not had this information yet. If we evaluated where NAADS has been, it has been a failure and I hope this failure does not spread. Yes, we had actual reporting from FOWODE. They organized for us a dinner to report their results about NAADS in Luweero. I want the Ministry of Agriculture to get hold of their report and use it so that the problem does not spread nationally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you please perhaps give details, when was this report made and where can it be found?

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, a number of Members were invited to a working dinner by FOWODE at Hotel African about two months ago, and they presented their findings about NAADS. And in fact, the Chairperson of the Agricultural Committee was there to, I hope he can be my witness.

MR MWONDHA: I think hon. Kagonyera has helped me hit the nail on the head. The Ministry of Agriculture is not being responsible enough. Okay, you are moving on to another stage, you are moving on to another scenario, but what do you do in the meantime, do you abandon the farmer? So, extension service has to continue while we are working out a new arrangement with NAADS. But right now, it is a total black out and imagine, in districts where NAADS has not gone, what is happening? 

Already there is a complaint that even in districts where NAADS has gone, it has not performed. You cannot abandon your way of doing things, because you are expecting a new way of doing things. You know, we have so many things, even the soils themselves are deteriorating, who is going to tell the farmer about the soils, who is going to advice them? These are some of the issues, which I think this bill should help to bring out.

MR ODIT: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for the concern he has expressed on the weakness in the area of extension services. But this particular bill has little to do with extension, it has more to do with generation of good quality seeds, which can be accessed by the farmers and which can also meet international standard so that we can be able to export –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, is it proper for the Chairman of the Agricultural Committee to say that the bill is not meant mainly to serve the farmers?  Because when seeds are generated, they must be delivered to the farmers and really we are not producing for the international market, we are producing for the farmers mainly. So, is he in order to think that the bill is not meant to assist the farmers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members. Ultimately it is the farmers who are going to use these seeds, they are going to plant them, they are going to store them and somebody will have to advise them about how they are used and how they should be stored. So, they are related.

MR MWONDHA: I think the chairman was missing the point, because if you have a new breed, somebody must propagate the information about that breed, and the best people to propagate this information are the extension workers, who else would do so? With these few remarks, Madam Speaker, the bill is welcome.

12.25
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the brief and precise report.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment first on the cost of the seeds. Though you said we are talking about the seed without the cost, but it is very important to facilitate the farmers to get the seeds at as little cost as possible, and if possible, it could be distributed free of charge to the farmers. Madam Speaker, you know that our farmers plant varieties of crops. Some plant potatoes, cassava, sim-sim, millet, maize and so forth. Where will a poor farmer, a blind woman get money to buy all these varieties of seeds to plant in her garden? 

So, I am requesting Government, if Government can subside UPE, we should be able to give free seeds to some extent so that the poorest farmer is able to plant some seeds and grow food, rather than just putting a blanket that everybody must buy as if we can afford. It is true for a commercial farmer or a cotton farmer who will sell the cotton and at the end and get money. But for the woman who plants just only for her family, I think Government must do something so that the cost of seeds is waived off for the poorest farmer.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the distribution of the seeds –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: I would like to thank my colleague, Baba Diri, for allowing this information. When Dr Mugerwa was still Minister of Agriculture, I made several approaches to him to look for a way of providing some funds every financial year, so that what our scientists research in the laboratories and it has come out in the form of improved seeds, could be availed initially to farmers. But at that time, the honourable Minister told me the era of free things is over. Everybody must look for that money to buy the new seeds and that is the reason why most Ugandan farmers are unaware of what improved seeds are available, and those who know it is beyond their reach. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, for that information. If we really feel that everybody must buy, then in the end many farmers will just sit with their fields unplanted because of lack of seeds.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about distribution of the seeds. These centres where these seeds are found are very far from the farmers, and quite often, these businessmen and women take advantage of the farmers. They just pick any seeds and paint according to the colour of the seeds which are in the market, and poor farmer who does not know the right place where to get the seeds, will buy seeds which are forged and will plant and will make no difference in the yield.  Therefore, I would like to request that we provide centres for getting these seeds so that farmers can go to the right place to buy rather than just going to any market and buy some seeds.

Madam Speaker, the issue of not having policy, I think is the cause of all these problems.  Definitely, if we had a policy in place, there would be guidelines of distribution of these seeds, there may be the price control over the distribution, the people who are going to distribute. Therefore, I urge Government to come up with this policy as soon as possible. We cannot pretend to be an agricultural country when we do not have policy in place, people do whatever they want and yet we cannot produce the crops we require.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment about the composition of the seed board. I would like one honourable Member to read for me that provision. I have seen very clearly that there is no provision for gender and they assume that the people who are nominated there may be women. And quite often, if we do not have any deliberate provision for women to be on the board according to the Constitution, definitely a woman will never be on that seed board. I, therefore, urge the House to insist that we have a provision, at least a third of the composition be women and at least one person with disability. 

You know, very much how people with disability suffer when it comes to getting the right seeds. Therefore, we need a fair presentation of all categories so in agriculture. It is not only in the Seed Bill but also in all agricultural bills you have to observe the issue of gender because women are more engaged in agriculture than men. So, Madam Speaker, this issue of the representation of women and people with disability is very important and I will move it when the time comes at the committee stage. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Maybe let me ask the clerk for record purposes to read out for you the composition. Clerk please read out for her the composition of the board on page 7. This will help her when she is moving her amendments.

“The board shall consist of the following: 

1. The chairperson of the board who shall be appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

2. A representative of NARO (National Agricultural Research Organization)”
(Interruptions)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, we are not finding it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me read them out.  Honourable members, this is what is provided for in the bill and I know that the committee will have some amendments, but just for the record of hon. Baba Diri it says:  

“The board shall consist of the following:

The Director of Crop Resources in the ministry who shall be the Chairperson, the Commissioner of Forestry in the Ministry responsible for Forestry, the Commissioner for Trade in the Ministry responsible for Trade, a representative of seed merchants, a representative of the farmers, a representative of the seed growers, a representative of National Agricultural Research Organization, a representative of the private plant breeders, a representative of the Solicitor General, a representative of faculties of agriculture of the universities in Uganda. 

The registrar of plant breeders’ rights, a representative from the agricultural extension services, commissioner for crop protection in the ministry who shall be the secretary and a representative of the Faculty of Forestry and Nature Conservation of Makerere University, Kampala. The board may co-opt additional members to the board, as may be necessary. The members of the board other than ex-officio members shall hold office for a period of three years and eligible for reappointment.”

Hon. Baba Diri, the committee has also proposed, we shall move at an appropriate stage but I think I can confirm that there is no representation of women or persons with disability in the proposals.

12.35
DR DAVID BYATIKE MATOVU (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very indeed, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for the report.

My second point concerns what hon. Zachary Olum pointed out; these recycled seeds in the villages. I think this is a real problem, which we have to look into very seriously indeed. If, we have these recycled seeds, they are very bad, they are stored in the villages and coupled with that, you find them being planted in overused soils. The results are going to be a miserable harvest and I think this is what we have to avoid when we are looking at seeds. Let us have proper seeds and properly stored seeds.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I am missing two things in the recommendations of the committee. The first one is a serious recommendation for research, a support for research. I think this should be there. I do not know whether we are in any position to continue with the kind of seeds we have without any proper and strong research. I would like to have a very serious recommendation from the committee as regards research. We have seen some good results but I suppose they need much more than what the Government is really putting into research not only of the seeds but also other sectors.

My fourth point, Madam Speaker, is that recommendation on page 3, that last sentence, “The Government should reoccupy itself with regulatory function at policy level and leave the rest of the functionalities of the sector to independent agencies.” I am just wondering whether we should not do with special inspectorate. I do not know whether the committee is thinking about the board providing this kind of inspectorate where the Government can come in and have a kind of- this is a national kind of body and very important where Government can have not so much of a direct influence but to have some degree of control of what is going on in the seed sector there. 

I think I am missing that one in the recommendations. I would rather the committee reviews this one and find out whether we can have a special inspectorate either in the ministry or in the board itself but especially the inspectorate to check on the quantity, the research and so on as regards these seeds. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.38
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the nice report. Very rarely do I thank producers of committee reports the way I am doing. First, I was happy that the committee foresaw the need to amend the title of this bill to bring it in conformity with the environmental concerns. 

Madam Speaker, one immediate proposal I would like to make in terms of recommendation is in regard to where the committee talks about the registrar of plant breeders’ rights. If you create a committee of a registrar for that matter, you should also be in a nutshell accepting to solicit on how those seeds shall be used because there are not going to be decorations in the bookshelves. They must perform; they must portray an activity related to how we can improve the environment. I think this bill, Madam Speaker, should have already come into being. I am surprised how Uganda has been able to sign protocols and conventions especially those with a bias on environment without having implemented this legal responsibility of formulating a law to direct us especially in regard to how we can protect plant breeding in respective areas of Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, this bill is very important especially the aspect related to the plant bill, which is intended to improve our environment.  Trees like Mahogany, Muvule, Musizi we should stop importing the seeds from outside. There are various environmental calamities related to that exercise and coming into force of this bill, will protect us and our tree species from internationalisation, trees like croton, acacia, alabaster, their seeds should be distributable free of charge on every village because these can be organized through this registrar general’s office, the registrar of the plant breeders’ rights. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to advise again as an environmentalist. I am not happy with the way we have ignored the sector of seed promotion. Places like Ankole, Tororo, Masaka and Rakai are badly lacking in afforestation, if something is not done immediately, heaven knows whether the individuals residing in those areas will ever find any substitution for firewood in a few years to come.  So, this is a very serious debate related to the seeds and we should do all we can to promote it.

DR NKUUHE: Much as I sympathize with you about the environment, as you go southwest in fact in the whole country soil fertility is going down. In fact, soon Uganda will be facing famine and it will be a shame. I would like to say that if you really want to protect the environment, you should involve the local community and I can share with you my own experience where we involved the local community to share seeds. 

You find that if you give those seeds for free, people do not really take them seriously. If you encourage a bit of commercialism, so that a group of women are growing these tree seeds and then you teach them how to process and condition them and so on and how to store them, then to sell so that there are some commercial benefit, because if you do not put a bit of money in the whole thing then the thing collapses. You can even come and visit my constituency; this sort of thing if you try it for free nothing happens, the moment you put in a bit of money and promote a bit of commercialism then the thing starts moving.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, for that information. But Madam Speaker, I think the main worry now in Uganda is in regard to how we can inculcate a responsibility of agro-forestry among the people who are in practice. I speak about tobacco growers, I speak about coffee and even cotton growers, the time is now for us to environmentally encourage those farmers on the ground to endeavour to involve trees like croton, crevalier lobasta, acacia, they can grow very well along the cash crops. When we invest in such a scenario certainly, we are investing in the mechanics of a viable climate.

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, I am really happy that we have brought this bill on board.  Parliament signed the National Forestry Authority and Tree Planting Bill last year. In that bill, which is now an Act, there is a national responsibility which says, “There shall be a national tree planting day every year.” We have never implemented the national tree-planting day in Uganda. If this law had already come into being certainly, it should have made arrangements or enabled the policy makers to solicit funding to ensure that when you hold a national tree-planting day you must plant trees and, therefore, giving out free seeds is inevitable. It is in fact a responsibility.  

So, Madam Speaker, I urge the Government of Uganda especially the sector of the environment now that we have brought on board this law, the Ministry of Lands and Environment will not have any excuse whatsoever to ensure that on the national tree planting day all Ugandans invest and participate in tree planting.

I am surprised, Madam Speaker, that the committee has not talked about anything of seriousness in regard to the GMOs. Maybe we need a separate law and policy on GMOs. I expected the committee to have injected on board something related to how we can control the GMO promotion because of their present day environmental calamity. Many people are getting excited with GMOs, not knowing that the GMOs seeds in particular are environmentally destructive to our soils. So, we should take note of that.

Finally, Madam Speaker, what are my recommendations as a person with a bias on the environment? I think first of all, the time is now when we pass this law we should also bring on board the immediate implementation of the Land Act with amendments – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi to clarify on how destructive the GMOs are to the environment. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: My earlier speaker had already made some comment in that direction. For example, the destruction of the quality of soils cannot be avoided. The foods themselves have some environmental calamities in regard to the consumers. I will not elaborate on that but when an appropriate time comes, I will environmentally advise you on what should be done. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend as follows: 

One, that when we pass this Seeds Bill, there is also need for us to expedite the implementation of the Land Act with amendments. Because before the Land Act was amended, the citizens of Uganda especially the bibanja holders did not have any security of tenure. You need to have some minimal meaningful security of tenure for you to plant the seeds you get. Otherwise, you will not have any courage to plant trees when you know soon or later you are going to be chucked away from wherever you are staying.

Two, this is in regard to the responsibility of the registrar of plant breeders’ rights. Today the Lake Victoria water body is in danger especially when you move around the riverbanks. There is total depletion of the environment along the riverbank.  The registrar proposed here should undertake, among others, responsibilities to ensure that there is a programme, which can promote tree growing or tree planting along the riverbanks. Otherwise, the lake is in danger.

Three, we need to develop a scheme where, for example, fruit seeds at various levels can be given away free of charge or to encourage people to plant fruit trees so as to environmentally and sustainability fight famine which is eating up the pockets of so many people right now.

Lastly, I have not – (Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since hon. Lukyamuzi is a renown environmentalist, I would like him to advise me. There are farmers in Arua District who took to planting sunflower, and after some time they realized that the gardens where the sunflowers were growing could not take up other types of crops. The fertility of the land deteriorates, it is only sunflower that you have to keep planting in the same area. I would like to benefit together with the farmers of Arua from the knowledge of hon. Lukyamuzi. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: This is where the provision of agro forestry becomes an environmentally friendly alternative because plants have various capacities to fight soil problems. So, when you practice agro forestry you know that one plant or the other may fight the environmental calamities circumstantially. So, I would advise your people to begin exercising agro forestry because it helps a great deal to diversify the soil qualities – (Interruption)  

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, besides the information given by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to the Member of Madi-Okolo, I would like to say that what he has stated is not quite correct. It is not true that when you plant sunflower you have to keep on planting it all the time because the soil now cannot be productive for other crops. That is not true.  

What happened in the past was that farmers did not know how to cultivate sunflower. They would plant the sunflower, after harvesting they would cut the stems away and burn the stems. By so doing they would deprive the soil from the nutrients, which should have gone back to the soil, which they carry away with the stems. This has been now taught to the farmers so that when you harvest your sunflower, the stems should be allowed to rot and go back to the soil. We also encourage farmers that even after removing the seeds, the chuffs should be taken back to the farm. This will make it much better. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we encourage rotation of crops. It is not possible that you keep on planting the same crops and get good yield; really that is not scientific. So, these are the facts and I would request that when you go back home my colleague, you will try to get to the experts in the department of agriculture in your district to help the farmers apply the correct and modern technology for production. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: I think in your constituency there is Uganda agro-forestry network and they collaborate with ARDC, and they could actually help you to show you which agro-forestry trees you can inter-crop with your sunflower, which extract minerals from deep down then they bring them to the surface so that your plants can benefit. Actually, the rains can actually percolate through the roots of those agro-forestry plants and so on. They fix nitrogen, they do all sorts of things. So, the hon. Lukyamuzi is actually right. Although his approach is political, generally speaking, the point that agro-forestry preserves environment is correct.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Definitely my friend from Arua is not one of the farmers encouraging the use of Roundup because it has also become a catastrophe to the soils in those areas.  

But, lastly, what is my worry? My worry is that Uganda is one of the countries mostly endowed with unique diversities of seeds. We should do all we can, using this law, to protect the genetic resource of Uganda’s seeds.  Thank you very much.

12.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE (AGRICULTURE) (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, may I thank all those Members of the House that have reacted to the Bill.  I will comment on some of the reactions and then where I cannot, I may have to present written statements.


A question arose as to whether the Ministry of Agriculture or whether Government has any priorities. I think the concern was that, 90 per cent of our population depends on agriculture but that agriculture only receives about 3 per cent of the gross machine product. I am very appreciative of that statement.  

There was a concern from hon. Zachary Olum that in the rural areas, improved seeds do not exist or if they do, they are very expensive. That is correct.  May I however, point out that in some situations many of those rural seeds are actually very good because they are very resilient, and where a practitioner cannot practice modern methods of farming then those seeds may be the preferred choice because they have got a lot of stability.

There was a comment that there may not be capacity to implement this Bill. Madam Speaker, capacity is being built, we are building some very modern laboratories in Namalele for purposes of implementing this Bill and we thank Parliament for having accepted that we recruit 34 specialists for purposes of implementing this Bill.  

Delinted seeds: Madam Speaker, we appreciate that Members of Parliament appreciate that now that we are providing delinted seeds, that is a step forward.  

Genetically modified seeds: Madam Speaker, I was not able to quite follow the argument, however, may I inform the House that nobody needs to fear about genetically modified seeds since were not in that business; until there is a by-safety law and also a biotechnology framework and policy.  

There was the observation that good seeds require good agricultural practices. Madam Speaker, that is correct. 

There was the observation that this Bill reduces the testing period from three seasons to two seasons, the question was why? The answer is that, we have statistically proved that there is no significant difference between two seasons and three seasons. 

Madam Speaker, there was the worry that the information gap between Kibirige Sebunya and the peasants is very big. That is correct. There was also the concern -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I do not feel like interrupting you when you are responding. However, it is not that you have to say, “What you have said is correct” but what are you going to do about the gap. You said there is a gap, what are you going to do about it? Members want to hear how you are going to respond to their concerns not just to say, “This is right, I agree with it.”

DR NKUUHE: I want a clarification from the honourable Minister. When he says there is no significant different between results obtained when you test for two seasons and when you test for three seasons, knowing that in Uganda really there are two growing seasons for every region more or less. So, when you test for two seasons, in short you are just testing for one year and yet when you test for three seasons, you are testing for two years. So, I am wondering what is the practice? For instance, in other countries where they have two growing seasons, they are actually testing for two years. But for us if we test for two growing seasons, we are testing for one year, are we not short chaining ourselves? In other words, is there enough time for us to observe these plants adequately?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The minister is talking about the need for a bio-safety law, what arrangements has your ministry made to enable Parliament access the contents of the bio-safety law before you ratify the protocol?

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to know whether the minister is aware that in this country we are losing 150 kilograms of nutrients every year per acre. We are losing 300 metric tons of soil in districts of Kabale, Mbale and most districts which are mountainous and Kapchorwa. I would also like the minister to tell me if he is aware that there is no soil control, no soil conservation this time in the country. All these are impacting on the seed. However good the seed will be, when those issues are not addressed, this country will still not be productive. I wanted a clarification.

DR KIBIRIGE: When we test for two seasons instead of three, we test in a wider area. We caught up many more trials and that statistics is coming. We are able to prove statistically that we should do that it is like testing for three seasons.  

Madam Speaker, I am aware that there is a lot of soil loss and that that may have impact on this Bill but we will address that elsewhere.  

Madam Speaker, the bio-safety law, that one is being worked on by the Ministry of Finance under the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology.  

Madam Speaker, I was continuing to say that the gap between Kibirige and the peasants is very big, and I was going to say that it is true that we have got a traditional extension service out there at the sub counties. There is a graduate veterinary in most of these sub-counties, there is a graduate agriculturalist, there is a graduate environmentalist, there is a graduate fisheries officer as had been approved by this Parliament.  

Then, as all of us you know, we found out that they are fairly ineffective but they are there and I think it is a duty of all of us to ensure that they do their work. Unfortunately, they are employed by the districts and we are unable, we in Entebbe, to discipline them like we cannot discipline the CAOs, like we cannot discipline all those persons who are employed by the district service commissions. But at any rate, after we have amended the Constitution, I hope we shall particularly address the issue of the CAO so that the central government can hire and fire him and since he is the head of the public service at that level, I am hoping that then we may handle those persons better. 

In the meantime, we are rolling out NAADS; it is not in all the places yet. It is true that in some places, we are still at the stage of capacity building, but in other places, where we went before, we have passed capacity building and are actually in advanced stages and providing, for instance, planting and stocking materials, demonstration farms. We are addressing all the other areas that NAADS is meant to address. It is true –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to find out whether the Minister of Agriculture has evaluated where NAADS has worked so that the mistakes made there are not replicated elsewhere it is going.

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, we do that on a routine basis. I was continuing to say, Madam Speaker, that where we are in advanced stages of NAADS we are no longer at capacity building stage but we are implementing the other aspects of NAADS. If you visited places like Kabale, Soroti and others –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that we are approaching Christmas, but really your telephones should not be on. Please respect the rules of this House; switch off your telephones. I have heard three telephones ringing this morning.  

DR KIBIRIGE: Really, you would realize that we are doing very well with NAADS and that would be our link between the good seed and farmer. There was –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, before the minister leaves the point of NAADS, I think this House is entitled also to know the result of your evaluation. You talked about the study done by Forum for Women in Democracy. I happen to chair Forum for Women in Democracy, we did it in conjunction with Oxfam and reports are available and the findings were in the negative, if I must say. But the honourable Minister is telling us that NAADS is doing very well, but that one is not documented anywhere; we do not have those findings.  In fact, we ran into problems in NAADS secretariat they did not want us to review the findings we found on the ground in Luweero. 

So, may I ask through you, hon. Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture avail us with the findings from their evaluations and monitoring reports so that we could compare and make informed decisions for this country? Otherwise, wherever we are going they are telling us, “NAADS is not doing well” maybe except in Mukono because Mukono was already ahead, it could even have done better without NAADS. Could he give us the reports and the findings of the performance of NAADS in the various districts where it is operating?

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, we shall oblige.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When will you oblige, honourable Minister, can we have the time frame?

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, some four months in a new year with your permission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, but you have said that you routinely evaluate. Do you really need four months and we all say that agriculture is the backbone of this country? Do we really need four months, honourable Minister? When it is routine, this must be available. 

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, may I say “at the earliest opportunity” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, minister, let us be serious about this matter. Can you give us a date? Parliament is resuming on the 1st of February 2005. When will you present the report and evaluation?

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, on the 28th of February. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the clerks, please note it. That is a government assurance and the Committee on Government Assurances should also take note of that date.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to seek further clarification from the honourable minister. He has admitted that the extension services and officers at the sub-county level are in place but they are not effective. This was a question asked by an honourable member of this House. And his excuse for admitting the ineffectiveness is that the central government is not able to monitor and direct the CAOs. He hopes that when the Constitution is amended and government is able to directly appoint the CAOs, then automatically it will translate into efficiency of the extension officers. 

I want to find out from the honourable minister whether he is aware that although the extension officers in agriculture, in animal industry, crop sector, and environment are in place, they are inadequately facilitated. Many times you find that they may have motorcycles and bicycles but they lack the fuel. Even when they are facilitated by the CAOs with fuel, they do not have adequate allowances.  

Secondly, the farmers who are supposed to apply for the extension - because now it is privatised and it is upon the farmer to apply for it - are not aware that they should apply. Even when they apply, they find it very expensive because the extension officers are bound to request the farmers to meet certain minimum expenses. Is the minister aware of that constraint? And if he is, what steps is he putting in place to correct that situation? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I have just been advised that the 28th of February is a Monday, so you may want to adjust it forwards. The 28th of February is a Monday, so you might want to move it forward. 

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that advice. Then it will be the 1st of March. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the extension workers are very well facilitated. They are paid under the PAF programme, they are supplied with a motorcycle each, we send them fuel and we send them allowances. That I can say for certain. Certainly, we do not give them vehicles, I do not have one myself, but they are better facilitated now than when I used to be an extension officer myself. They have got motorcycles, they have got fuel, they have got allowances, but notwithstanding all that, they still do not work. I still insist that should we as the central government employ the CAO and be in a position to hire him and fire him, then I believe he will supervise not only agricultural staff but all other staff who work in the districts, better. I hope that at that stage they may even be less corruption. 

I sympathize with those farmers that find it necessary to pay those fellows whom we are facilitating adequately, but I am aware also that it is mainly the cattle keepers who are normally amenable to actually giving bribes to those staff yet I am totally aware that those people are being adequately facilitated -(Interruption) I will not, Madam Speaker, I am speaking this with a lot of confidence. Of course we are not giving them the largest salary as received by Members of Parliament. Certainly, they are not receiving Shs 5 million but at their level, I am saying they are adequately facilitated.

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the minister that it is true the extension workers are facilitated with motorcycles and all that he has mentioned. However, what is on the ground is that these extension workers are using the motorcycles to carry their chemicals and drugs and go to Nalubabwe, these open markets, every market and they sell those products. You have facilitated them to be able to do that. 

Two, the extension workers, many of them do not even visit their farmers a meter away from their home. We would say that maybe there is a problem of transport but if you are an extension worker you would start with your neighbour to advise him so that at least the farm near the extension worker is better off.

In 1998, in this House we nearly abolished the Ministry of Agriculture in the Sixth Parliament, because everybody was annoyed with the way agriculture issues were being handled. The indicators for agriculture are very clear, that is a ministry for which you can the performance on the ground without going even into reports, which we are going to receive on the 1st of March. First of all, the prevailing famine, the food deficiency in some areas and food surpluses in the other areas, the failure for Uganda to participate fully in the AGOA process, the lack of marketing in this country, all are indicators of inefficiency in the ministry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the issue of the inadequacy of the work of extension was well presented earlier before some of you came to this House this morning. So, let us not go into the general debate. We have noted it. I think everybody has accepted that the extension workers are not doing enough to reach the farmers. Those are the matters you can address in your budget sessions or call the minister. But let us deal with the plants and the seeds for now.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, I am perturbed. I thought some time in the Sixth Parliament the department of veterinary services was abolished. Actually we do not have a department of veterinary services. So, what is the minister telling us now? It seems it contradicts that position. What really is on the ground? Even US $3.4 million was given by the World Bank so that we abolish this department and privatise and enable the veterinary surgeons and veterinary staff to do private work. So, what really obtains now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, minister, please answer that and then go back to the Plants and Seeds Bill and avoid getting carried away by other subjects.

DR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, mine is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and animal industry includes veterinary medicine and animal husbandry. There was an attempt to privatise the veterinary sector but we did not go very far because the interest that was supposed to be charged on those particular World Bank loans was so high that many veterinary officers opted not to join.

Finally, hon. Matovu was concerned that this Bill does not address the research component. May I reply by saying that, that component is already being addressed under NARO. 

I appreciate the concern by hon. Lukyamuzi for agro-forestry and he specifically indicated his particular interest in Mvule, Musizi, Acacia for backcloth, and all those things. I appreciate that concern and may I reiterate that there is no need to fear GMOs because we are not in that business yet until the relevant ministry turns up with the appropriate safety regulations and policy. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You beg to move.

1.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (Mr John Odit): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for responses to issues raised by honourable colleagues, and I think they are very clear and simple. I only want to complement two areas.

A colleague was concerned with accreditation to the international organisations. This is one of the most important reasons we need this Bill urgently enacted so that we become part of the international community. We shall then have the capacity to certify seeds for our country and also to be able to certify our seeds for the international market. At the moment we are only making what we call the gentleman’s arrangement between Kenya and Uganda. Kenya is already accredited but in their own interest they accepted to certify our local seeds, for domestic consumption only. They will not allow us to use their certification to access the international market. Therefore, we need our own system. We need our capacity so that we can stand on our own. The concerns are genuine and I appreciate that the Bill can be enacted into law and then we move forward with the area of accessing the certified seeds. 

We can also, in this Bill when it is enacted, protect our own gem-plasma. It is clearly catered for here and that is why we think that a technical committee is definitely being changed to a variety committee.

Lastly, an issue raised on the valuation report for NAADS -(Interruption)

MR SSENGO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable chairman for giving way. Our seeds are certified by Kenya, and I get the impression that they certify our seeds and then they sell them as their own seeds. That would imply that they are making some good money out of us. Do we not stand the risk of those people frustrating our moves to have our own accreditation so that they continue buying seeds from us, certifying them, and then selling them as Kenyan seeds? You know the seed situation in Kenya is not the best.

I want the chairman to clarify on that because it is a very worrying situation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ODIT: You are quite right honourable colleague and I think that is precisely the reason we should stand on our own by enacting this law. But the Kenyans agreed to accommodate our demand for our own use, and not to export our seeds. Because even our local farmers should be able to plant seeds, which are certified. So, we are using their certificate to access our own local seeds basically for our domestic use but if we get this law in place, I am sure that the national seed certification services will have the capacity to approve and certify our seeds for the local, regional and international market. That is precisely the reason.

The last point on this issue was raised by the honourable colleague from Masaka on the evaluation report on NAADS performance in Luwero. The fact is that the report was submitted but we advised these consultants that the sample size was too small to give a generalised conclusion on the performance of NAADS countrywide. Therefore, we advised them that out of the 27 districts where NAADS now operates, you cannot just go to one or two villages in Luweero and get the performance in that area, with the weaknesses within the local area, and make your conclusion. Thus we are expecting wider consultation and a better considered report countrywide before we can draw conclusions on the failure or successes of NAADS. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we are unable to proceed to the third reading right now. So, the House is suspended until a quarter to three when we shall continue with the business on the Order Paper.

(The House was suspended at 1.27 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.45 p.m._)

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON 
MR RICHARD KAIJUKA’S  PAYMENT OF THE TERMINAL BENEFITS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance. Is there a member of the committee who can present the report?

MR KATUNTU: Well if there is not, since there is a member here, she can volunteer and present the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the vice-chairperson? [Mrs Nyombi: “No.”] You are a member; well versed? Could the clerk please ask hon. Rwamirama to come into the Chamber? And those of you, who are here, do not disappear as well. We suspend the House for five minutes.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, after five minutes we can even present this report, since it is here, and we proceed with business.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.00 p.m.)

(On Resumption at 3.14 p.m._)

3.14
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the payment of terminal benefits for Mr Richard Kaijuka.  

Introduction

Madam Speaker, hon. Mike Mabikke, MP for Makindye East, raised a query about the payment of the terminal benefits of Mr Richard Kaijuka. The Speaker referred the matter to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for consideration.  

The committee has considered the above concern and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations.  

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the following:

1. Hon. Michael Mabikke
2. Mr Richard Kaijuka
3. Officials of Bank of Uganda
4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee further analysed the submission from the Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance and Attorney General’s chambers.  

Submission on Mr Richard Kaijuka’s terminal benefits

Mr Richard Kaijuka served as the managing director and chairman of Uganda Commercial Bank, then a government owned bank, for a period of seven years from 1979 to 1985. The benefits were calculated to total US $189,000 before tax.  

His services were reportedly terminated after General Tito Okello Lutwa’s coup in 1985. He reported that his office was taken over immediately and a new managing director was appointed while he was on official duties in Lusaka.  

He further informed the committee that he never had chance to come back to his office and check on any records that existed.

The committee was informed that all other former managing directors of UCB were paid their terminal benefits accordingly.

Hon. Mabikke’s Submission

The committee extended three invitations to hon. Mabikke to express his reservations on the payment of Mr Kaijuka. However, he appeared on the first invitation and promised to appear with other informed people, which was never done in spite of several reminders about the meetings.  

His concerns were as follows:

The time lag between the time Mr Kaijuka was managing director and the time he is being paid – now.

Whether he had been paid before; and the basis for computation of his terminal benefits.  

Madam Speaker, the Bank of Uganda submitted that the payment to Mr Kaijuka was not part of the obligation to be settled from the sale of UCB. It was not among the verified lists of claims. 

It should also be stated that UCB was not sold under the PERD Statute but under the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993, whose provisions for compensation are rather different from those of the PERD Statute.

The bank, therefore, insisted that payment to Mr Kaijuka could not be met from the proceeds of the sale of UCB as was directed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and as echoed by the Attorney-General. 

They maintain that they should pay Mr Richard Kaijuka from the Consolidated Fund.

Observations

Madam Speaker, honourable members, the committee found no reason to question government’s intentions to pay Mr Richard Kaijuka’s terminal benefits. The payment to Mr Kaijuka is a genuine claim since there is no objection from the former employer, who is the Government of Uganda. 

There is no evidence that Mr Kaijuka has been paid his terminal benefits before.

The delay in the processing and payment of the benefits was explained and hinged mostly on bureaucratic procedures in government. 

The member who raised the issue seems to have lost interest in the matter since he could not appear before the committee and present any evidence to warrant stopping the payment.

Mr Kaijuka was summarily replaced and could not rejoin his office to access any document but he swore an affidavit in lieu of his appointment letter. This is the basis upon which his terminal benefits were calculated.

It was the norm by the bank to pay its employees’ terminal benefits as agreed. Mr Kajura Muganwa, Mr Ezra Suruma, Dr Mwine, Mr Elly Rwakakoko and Mr Kabanda were all paid their terminal benefits.

Recommendations

Government should pay Mr Richard Kaijuka’s terminal benefits from the Consolidated Fund to avoid loss of resources in courts of law.  

Madam Speaker, since Government had already indicated to pay Mr Kaijuka, the committee is of the opinion that they should go ahead and pay him.

Parliament should in future take up petitions or objections to people who submit incredible evidence of the objection to avoid wasting of the valuable time of Parliament.  

Conclusion

Government is acting in good faith to meet its obligations by paying Mr Kaijuka’s terminal benefits for the time he served as the Managing Director of Uganda Commercial Bank and the committee, therefore, found no cause to stop payment. We commend government for undertaking to pay Mr Kaijuka’s terminal benefits. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: what does the government say?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Leader of Government Business has allowed me to present this evidence. What I am presenting is a letter written by hon. Gerald M. Ssendaula, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, P. O. Box 7120, Kampala. The letter concludes as follows, Madam Speaker: 

“Following consultations with the Attorney-General, Mr Kaijuka has sworn an affidavit in proof of his claim, which shows that he served in Uganda Commercial Bank as Chairman/Managing Director for seven years from 1979 to 1985. His benefits, therefore, work out to US $189,000 before tax.”  

Hon. Gerald Sendaula is therefore requesting the Governor, Bank of Uganda, to settle this amount from Uganda Commercial Bank’s resolution first proceeds held by Bank of Uganda. I take it that the Ministry of Finance, therefore, has no objection to this payment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.24
MR MIKE MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must begin by thanking the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this report, but still I find a few problems with the final product.

As you are aware, when I presented an objection and queried this particular payment, my intention was never to stop the payment of Minister Richard Kaijuka –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was in the Chair when you brought up that matter. Actually, you did not want us to proceed with the Budget until government explained that matter, yes! So, can you tell us now whether the man was paid or not so that we move on? You wanted to block the Budget because of that matter. I remember because I was here.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I wanted this matter clarified by government. I wanted the Minister of Finance to clarify and clear the procedure by which the computation of these terminal benefits was done and that sum arrived at. 

I already find serious discrepancy, first on page 1 when I look at the methodology the committee used. The committee met with me, that is true; the committee met Mr Richard Kajiuka; but the committee does not tell Parliament which Bank of Uganda officials they did meet in particular.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is true that when I met with the committee the meeting was chaired by hon. Nsubuga and at the end of my submission it was the consensus of all members of the committee that I could not be put to task to present any evidence. In fact the committee cited Article 90(4)(a) of the Constitution, which reads as follows: 

“In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament may call any minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.”  

The Minister of Finance was never invited to this committee. Madam Speaker, this committee can also co-opt any Member of Parliament or employ qualified persons to assist them in the discharge of their functions.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is quite illegal hon. Mabikke to say that we never invited the Minister of Finance about this matter. We invited Bank of Uganda, we invited the Minister of Finance; in fact hon. Mabikke was called ad at one time when we were in committee waiting for him, he promised us to come but eventually switched off his personal phone. And hon. Mabikke, please let us respect one another. Thank you.

MR MABIKKE: Of course I will not respond to each and every issue that may be raised. This committee has got powers of the High Court, they can enforce the attendance of witness and examine them on oath and they can even compel the production of documents. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So they should have compelled you to come to the committee?

MR MABIKKE: No, I did appear before the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They said you went to bring other evidence and you never came back. Should you also have been compelled to produce other evidence?

DR EPETAIT: I note with great concern that the petitioner, hon. Mabikke, has continued to do exactly what he did at the time when the Committee on Finance wanted more evidence from him. The committee in its report has even stated that hon. Mabikke was rather elusive, he could not appear before the committee to give more evidence in spite of several reminders and therefore he wasted the time of the committee. Is he in order to continue treating this House as if it were a committee and continue wasting our time on a matter that is really very clear? Madam Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke actually you are out of order. You can only return to this Floor to produce evidence that Mr Kaijuka had already been paid. Lay it on the Table here that he was already paid. Table your dispute about the computation; lay it on the Table here. If you cannot do that, please, do not waste more of our time.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, when I did appear before the committee it is not true that my query was on a time lag or whether Mr Kaijuka had been paid before or not. My query was first of all that the procedure for payment appeared irregular.

Secondly, the basis of computation of the terminal benefits was irregular because you cannot base –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you table the basis of computation here? Table what you consider to be right to this House. Honourable Mabikke, I know that people think you can say anything in Parliament but should say things, which you can substantiate. It has taken six months to handle this report. You have not produced anything to the contrary; no evidence that Mr Kaijuka was paid, no evidence that the computation is wrong. What do you want the House to do; to continue considering this matter? No, please, if you do not have that information, stay where you are.  

3.31
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much. If it takes the likes of hon. Kaijuka Emeritus’ resolution of Parliament to get their money, then that should show you how much the ordinary worker on the street suffers to get their benefits.

Turning to this matter, I would like to say that hon. Kaijuka is entitled to his terminal benefits because there is no doubt that he was Chairman and Managing Director of Uganda Commercial Bank. But again, Madam Speaker, payment of terminal benefits must be based on established facts. We have been informed that Mr Kaijuka is not able, due to circumstances stated, to produce his appointment letter. But we know that UCB had a board office. There was a board secretary, and they must have minutes where he was appointed, which specified the terms and in particular the terms regarding his terminal benefits.

Therefore, for terminal benefits to be paid just based on an affidavit sworn by someone, raises a bit of a problem. Before coming to this Parliament, following up issues of terminal benefits with the Privatisation Unit was part of my daily routine and the standards of evidence that one was entitled to terminal benefits were extremely high. The Unit always insists that you produce an appointment letter or an identity card but in the case of Mr Kaijuka we know he was there. But the worker must be able to prove that he was entitled to terminal benefits and these are based on a certain formula.

The question that I want to know is, what is the basis of the computation of these benefits? How do we arrive at US $189,000? Is there any evidence to that effect, regarding the formula? Because when I look at one the attachments to this report, this is a letter from the Attorney-General to the Minister of Finance:

“Mr Kaijuka had a meeting with His Excellency the President in which it was agreed that Mr Kaijuka should be paid his benefits accruing from …”.  

I would have expected the Attorney-General to quote “basing on clause this of his terms and conditions of service and board minute number this”. Now that is not there and until records are produced - because they should be there in UCB showing that Mr Kaijuka is supposed to get terminal benefits based on this formula - I will be very reluctant to support the payment. Though  generally I support that he should be paid his benefits, they should be based on the terms and conditions that are accrued to him at the time, and UCB and government should be able to produce that –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify that actually the matter of computation on the figure was not considered as a serious problem. That was because the Government, who is the employer of Kaijuka in the absence of his appointment letter, had records of how they had handled the previous MDC, and they calculated this.  

Much of the concern was how Kaijuka was to be paid. It was based on the affidavit that actually he had lost documents, his office was broken into when he was in Lusaka and they put in Onegi Obel as MD. Mr Richard Kaijuka did not come back to Uganda; he went and worked for the European Union bank. When he came back he stood in his constituency and he came to Parliament and he was appointed a minister. His claim appeared but because he was in government then, he could not sue his own government. So, the claim stayed and stayed.  

When we were looking at the petition actually we wanted to find out mainly whether Mr Richard Kaijuka had been paid. Two, whether the time lag could be explained. We have really tried to be brief and explained how it happened. Otherwise, we do not have records from the Auditor-General that actually the computation is very wrong. We did not go much into the calculations. We focused on the principle.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that Mr Kaijuka was an employee of Uganda Commercial Bank, which was a body corporate established by an Act of Parliament – I think - and is different from the Government of Uganda. Employees of the Government of Uganda are recruited through the Public Service.

But the point I am trying to raise is that benefits are paid based on a formula in your terms and conditions of service. I stated that there is a board office in UCB from where we can get this information. Madam Speaker, what I am trying to say here –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you my brother, Martin Wandera. The Chairman/ Managing Director, UCB is the chairman of the board. The shareholders of UCB by then were Ugandans and the one holding the shares on behalf of Ugandans is the Ministry of Finance. All chairmen/managing directors were appointed by the Minister of Finance on behalf of Uganda. Therefore, the one who appointed must be having information about the employee they appointed.  

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much. Let me be very specific: could the minister or the chairman give me the formula that leads us to US $189,000? Because if it cannot be tabled then this is a political payment and I am not going to be party to that. In the Attorney-General’s letter he is saying, “ …the political decision having been taken at the highest level, I wish to assure you that there is no legal impediment …”; I do not agree with the opinion of the Attorney-General because Mr Kaijuka had his employment contract, which specified how he would be paid his terminal benefits. So, can you table the formula?
 
3.39
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two lingering misgivings in my mind, which I want the committee chairman to clear. It will appear that Mr Kaijuka absconded from office after there was a coup in Uganda. There is not indication that he made every attempt to come and resume his office. In public service if you do not report for duty for a given number of hours it is deemed that you have vacated office. To some of us these matters we are applying, why are we applying them selectively?

Two, Uganda Commercial Bank at that time was not a branch of the World Bank. Why is this computation done in dollars? Is every Ugandan who has got a claim now free to lodge a claim in dollars?  

Thirdly, perhaps as my colleague who spoke before me has said it, what formula was used to come to this huge figure, which translates to almost Shs 400 million? Otherwise Ugandans are going to query what we are going to pass here. It will set a precedent and we will find ourselves in difficulties when we are handling similar matters in future. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, this Parliament is required to take a decision on this matter because we have no control over these payments. It came to this House because the member was asking us to stop discussing the Budget until this matter had been explained. That is how it came to this House.  

3.42
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County, North): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad you have made that comment. My honourable colleague, Arumadri, is opening a can of worms. In generic terms really this matter of employment and terminal benefits is huge. Number one; I do not know if the Government is in a position, on the same person, same subject, to tell this august House that there is no further litigation in the pipeline against the Government by the same person. 

Two; not long ago the same person, on the same subject inquired why the Government had unlawfully terminated his services at the World Bank as a director on the pretext that there was evidence against him of being corrupt in the AES dam proposal. 

Madam Speaker, my colleague hon. Wandera also raised another issue of political payments. But referring to your immediate comment, Parliament cannot determine or offer such payments. Political payments are becoming difficult. Not long ago a former vice-president, Dr Speciosa Kazibwe, was given Shs 2.5 billion. We do not know from what vote and for what purpose. I sit on the committee responsible for that kind of vote and there was no provision in the vote for that type of payment. If you by precedent one time refused to honor an obligation on the part of a person who acted as a vice-president, I am referring to the late Brigadier Toko; he acted as a vice-president during a military regime and he was never accorded his benefits until he died that is when we gave him a state funeral. But the terminal benefits regarding his service were never honoured. 

In terms of need for education we have a former vice-president to Amin, Idris, this person for a long time was illiterate. This is a man who needed UPE and we never accorded him that privilege. Instead we sent someone for a PhD at a cost of Shs 2.5 billion. When we talk about political payments I am glad the Rt hon. Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister, is a distinguished political scientist, distinguished Prime Minister technocrat, and very vast in matters of education. He is a chancellor; maybe he can guide this august House. These political payments, are they out of the kind of money we authorize in the Budget in this august House?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is very disturbing for hon. Awori to stand here and continue saying that this is a political payment when the man is claiming for his terminal benefits based on the work he had done for this country for seven years. I would really not like to tie this payment to our former vice-president because these two are unrelated.

3.46
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to tell hon. Aggrey Awori, who came late, that before he came I did authorise a minister to read hon. Sendaula’s letter dated March 23, 2004. It ends, and let me quote: “Following consultations with the Attorney-General, Mr Kaijuka has sworn an affidavit in proof of his claim, which shows that he served in Uganda Commercial Bank as Chairman/Managing Director for seven years, from 1979 to 1985. His benefits, therefore, work out to US $189,000 dollars before tax.” So this is not, I repeat, this is not a political payment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, permit me to assure both the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, and the chairman of my committee who I respect that at no period - in case my English was lacking somewhere - at no period did I say this is a political payment. I only referred to the position by hon Wandera when he said, “is this a political payment”? That is the only thing I questioned. I never said this is a political payment. I only referred to his statement of political payment in regard to these other payments I referred to, excluding Richard Kaijuka’s. 

I am only disputing the payment we made to Harvard University –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving way. I would like to inform you that the way you perceive it, this is an entitlement that the member claimed. However, he followed a political approach to get his entitlement. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, when we are checking public expenditure, we have a right to scrutinize every payment. Nobody should chicken away from that responsibility, which we shoulder as Parliament. 

The information I would like to give to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, through hon. Aggrey Awori is that the testimony of the Minister of Finance to the effect that a certain figure was being given does not sufficiently distance that figure from political motivation. I thought you would speak beyond what you said.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I would like to further raise this information. When you read the letter enclosed from the Attorney-General, the last paragraph says: “I am informed that there is a fund from the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank from which this money can be obtained.” 

When you get to the submission of Bank of Uganda the committee reports that the bank, therefore, insisted that the payment to Mr Kaijuka cannot be made from the proceeds of the sale of UCBL as was directed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and echoed by the Attorney-General. There is a discrepancy between these two positions; there is a position of Bank of Uganda and the position of the Attorney-General. Where is the money going to be paid –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam speaker, hon. Mabikke was invited many times. For the last two times he actually did not surface at all, and he switched off his phone. Is he in order to come here and actually confuse the House and read the report in half and not in full? Because the contention the Bank of Uganda had is that it took over the assets and liabilities of the bank and it was not listed in those so they referred the payment to be settled when they had disbursed the money to the Ministry of Finance. Is he in order now to confuse the House and bring here issues he should have raised in the committee? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, you should really help this House. For instance, you have not told us why you did not go back to the committee.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, I was trying to make a presentation and it seems that the honourable chairperson has an interest in this matter. I was invited to the committee and I actually appeared before the committee but he was not in the country when I appeared before the committee. The committee was being chaired by hon. Nsubuga and –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mabikke was invited to the committee. Hon. Bright Rwamirama is not - being a chairman is an office not tied to him as an individual. If he is away does it mean that the committee does not operate? Having said that, is hon. Mabikke in order to refer to our Chairman of the Finance Committee that during his absence hon. Nsubuga was not competent to handle his petition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, if you are still pursuing this matter I want you to formulate a question to the Minister of Finance that in view of the position of the Bank of Uganda, where does he intend to get money to pay Mr Kaijuka? I think that is what you should be doing. Otherwise, we cannot go on meandering without ending this matter.

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, at the end of my meeting and submission to the committee there was a consensus that actually the committee was going to use its power to access each and every document in order to verify this claim. When you observe and analyse the report of the honourable chairman carefully, there is so much fraud. There are so many documents that were not accessed, which were important in order for us to be able to have a full picture of how the computation of US $189,000 was done -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Mabikke, just do what I have told you. Can you sit down and write the documents you want? Ask the Minister of Finance to produce this and that, and do it today, please so that we can get to the bottom of this matter.

MR MABIKKE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, permit me to conclude my submission by saying –(Interjections)- no, no (Interruptions)

I would like to conclude my submission by saying that I do endorse the payment for the terminal benefits for Mr Kaijuka. Over and above that, if this House has the powers, it should also look into payments due to him at the World Bank as an executive director whereby we instigated his removal from the World Bank by giving a false report and allegation that he was involved in corruption yet a court in Sweden, and the World Bank, absolved him. 

I would also like to submit that if it is within the powers of this august House, payment should be looked into and the payment of other members of UCB who are still claiming their terminal benefits to-date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have found the way forward on this matter. Hon. Mabikke, you will do the needful before we go for Christmas so that it can be transmitted and dealt with quickly. 

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually, while I agree with the submission and thank the committee for approving the payment of Mr Kaijuka after his seven years’ service in UCB, I served for 15 and a half years as Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, a major parastatal to government, and I got only Shs 36 million as retirement benefits. 

I bring this up just for the attention of Government because really all those heading major government parastatals, particularly the National Water - when I joined as the Managing Director in 1993 there was no drop of water in Kampala. I spent all my time and life to build up that institution from zero. There was no drop of water to the existing level. Since I left up to now there is no single drop of water added on what I left although there is a lot of propaganda going on there. But there is no single drop of water they have added onto what I left –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Hon. Onek, you said you only got Shs 36 million after 17 years’ service and this is somebody who served for seven years and he get Shs 400 million. Is there something wrong with your arithmetic or are you happy? 

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, thank you for the contribution of hon. Aggrey Awori. The matter here must be the formula used, the mathematical equation used in deriving those figures. So I have brought this up is just for posterity because the Leader of Government Business here in the House should note that the treatment of those who are handling sensitive and big government institutions must at least be harmonised. If I was not a practical engineer as of today I would have been a pauper on the street. Shs 36 million would have gone –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Onek, that he was in charge of sewerage and Mr Kaijuka was in charge of money –(Laughter)- so, he should be cognizant of the truth. Thank you.

MR ONEK: As far as I am concerned there is nothing more valuable than sewerage. (Laughter). Sewerage is more valuable than money. All of you seated here contribute heavily to sewage and you are obliged –(Laughter)- to contributing to sewerage. If you did not relieve yourself of the sewerage you would be dead. So, what I was taking care of was fundamentally human rights related. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, on a serious note really I feel very unfairly treated as a managing director for 15 and a half years, having restored water in Kampala, Jinja, Entebbe and all the towns of this country. When I got to National Water there was only Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe without any drop of water for expansion. By the time I left we were covering all of them up to Gulu and Mbale. We built new planning water works in Mbarara, Masaka; I managed it with all my diligence and I gave all myself without eating the money, really I put everything in force and the results were seen. But for that I got Shs 36 million. And today for somebody who worked for only seven years gets how much?

HON. MEMBERS:  Shs 400 million.

MR ONEK: So, these are the kind of irrational things, which I want the House to note that Government put right the terms for all those heading important Government parastatals.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You remember there was currency reform in 1987 and official bank rate of the US dollar was Shs 60. So, if you go back and multiply this money by Shs 60, you would get exactly what Kaijuka should have got at that time. The purpose of putting this money in dollars, I believe, is to take care of the inflation, which has taken place over time. So -(Interjection)- -(Mrs Ssentongo rose)- well, you can make an argument. Let me make my argument. 

For my brother, Eng. Hillary Onek, I know you could have got Shs 36 million, but we have classes of parastatals. There are top ones, there are the mediums and there are the lower ones. So, I do not know where the National Water and Sewage Corporations falls. But if it falls in –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: It is very offensive for someone to argue in the way my colleague is arguing on the Floor of the House. Here are workers in this country who are demanding their money in arrears –(Applause)- but whenever they are being paid they never put inflation into consideration. It is so unfair. You cannot utter this on the Floor of the House of this country, no. Is he in order, surely?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not. Honourable members, we have agreed that a question is going to be put urgently to the Ministry of Finance seeking details of the computation and requesting for various documents. If we talk about which parastatal is better or not, we cannot solve anything here. So, let us end here for now and the Clerk will assist you to formulate the question. Thank you.

Honourable members, the business we were supposed to do this afternoon is from the Committee on Legal and Parliament Affairs but I understand they are still having a meeting somewhere and we are unable to proceed with it. We cannot proceed to the Third Reading of the Seeds and Plants Bill, so I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.02 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 December 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)


