Wednesday, 4 December 2013

Parliament met at 3.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Stephen Kangwagye Rwakanuma

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kangwagye, I welcome you most warmly to the Parliament and congratulate you upon your election. I understand that you are a member of the National Resistance Movement Party and so, you will sit on this side of the House. (Applause)

On this side, are the Members of the Opposition and on the other side are the Independents. You are going to be working with all of them.  I want to hand over to you your instruments of office; a copy of the Uganda Constitution, which should guide you in your work and the Rules of Procedure that I want you to read and study carefully, to help you in doing your committee and plenary work.

The Government Chief Whip will allot you one Standing Committee and one Sessional Committee. You are welcome. (Applause)-The Leader of Government Business would like to welcome you.Do you want to welcome him formally?

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of many to welcome hon. Stephen Kangwagye Rwakanuma to this Ninth Parliament-(Applause)- I congratulate him on the campaign and the victory that he registered as the clear choice of the people of Bukanga Constituency. 

I would like to assure him that in this House, especially on the side of the ruling party, we are very happy that he is the chosen leader of the people of Bukanga. (Applause) We will work with you as Parliament, as the ruling party to which you belong, with the Opposition which we all work with and all other Members of Parliament. 

We urge you to recognise that you are now the leader of all the people of Bukanga; those who supported you and those who did not support you. That is the spirit of the Movement and spirit of leadership. We want to assure you that you will have our full support from now on until the next time you go back to account for your activities and leadership position in the Parliament of Uganda. Congratulations, once again. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition -

3.35
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to welcome our brother to this House. I wish to welcome you on behalf of the Opposition. You are welcome and we hope to closely work together. We will expect you to go back home and work closely with the people whom you might not have pleased in your victory – that is what the campaign means. 

But we also wish to call upon the organisers of elections that they should, at all times, be transparent, free and fair so that people who lose elections can comfortably lose and know that it has been a fair game. We call upon our brother to seriously defend the Constitution like he has vowed. We vow to protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda but on many occasions, we have left it where we took the oath from.I call upon you my dear brother that we do that; protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as by law established.I want to welcome you once again and we are ready to work with you as Members of the Opposition. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Independents.

3.37
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. As the second largest grouping numerically or strength-wise, I would like to congratulate my brother, hon. Kangwagye. While I welcome him to this House, I would like to urge him that as my colleagues, the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition have just mentioned, we are governed by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. You have just sworn an oath of allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Uganda belongs to us all. 

While we are in this House, we treat each other in a very cordial manner, respect each other and work together as a family. While we may agree to disagree or agree to agree, never has it come that we totally become uncordial in our behaviour and manner that we prescribed in this House.

Therefore, as we welcome you, we hope that the disintegration that is taking place in other areas in our country should not crop in here and we continue working with the same zeal, focus and desire that we each have to serve our nation. You are very welcome; congratulations to you, to the NRM and most of all, to the people of Bukanga. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I also want to rise on an issue on a different –

THE SPEAKER: No, you cannot.

MR TANNA: It is a point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order to who?

MR TANNA: The Minister for Defence – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no. Please, you are interfering with my Order Paper. Please, take your seat.

MR TANNA: He is seated at the back, Madam Speaker.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. 

I want to announce that the Committee on Science and Technology will be having an exhibition – what they call “The Parliamentary Bio-Technology Exhibition Week” that started today and ends on the 6thof this month. This is being done with the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.

Tomorrow, Tuesday 5th December, has been dedicated to questions relating to bio-technology and Genetically Modified Organisms. You are encouraged to meet the professors who will stay the whole day there tomorrow to explain those issues. So, that is information for you.

The second is that as it is our custom, we shall also have the Annual Parliamentary Health Week to commence on 9thDecember and ending on the 13thDecember. It will commence with a health walk to be officiated by the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker. I invite Members to go and support it. 

Other activities will include blood donation drive, screening for cervical and breast cancer, free male circumcision in case there are Members and staff who have not been circumcised. (Laughter) So, I want to urge hon. Members to use the facility because it will be available.

The third point, hon. Members, is that two weeks ago, we asked all the committee chairpersons to report on progress of their work. I just wanted to say that I was attending a meeting unconnected with this Parliament, where one of the participants informed the audience that there are Bills that have pending  for several years.So, in particular,I want to point out the Plant Variety Bill- It has stayed long in our hands. I also want to point out the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill. 

Really, hon. Members, we cannot justify the failure to bring these Bills before Christmas. So, I am warning you, I want those Bills next week. The Bahati one also-(Laughter)

3.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise a matter of national importance and urgency on behalf of the people of Kanungu District that are represented by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Hon. Karungi and myself. This is to do with power supply, Kanungu Electricity. 

At the end of 2011, H.E the President commissioned Ishasha Hydro-power Dam and where dams are constructed in communities, usually, there is a sub-station that is constructed so that if power from Jinja is off, the local community can have constant power. We asked the Minister for Energy, Eng. Irene Muloni and she assured us that because there is a line, which was being constructed through Kabale Nyakishenyi connecting to Kanungu, that once it was completed, then Kanungu would have power supply all the time and she spoke as a professional engineer. 

However, to our surprise, when the line was completed, there was more darkness than light. Madam Speaker, I raise this issue because we have been working hard in Kanungu to promote Prosperity-For-All and Government has supported the people of Kanungu with tea growing programmes. And to that extent, there are three factories, which are in Kanungu District, namely, Kayonza Growers’ Tea Factory and Bwindi Tea Factory, which are in Kinkiizi West Constituency and Rujayo Tea Factory which is in Kinkiizi East Constituency.

There is a concern that these factories are unable to run because the costs, which they are meeting in terms of buying fuel to run generators are extremely high;and they have written threatening to close the three factories immediately because they cannot afford to run them without electricity. The concern, which we want to bring before you, Madam Speaker, is for the minister to assure the people of Kanungu that Government needs to urgently come to the attention of the people of Kanungu and assure us that we shall have constant power supply or in any case, some measures should be put in place to help these factories so that they can run because ifthey close, then the livelihoods and the economy of Kanungu will actually shut down. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to lay the letter, which has been written by the factories on Table so that the minister can take note.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the minister will be able to respond at some point.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a letter from Kayonza growers’ Tea Factory, Rujayo Tea Factory and Bwindi Tea Factory written on 3December 2013 and addressed to hon. Eng. Irene Muloni, Minister of Energy and Mineral development. Reference is “’Eminent closure of the three tea factories’.” Dear Madam, the above subject refers –“

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t it what you have said?  Just name the authors, and then lay the document.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The other complaint they are raising is that these factories are buying fuel on commercial rates; they are not allowed to buy on industrial rates, and therefore, each factory is spending Shs 75 million Shillings per month. Just on fuel to run the generators. This letter has been written and signed by Tumwesimiire Caleb Kipande, who is the Chairman, Board of Directors, Kayonza Tea Growers Factory and Mr Musinguzi James Garuga, Chairman Board of Directors Rujayo and Bwindi Tea Factories. 

It is copied to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, Ministers of Agriculture, Trade and Industry, the Members of Parliament from Kanungu, the permanent secretaries of ministries of Finance and Energy, the PPS to H.E the President and the District chairperson Kanungu District. 

It will be a double tragedy, in addition to having no bridge, if the factories close. I do not know what the people of Kanungu will do. So, we pray that this matter be treated as an issue of emergency and the minister responds as soon as possible. I beg to lay the letter on Table. Thank you.

3.48
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This morning at about 4 a.m., fire gutted Park Yard Market, part of Owino, again. This is the second time this year; the first one was on 7th April but it is the fourth since 2009. 

This is a place of about 30,000 traders out of about 700,000 in the whole of Owino. I personally know quite many of them and I have always shared with many of them regarding the challenges of doing small businesses in Kampala. 

I do not think Ugandans can believe that we do not know the major cause of such fires. The reason some of us stand here and demand for investigations and reports of fire is not only that we are suspicious of some elements in Uganda but because our safety can only be perfect today when we know the cause for the setbacks we suffered yesterday. 

Owino was gutted in 2009, again in 2011, in April this year and now today. They have also been prominent fire outbreaks - Kasubi Royal Tombs, Bwanika House in Nagalabi Buddo, Buddo Junior school, Kanungu and so many others; none of these has ever provoked Government for a comprehensive report. The cause for the fire today and that which may occur tomorrow is known and here it is; Government’s failure to be sensitive of the need -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasibante, you are now debating, justifying, rationalising; you want the government to pay attention to the fires. I think you have made your point.

3.51
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe South Constituency, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I will try comfortably to use the three minutes. I am rising on a matter of national importance and it has ever been before this Parliament. It is about human trafficking. A report was brought here by the chairperson of the Committee on Gender regarding human trafficking. 

My concern is on the females. Parents have already approached me that the thing is becoming even worse. We made reports and recommendations here but we want to know exactly what Government has come up with regarding the recommendations. For instance, girls have been taken again, especially senior four and six leavers who have sat exams because of lack of jobs. They are being promised lucrative jobs in the Middle East, Kuwait, Dubai and so forth. 

The concern, is that we would like to know how far Government has reached with the recommendations made by Parliament on human trafficking. There are offices here, which are continuing to recruit Ugandans particularly girls and they are being taken for sexual trafficking. If I am to read very fast, one of those observations in this report, it said that “a big number are victims of a gang of fraudsters who recruit them for lucrative human trafficking” as mentioned by the chairperson of the Committee on Gender “and unsuspecting individuals are often promised non-existing jobs as already mentioned on this Floor. 
The delegation observed that the chapter on sexual enslavement and exploitation abroad is a very disheartening and sad one. Recommendations were made on what Government should do; how they must curb this, how they should go and close these offices.

I have got a mobile number here, a girl has already sent a message through her parent to me, that they are in a harem; men come and pick them as if they are picking chicken and one girl serves four men. These are Ugandans, they cannot escape from Kuwait; there are in a building. Everything is here even the numbers; I can even lay it on Table, for security purposes such that the Government can continue. 

I seek your indulgence to ask what Government has done so far ever since we made these recommendations on Thursday 29 August 2013. Madam Speaker, your name is Rebecca and Rebecca is a very good name and you have been fighting for a girl child. Before you go for Christmas, give this as a gift to our young girls and the mothers; Government must do something.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask Government to come to us before we leave for Christmas. Is the minister ready on the power supply and eminent closure of the factory? Then, the Minister for Internal Affairs will respond on fire and human trafficking.

3.55
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I acknowledge receipt of the letter written by three tea factories complaining about power supply in their area and indeed, I apologise for the inconvenience they are experiencing for the reason that we have been trying as Government to ensure that Kanungu District gets reliable power supply; one, by constructing the Ishasha hydro-electric power dam that was commissioned but the way the dam was structured, it needs reference voltage from the main greed in order to operate. So, any interruption on the main grid affects its operation and currently, we are having rehabilitation works going on, on the main transmission line to Western Uganda and also the distribution network in Western Uganda.

Therefore, the interruptions will continue for a period of nine months and we have alerted factories and the customers on the network in Western Uganda to bear with us so that we can rehabilitate the network. At the same time, we are trying to improve the immediate distribution network, which can feed power supply to this power station so that it can be on most of the time. 

In the next two to three months, we also want to modify the configuration of this plant so that it can be self-excitation instead of depending on the main grid. So, we acknowledge and apologise for the inconvenience but Government is striving as much as possible to rectify the problem and ensure that the tea factories operate. I thank you.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the very regrettable fires, which have been occurring in Nakivubo area, first of all, Government as before has been prompt in taking action to alleviate the suffering of the people who lose their property there. On the previous ones, I am yet to get hold of the previous reports and then bring them before Parliament of what was done, of the causes and what other action was taken. As for the fire of today, hon. Minister Kiyonga will say something. 

On human tracking in persons, we are taking action and we are bringing it to Cabinet to form a multi-sectoral unit to take action because a number of ministries have been taking action on this; we want to consolidate these efforts into one home to ensure - but for now, action is being taken, investigations have been done and some people have been taken to court and we are working with Foreign Affairs and other ministries to ensure that this malpractice is brought to an end.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what hon. Ssebuliba was saying is that they have changed tactics and have gone to religious organisations. They are recruiting through mosques and churches. Now, they have gone near God in order to entice young people to believe that they are really good jobs.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, whether through the church, or some other individuals, still Government will have the capacity to deal with all the outlets where these activities have been conducted. We will take action and I assure Parliament that we will take action and bring this evil practice to an end. Thank you.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Early this afternoon, on behalf of Government and on the instruction of H.E the President, I led a government team to go and convey our sympathies to our brothers and sisters who were hit by this tragedy of fire today morning. The team included the honourable Minister for Security, hon. Muruli Mukasa, the Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura and I.

Madam Speaker, the market at the parking yard was erased to ashes and it is clear that our brothers and sisters who work there have lost hundreds of millions of money. The Government has announced through our team an immediate relief of Shs 1.0 billion to the victims and this is going to be followed up by immediate discussion with them so that we find a lasting solution to this recurrence of fires in this market. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.01
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I wish to use this opportunity to also extend our sympathies to the people of Park Yard Market, Owino. 

The question that was asked is: What is Government saying about the cause of these fires? There are several of them. Many commissions of inquiry have been set up to find out the cause of these fires and we believe that if we possibly studied these reports, we could have been able to come up with a lasting solution to the fires around the country.

Every time fire guts markets and schools in Uganda, Government will rush in to give a contribution. We appreciate that but for how long are we going to do this? On many occasions, we have noted that such Government contributions do not actually reach the people who might have suffered the loss. These contributions, on many occasions, have ended up in other people’s hands. How are we going to sustain this project without addressing it in totality?

Finally, the people suffered a fire this morning. I was alarmed to see the people who were in pain after that big loss being beaten and sprayed with teargas. Can we get the reason the people who had suffered a loss were being beaten up and sprayed teargas by military police? I wish to get a response to that, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, I informed Members that they were free to park in the entire multilevel car park. But after the sitting of yesterday, I was informed that only the main deck was available where there are 100 parking slots. I am still constrained by the instructions of the Minister for Security not to allow utilisation of that facility until he has secured it. So, there are only 100 slots available on a first come, first served basis. That is what I wanted to clarify.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, may I, as directed by rules 30 and 31 (2), lay the local governments, municipalities and town councils financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. The statements are for the following district local governments: Nakasongola, Nakaseke, Ntungamo, Kisoro, Isingiro, Hoima, Napak and Ntungamo Municipal Council.

Those for town councils include: Masuliita, Kihiihi, Rubaare, Kitwe and Kaberamaido. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Those should be sent to the committee and perused so that we can get the report.

QUESTIONS TO THE PRIME MINISTER

THE SPEAKER: This will take 45 minutes. 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, there is one fundamental question that remained unanswered.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, last week, I raised a question to the effect that one of the Constitutional qualifications for one to be President is about age and this age is limited to only 75 years –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, the Prime Minister told you he would ask that person from whom you want an answer. That is what he told us.

MR KASIBANTE: That is why I am raising it.

THE SPEAKER: No, do not smuggle that. 

4.09
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also first take this opportunity to congratulate our new honourable member upon that success.

I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister a question about the salt industry. It is on record that our Government spends Shs 44 billion in importation of salt every year. If I refer to the United Nations Trade Statistics data, it is indicative that this country imports 90 percent of the salt used and moreover from our neighbours in Kenya.

When I look at those expenses, I notice that it suffocates other resources of Government. So, my question to the Prime Minister is: What plans does Government have in place – I wrote to the Minister of Trade and the Minister of Finance but up to now, they have not responded – what plans do you have to revive Lake Salt Project? At the moment, Lake Katwe has 22.5 million tonnes.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, when do you intend to revive Lake Katwe Salt Project?

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kafuda for asking a question that concerns an activity in his constituency.

The question of salt at Lake Katwe has been handled for a long time. In the 1970s, some equipment, as he knows very well, was imported to put up a factory to process salt. It was imported from Germany. But this equipment could not work because it was corroded by that salt. Since then, studies have been carried out to determine the chemical content and other contents in the raw material in Katwe to see the appropriate technology that would be used for the purpose of extracting salt.

We have had many presentations. The Ministry of Trade has received many proposals by intending investors who have carried out those studies. We are just waiting for the conclusion of this process and when it is done, then the right thing will be done.

4.13
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question is: What plan does the Prime Minister have for the people who were abducted along Lake Albert while they were enforcing laws on the lake? They were three police officers and two civilians. They were abducted by the DRC soldiers but up to now, their families do not know their whereabouts. So, what plan does Government have to handle this matter?

4.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, the problem of abduction at borders and when we know as we do in this case, that the abduction was done by forces from a neighbouring country, is handled through diplomatic channels. 

Our Ministry of Foreign Affairs has made the necessary representations to the Government of the DRC, which they are following up. And as has happened in the past, our expectation is that the Government of DRC will respond. We do understand sometimes when their speed of response is limited because of the specific conditions that existed in the Eastern part of their country. But as you know, we have been part of the effort to try to help them normalise the situation in Eastern DRC so that there is full state authority. 

We can, therefore, hold them accountable for the activities that occur at our borders. Yes, we will still hold them to account but sometimes, we do understand when their own investigations take time. Thank you.

4.16
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question is: Can the Prime Minister tell Parliament when the amendment of the Children’s Act will be tabled in this House? This House, in 2004, directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to bring an amendment on the Children’s Act. However, to date, nothing has been done. 

Members of Parliament have raised questions on this Floor. They have also raised points of procedure and presented statements on this Floor about this amendment but nothing has been done so far. So, can the Prime Minister let us when this process will be complete?

4.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, hon. Mutyabule is raising a very important point. Of course, as we all know, the passage or the enactment process of laws involves many parties. This is under the Ministry of Gender. So, I will task the Minister of Gender to expedite what they are doing because this matter has not yet come to Cabinet. So, we will look at how to speed it up. I donot know what constraints they have been facing. But it is a matter that we will take up. Thank you.

4.18
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County North, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister – with reference to the fire at the Park Yard Market – we all know that the major cause is that the market was constructed from temporary wooden materials. So, I would like to find out why Government does not construct a permanent structure and shiftthe vendors into it to reduce the incidences of those fires?

4.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I agree with the hon. Kabajo that, particularly, the Park Yard Market – this is a temporary market as we all know – actually, this is the fourth time it is catching fire because it is made of flimsy inflammable materials and it is not a licensed place for a market. However, for the reason he is giving – because we would like to ensure all traders have places of operation – it is Government policy and it is a plan for which this Parliament has appropriated funds to build permanent places and expand the markets we have.

As we all know, the President opened Wandegeya Market only a few days ago. There is a market at Kalitunsi, which has been completed and it is partially now operational and there are others that are coming up.

The operators of Owino Market have formed themselves into an entity that intends to develop that market to accommodate all the operators in there now. We are doing everything possible to make sure that people move out of flimsy markets into permanent homes. Thank you.

4.21
MS GRACE FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two questions. The first is: Is the Prime Minister aware that our technical people, especially, at the Ministry of Works and Transport are either sabotaging our work or are incompetent? This is because on 28th September, we had the privilege to host H.E, the Vice President of Uganda at Nyaper St Aloysius College. But two days to his coming, the Ministry of Works started grading the roads. Immediately he left, they stopped leaving soils and stones on the road between Nebbi and Paidha. Buses cannot pass. When it rains, vehicles cannot pass. So, my question is, is the Prime Minister aware of this apparent sabotage and incompetence in the Ministry of Works and what steps he is going to take? 

4.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank hon. Kwiyucwiny for that question. It is a question that we have been discussing with the ministry concerned. It is not only the road to Nyaper St Aloysius College, but to many other places. Even my own constituency has a problem. In fact, one of the sub-counties is almost cut off because of the rains.

The explanation we are given and we have asked them to find solutions for is that because of the heavy rains, they did not think they had capacity to compact that murram and they are waiting for the heavy rains to subside and then, they can continue with the work. I hope they do that as quickly as possible. 

4.23
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about the people suffering in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. People go there to get passports, as most of you know. But when it rains, it rains on them and the sunshine also hits them directly. What are you planning to do for suffering Ugandans?

4.24
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, I agree with hon. Katoto that it is a problem that the ministry itself feels. Actually, one of the problems they have is that the place is like a market place. We have been discussing the question of finding a home for the ministry and for the various activities that are the reason for the amassing of numbers at that point. 

Secondly, as you know, we are advancing in technology. We are going to introduce; in fact, we have already laid the necessary infrastructure – the optic fibre; the National Backbone Infrastructure. The first and second phases have been completed and they are going to do third phase. This will enable us to provide e-governance, e-health and so forth. 

So, one of the things that our people are going to benefit from that is to apply for passports and receive them without coming to the office and in so doing, decentralise the issuance of passports in terms of collection. Even if the processing is done from one centre, the collection will be done in many centres of the country for the convenience of the people. 

4.26
MS MARY NALUBEGA (Independent, Worker’s Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister on the workers who are being mistreated outside Uganda. Unemployment has been a disease in this country. So, in 2003, the Government came up with a law on free movement of labour and they created a desk in the Ministry of Gender and Labour. But they have left free moment of labour to private companies, which mistreat the girls and boys whom they take outside this country. So, what is Government doing to make sure that boys and girls work in a decent work environment? 

4.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I agree with the Member; that is a matter that has been under consideration. The formula that we thought would be the effective answer was not to involve Government in handling the question of movement of labour of people who are seeking employment outside Uganda because it would not be very effective. However, as Government, we have a responsibility to oversee that entire exercise and therefore, we are in the process of formulating rules and regulations that will govern the treatment of free movement of labour even by the private sector and we hope this problem will be curtailed in that way.

4.29
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, every preceding year before the elections, that is 2000, 2005 and 2010, the President has personally pledged to the people of Kaliro–Bulamogi that he is going to extend power from where President Amin stopped to Nawaikoke and Irunda and Namwiwa and Gadumire. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you state it with certainty that this time, before the 2015 election campaigns start, this pledge will be made good? 

4.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Lubogo knows as much as I do that we have a very comprehensive rural electrification plan. There is no part of Uganda that will remain unreached; including Kaliro. (Applause)But with the appropriation of funds in the hands of hon. Lubogo and the rest of us here, our speed will be determined by the amount that we provide for that plan. I want to assure you that our speed will pick up when we have more resources to this sector. 

I have been discussing this issue even with other people in relation to not only industrialization; because you know very well that it is this Government’s plan to respond to the big question of job creation through industrialisation and value addition. We are determined to make every village and sub-county of Uganda access power so that they are able to access this overall plan of bringing about transformation in Uganda. Thank you. 

4.32
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, over the years, the people of Teso have been promised compensation for livestock that was lost to marauding NRA soldiers during the insurgency of 1986 to 1991. Over very many elections, this promise has been re-echoed by H.E the President during campaigns. I want to know from the Prime Minister as to when cattle, goats and sheep taken away from the Teso people will be given back to them. 

I also want to ask the Prime Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: One question only.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, there were people killed during the insurgency – 

THE SPEAKER: Only one question, please. Hon. Member, do not smuggle another one.

4.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): It is true and Government has clearly taken cognisance of this and I do believe that this point is very well covered even in the ministerial statement of this financial year, that there was loss of livestock. It is also true that we have had a series of programmes for the restocking of Teso – [Mr Amuriat: “That is re-stocking and not compensation.”] – I would like to give my answer; and if hon. Amuriat Oboi – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, you have asked your question. Let the Prime Minister answer. He has just started. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, as you know, I am an orderly person and I behave, strictly, in accordance with the rules. So, my answer is that: It is true that Teso lost livestock like other parts of Uganda and Government has had an extensive plan of restocking Teso for many years now. And in this year’s Budget, we actually have Shs 5 billion earmarked for the restocking Of Teso - (Interjections) - and West Nile as well but let me talk about Teso. 

We chose to do it this way because the claims of compensation – as you know – which are outstanding, have to be handled very carefully. I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that when we totalled up the claims of livestock from one region, sometime ago, we found that the livestock claimed to have been lost in that region, was twice as much as the livestock the whole of Uganda was known to have. Therefore, we have taken the line that for compensation, there will be careful investigation and verification. But at the same time, in order to make sure that we have livestock in the area, we have this programme of restocking, where we have spent billions of shillings, including in Teso. Thank you.

4.36
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister how far he has gone with the plans of setting up a fruit factory in Teso sub-region, specifically in Soroti. Deadlines have been shifted time and time again. Can the Prime Minister tell us today when the people of Teso should expect that factory established, because oranges are wasted away? We were given oranges and because there is no market for them, farmers are losing. Thank you.

4.37
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, it is true that we have been talking about the setting up of this fruit factory. And a lot of ground work, as you expect, needed to be done and it is being done. And I do believe that hon. Osegge maybe a lot more up to date on this than I am. But we were trying to connect power to the site because there was that question of power and site. 

And we have been discussing with the Koreans. So, as far as I am are concerned, this is a priority area and we are doing all that needs to be done to make sure that that factory becomes operational.And I look forward to visiting it soon.

4.38
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, we were informed – and indeed, it was true – that leaders of the East African Community countries were here, in Kampala. And we leaders were requested to mobilise residents to go to Kololo for a rally, which was going to be addressed by H.E, the President of Uganda and the other East African leaders. 

My question is: Why did they abandon our President and leave him to address the rally alone? And yet, we were informed that all the leaders of the East African Community states would address the people of Uganda on the issues of the federation. Why was our President abandoned?

4.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, it is my great pleasure to inform hon. Ssebagala that we did appreciate, especially his effort in mobilising the people of Kawempe to go to Kololo to receive the leaders of the East African Community states. (Applause) I would like to inform him together with the House that that day, the programme had been that the leaders would arrive the previous day – it was a Friday - and they were supposed to start their meetings on that evening. As it happened, they actually arrived late and so, the meeting could not take place on that Friday evening. So, the meeting started on the morning of Saturday and it went on for long. Eventually, when they had resolved the issues and all the leaders, except one, were planning to return home that day; there was not enough time for all these leaders to go to Kololo. 

As you may have noted, hon. Ssebagala – of course, he must have been there. President Museveni, who came on their behalf – because they had agreed that he represents them, arrived very late and when he arrived, as he headed to Kololo, the rest of his colleagues headed for the airport. It is not true that they abandoned him; instead, they assigned him to represent them and address hon. Ssebagala and others, who fully subscribe to the idea of integration of East Africa. And I hope hon. Ssebagala got satisfaction that the meeting had achieved its objective, which was to sign the protocol for the creation of a Customs Union. Thank you.

4.41
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question comes from the Education sector. In Uganda, we have a shortage of teachers’ accommodation and specifically, in Kampala District, some schools like Kitante Primary School was constructed by the Queen of England as a gift to Uganda. 

In that school, there is a deputy head teacher’s house, which was later on given to a number of teachers because of no teachers’ accommodation and the Executive Director of Kampala Capital City Authority wrote to the administration of the school taking away the teachers’ house- the only one they have- so that she could use it for her guests coming to Kampala. We raised this matter in the Committee on Presidential Affairs and I also informed the hon. Kagyigyi on the same matter and -

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, you are wasting our time.  Ask the Prime Minister when he is getting back the house.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the question I am asking is: What is the Prime Minister going to do to Madam Jennifer Musisi who has failed to respect teachers; who has removed teachers from their houses at the school premises, which house belongs to the school, and has used it for personal benefits, yet, she had another house at Mabua Road, where Gen. Tinyefuza was removed from? What are you going to do to such a person, yet you know the income of teachers is very meagre? Answer me. (Laughter)

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, the hon. Ssewungu is asking a specific question regarding a specific item. Obviously, I do not have an answer because I can readily answer any question on policy, plan and programmes. But to be specific about a house, I have taken note. I will certainly find out the position about that house and you will be informed by those who are dealing with it even before I come back to this august House. Thank you.

4.44
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Is the Prime Minister aware that as a result of the single customs clearance taking place in Mombasa, the traders are incurring more costs and spending more time? And when is Government building its own inland port at Malaba as agreed by the Heads of State? 

4.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, hon. Ekanya who represents Tororo County where Malaba is, needs to be informed that because of these new policies - as the President announced the other day in his speech - the time for goods’ arrival in Mombasa and transit to Kampala has been reduced from 18 to four days. Thanks to the decisions of the leaders and specifically, the intervention of H. E. Uhuru Kenyatta the President of the sisterly Republic of Kenya. 

It would be unlikely- and I can check that one - that moving goods from Mombasa to Kampala in four days is more expensive than moving goods from Mombasa to Kampala in 18 days. I would be happy to receive that information from the hon. Ekanya and establish, indeed, because this would be a miracle that the shorter the time, the more costly it is as he is suggesting. Thank you.  

4.47
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am up on the Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP). Can the Prime Minister inform us on the recovery of the lost funds and also mechanisms for preventing more losses in the PRDP funds?

4.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, hon. Aol knows very well because this has been in the public domain, that all agencies of state have been doing everything possible to handle the question about the loss of money in the Office of the Prime Minister, some of which was meant for the PRDP. And I do believe she knows, because again, this is in the public domain, that many people have been arrested and charged in courts of law for specific offences of theft and things like that. 

And I know, because again this has been in the public domain, that the office of the IGG and all other sectors of Government concerned are busy following up the issue of assets of those who would have embezzled public funds. So, that is a process that is on-going. I hope that much of that money will be recovered through that process. Thank you. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that concludes the 45 minutes for question time for the Prime Minister. Let us go to the next item.

HON. MEMBERS: Leader of the Opposition.

THE SPEAKER: No, he did not give me notice. Let us go to the next item. I would have shortened the time for the others. Next time, please-

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

4.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I am raising on a procedural issue. First, I want to report that I have been engaging the Prime Minister since morning up to now, on some issues we have been discussing since the week began.  The procedural issue I am raising here is that yesterday, Parliament directed that the Lord Mayor and Dr Kiiza Besigye who had been blocked should be allowed to go and defend  themselves; to access food and other basics and when I talked to the Prime Minister, he told me that it had been effected.

However, I have told him that it is not true because we have been to Dr Besigye’s home and it is still blocked by Police. So, the procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is that when Parliament directs that something be done, has the Prime Minister, who is my good friend, got authority not to implement it?

THE SPEAKER: Since he is here, let him answer. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, it is true what my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. We have been in contact and we agreed that the best course of action to take in such matters is through dialogue because when we meet and talk, we shall even move mountains and I want to express my appreciation for his full support of that idea, which actually he, himself, already had initiated.

We, therefore, agreed that we would raise a statement, which is comprehensive tomorrow in response to the matters that he raised in his statement yesterday and in order to clarify even some of the issues that he is talking about now. I look forward to having this statement in this House tomorrow, if you so decide, Madam Speaker.


I did talk to him just a moment ago and I was trying to find out exactly what was happening. It is the reason I had stepped out when you called Prime Minister’s Question Time. I was out in the corridor with hon. Nandala and we were talking about that. So, I want to assure him and assure this House and the country that through this method, we will get to the root of everything and I am sure that we will find amicable and mutually acceptable solutions to the problems that we face. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (MR Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Free Zones Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to make provision for the establishment, development, management, marketing, maintenance, supervision and control of free zones; to establish the Free Zones Bureau, to be responsible for the establishment, development, management, marketing, maintenance, supervision and control of free zones; to provide that the Board of the Uganda Investment Authority shall coordinate, monitor, and supervise the implementation of this Act in collaboration with the Uganda Revenue Authority and provide for other related matters.

Madam Speaker, the Bill is intended to provide incentives to investors, to provide increased exports, increased foreign exchange earnings, employment opportunities, improve infrastructure facilities and enhancement of national human and capital resource. The Bill further is geared towards poverty eradication, promotion of Government policies like the Prosperity-For-All and bringing Uganda’s legislation in line with the international obligations. Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move. 

4.56
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Free Zones Bill, 2012. The Free Zones Bill, 2012 was read for the first time on 27 August 2012 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny.

The committee has in accordance with Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings to the House.

Methodology

The committee held consultative discussions – 

THE SPEAKER: No, the Members can read the methodology. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Okay, Members will read the methodology and object of the Bill. Let me go to the observations and recommendations. The committee makes the following observations and recommendations:

Free zones as a tool for economic development 

Even as Uganda is making significant economic progress, there are still a number of socio-economic challenges, which include high unemployment, high level of poverty, prolonged trade balance deficit, high rural urban migration and more importantly, Uganda being a land-locked country, the challenges are a result of low levels of development in key sectors such as agriculture, industry and services. This is due to low levels of technology, lack of successful modern entrepreneur cadre, inadequate fixed capital information, inadequate industrial base, inefficient industrial production, poor infrastructure, low level of value addition, cumbersome and costly licensing procedures, bureaucracy, difficulties in accessing land and limited scope of activities allowed in existing investment promotion  scheme.

In addition, where investment incentives are provided, they are not harmonised. As a result, the country has not been able to attract sufficient investment. Export earnings have remained low and experiences high levels of unemployment and poverty. Free zones have a broad strategy of offsetting a general adverse investment climate by offering:
    a) Service quality infrastructure and services
    b) Streamlined business regulations and 
    c) Incentives in order to attract investors and businesses.

Economic benefits from zones include the following:
    i) Increased foreign and domestic private sector investment 
    ii) Employment and income generation both direct within the zone and indirect through backward and forward linkages with businesses outside the zone.
    iii) Extra growth and diversification and increase in foreign exchange. Fiscal incentives are used to counteract the anti-export bias of other trade policies.
    iv) Development of industry and other sectors requiring service, specialised infrastructure.
    v) Skills upgrading and technological transfer from increased foreign direct investments.
    vi) Demonstration effects for new policies and reforms. Zones can act as experimental laboratories for application of new economic policies and approaches.
    vii) Improve ineffective tax rates through enhanced tax collection within zones, incremental (new net tax revenues collected from expanded tax base and improved tax collection procedures) will serve to offset, perceive, forego taxes from fiscal incentives while other policy tools exist, free zones can be particularly a cost-effective tool due to agglomeration benefits of concentrating businesses in one geographical area. 
    viii) Economies of scale in provision of public infrastructure and government services
    ix) Improve environmental controls 
    x) Classical development by developing linkages between firms. 

However, the committee notes that free zones are domestically criticised for engaging in business  set up operations under the influence of other governments and for giving foreign corporations more economic liberty than is given indigenous employers who face large and sometime insurmountable regulatory hurdles in developing nations. The committee recommends that the regime should encourage local entrepreneurs to participate in free zones operations. 

The committee further notes that there is need to ensure that Uganda does not attract shoppers of tax holidays by strengthening the regulatory framework. This usually arises where Government pays part of the initial cost of factory set up, loosens environmental protection and rules regarding negligence and the treatment of workers and offers tax holidays. When the taxation three years are over, the company without fully assuming its costs is often able to set up operation elsewhere for less expense than the taxes to be paid. 

Free zones vis-à-vis special economic zones

Clause 2 of the Bill defines a “Free Zone” as a designated area where goods introduced into the designated area are generally regarded so far as import duties and noted as being outside the custom territory and include export processing zones and free ports zones. 

In 2004, the Uganda Law Reform Commission issued a report on the law for establishment of special economic zones. In that report, recommendations were made to the effect that a law for the establishment of special economic zones be enacted. A special economic zone was defined as a selected area/zone to cater for export and domestic industries; providing best practice facilities and with the potential to be developed into any or all of the following:
    a) Industrial estates
    b) Export processing zones
    c) Free trade zones
    d) Virtual zones
    e) Tourists / recreational centre
    f) Manufacturing under bonds
    g) Technology park
    h) Free ports
    i) Special geographical areas

The committee notes that the Bill, therefore, should have been an umbrella law covering all types of special economic activities such as export processing, manufacturing under bonds, industrial parks, Technology Parks, Tourism Parks and free trade zones. This would enable flexibility in the regulations of particular forms of economic activities under regulations passed under this law and would eliminate the need to pass entirely new legislation for new types of special economic activities.

However, the committee also observes that at the East African level, and in particular, the protocol on the establishment of the East African Customs Union, provides for special economic zones but only expounds on one type of special economic zone namely, free ports for which regulations on free port operations have been annexed to the protocol as annex no.8. 

Article 32 further provides that the council may, from time to time, approve the establishment of other special economic arrangements for purposes of the development of the economies of the partner states. The protocol also includes Export Processing Zones (EPZs) as one of several exports promotion schemes. The EPZs are implemented through the EAC Customs Union (Export Processing Zones) regulations under annex no.7 of the protocol. 

The East African Community Customs Management Act, 2004, the law that implements the protocol only provides for the treatment of goods with free imports and export promotion zones and makes no mention of other component special economic zones scheme. It follows therefore, that introduction of other schemes has to be agreed upon by the council. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government initiates the process. 

Institutional framework and establishment of free zones
Clause no.7 provides that the governing board of the Bureau shall be the Uganda Investment Authority, which shall coordinate, monitor and supervise the implementation of the Act in collaboration with Uganda Revenue Authority. 

The committee makes the following observations and recommendations:
    1. The Uganda investment authority is an autonomous body with a huge and critical mandate of its own under the Investment Code Act. The establishment, construction, development and operations of the free zones is a new and expansive mandate and therefore, requires a separate and independent governing body.
    2. The governing board should be independent and its composition should be representative of the key partners/ stakeholders in the establishment and management of the free zones in Uganda.
    3. The law should be capable of being implemented without conflict between the existing authorities especially the Ministry of Finance, the Uganda Investment Authority, Ministry of Water Lands and Environment, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and Uganda Revenue Authority. The committee will, at committee stage, move an amendment to this clause to provide for a revised governing board and independent regulator. 

Incentive for free zones developers

Clause 67 provides that a business enterprise in a free zone shall qualify for incentive as provided for in the relevant tax laws. The committee found that:
    1. In several countries, including Kenya, where we benchmarked, the exemption and incentives were clearly stipulated in the law. There is, therefore, need for a clear framework on the determination and award of incentives. This law should clearly indicate the bare minimum  and the incentives available to the developers.
    2. Regulations made under the protocol on the establishment of the East Africans Customs Union on the operations of free port and export processing zones require that Partner States develop a harmonised list of exceptions. In Kenya, for example, this is clearly stated in the law. 

Policy on strategic investment

The committee observes that there is no policy on free zones in Uganda. Ideally, the Bill should have been informed by a clear Government policy. There is, therefore, a need to establish a specific policy framework for strategic sector investments in Uganda. The policy should be geared towards promoting foreign investments in closely linked strategic sectors, which should facilitate the building of backward linkages in the economy whatever possible in addition to the development of more aggressive export promotion and economic diversification strategies. 

Secondly, the strategic sector investment must encourage investment in local research and development in areas of direct relevance to set up industries.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Allow me to lay on Table the following documents:
    • A copy of the report of the committee that I have just presented on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Free Zones Bill, 2012. 

    • Minutes of proceedings of meetings of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Free Zones Bill, 2012, which we held on 18February, 2013, 10 April, 2013, and 11 September, 2013.
    • A brochure on the Export Processing Zones Authority of Kenya, which we got when we went to benchmark.

    • The East African Community Customs Union Export Processing Zones Regulation. 

    • Kenya Exports Processing Zone’s Authority presentations to Uganda Parliament’s Committee on Finance on the establishment of Duty Free Processing Zones, which was done on Monday 10 June, 2013. 

    • Kagera Eco-city Ltd’s address to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 2 October, 2013.

    • Presentation from the National Trade Council to the committee on 30 September 2013.

    • Lastly, a benchmark study report on free zones by the committee of June 2013. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. chair and your committee. Hon. Members, I want to confirm that the report has been signed by 17 out of the 20 members, which is more than the minimum required for the authenticity of the report. So, you can now contribute. Three minutes for each one of you, please.

5.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this very good report and Government for taking the initiative because special economic zones are long overdue. You realise that towns like Jinja were deliberately developed through the colonial policy of industrialisation. Now, the efforts being put on Namanve have also not yielded much. 

So, it is good that this time round, we are working towards integration – to work with our partner states in an effort to have organised development. And actually, this should not only wait for that level of pushing at the integration level.

I would also want to say that – I do not know whether we should limit it to a free zone or a special zone; because we need to look beyond what was proposed in the Common Market. As a country, we should be able to look forward; we have regions, which have neighbours beyond the current East African Community. 

I will give the example of West Nile, which neighbours DRC and South Sudan. You can actually develop a zone, with other ports, including air transport, which will make it very easy for them to do their business. And that is why I would like to encourage Government that while working on this Bill, you should help the National Planning Authority and other arms of Government – those on oil and gas development committee, those on Albertine planning; we should not do things piecemeal. Let us have an inter-ministerial integrated approach. That is why you can see here that we are talking of an industrial park and business centres. In some jurisdictions, you will even find science and technology cities also as part of zones. So, this is a very important instrument and even an area like Karamoja, which has been having challenges, because it is a neighbour to South Sudan, Kenya and Ethiopia, you can as well use the neighbourhood to develop such zones to make them best destinations for investments.

The other point I want to make is this: Many times when we talk of incentives, some people mistake them to mean tax holidays. But you do not have to necessarily give tax holidays to attract investors. There is nowhere in the world where investment has been attracted just because of tax holidays. What investors need are good infrastructure, good political stability and cheap power. That is what will bring investors, but not necessarily tax holidays. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use just half a minute to complete your presentation.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, as chairman of the national economy committee, for some time we have been demanding to push for commercial laws. But we have also been reporting to the plenary that a lot of laws are coming to the House without policies. The Leader of Government Business should find out how many laws in this country do not have the policy that should have been there in the first place. This would help us a lot so that we do not rush into laws without policies. 

Also, most times, after we pass laws, it takes very long to put in place regulations. Let us take the international best practice of attaching proposed regulations on a law so that we do not take long to come back with the regulations. Thank you.

5.17
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute the committee for the good report. I move straight to the recommendation/observation No.1, where they are saying that we need to have a separate mandate and a special body that should be in charge of overseeing the prisons in Uganda. 

Based on the interaction I had with Uganda’s Ambassador to Germany, Amb. Tulibaleka, he told us of the incompetence or the failures of Uganda Investment Authority. They have managed to source and negotiate for very many investors who are willing to come to Uganda and partner with local investors. However, despite the numerous correspondences they have kept making to Uganda Investment Authority, there has been no response at all. They feel they are being let down. So, if Uganda Investment Authority is just failing on the already defined mandate, I feel that if we added this other function or role, we will be worsening the situation. So, I agree with the committee that we should come up with a special body that will be able to effect this particular programme.

Madam Speaker, regarding taking care of the interests of other governments, I also agree with the committee on this observation. Whenever we negotiate in these customs union and protocol, we always take care of the interests of our neighbours or other states, trading off our own interests. I appeal to and urge Government that before we move farther in implementing this particular law, let us take care of the Ugandans’ interests. Thank you.

5.20
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for working on this important Bill. Whereas they have rightly observed that we have no policy – and this has been an issue, which cuts across a number of other laws, which we have passed here. We should urge the ministry to expedite the work on the policy – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I thank the colleague for giving way. They have continued talking about lack of a policy but I know very well that this country has got a National Development Plan and all the laws that we make, go according to that plan. (Interjections)We also have Vision 2040, which could be a better policy than the National Development Plan. (Hon. Bako rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order, from hon. Abia Bako.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I have already completed my clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us hear the point of order.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The frontbench is getting unserious each day that passes. When laws are originated- in fact, majority of the laws that have been originated here do not have any policy backing. For example, in the entire country since 1962, there has never been any agricultural policy but you have originated Acts, for example, the NAADS Act. Where is the current policy? That is one thing.

Madam Speaker, when pieces of legislation are brought in, the import is that these laws will have to function in our society but trouble is, there is no basis; there is no parentage in effecting and enforcing these laws. 

How dare the Minister- a senior one at that- come here and place this matter of a policy in a National Development Framework that is short changed by time?  Is he, therefore, in order to actually insult the integrity of this House and his own integrity as a senior minister and suggest that the National Development Plan therefore, can substitute policy- (Laughter) - that is sector specific for that matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, despite the bigger plans, I think it is always better to anchor the laws on specific policies, which can be traced and their parameters established rather than general statements.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, why I was putting the emphasis on the policy is that I have just been in neighbouring Rwanda, which I think, if we are not careful, it is going to be the Israel of East Africa because the rate at which Rwanda is implementing to the dot, policies and laws, even some of which they get from here, is amazing. And this is a very big issue of concern because how can the Rwandese really be able to implement and move ahead of us, when in actual sense we have been referring to ourselves as their seniors, their parents? So, for me there is much more we need to do to really have- 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not like what you have said. I want to expunge that thing you have said about Rwanda- about being their parents. No, please. 

MR RUHUNDA: I withdraw that. I do not want to cause trouble. (Laughter) But Madam Speaker, on this free zone, the issue of Uganda Investment Authority, one of the challenges I have faced is that yes, we establish these authorities but they are not well equipped and facilitated. Now, how do we guarantee that even when we establish another body outside the Uganda Investment Authority, it is going to function effectively according to our desires? These are issues, which we need to look into.

Lastly, much as we are trying to come to terms with the East African Community legal framework- of course, countries like Rwanda and Kenya, which have moved, we feel- (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I was trying to refer to the previous experience that, for instance, if you look at Kenya and Tanzania, they have moved ahead with the biotechnological law but here, we have put it on a hold and yet, when you look at the free zone, some of the components within this free zone have a relationship. Now, if we cannot move at the same pace with our neighbours, then I see a challenge.

5.27
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must confess that these matters of trade are a very complicated subject for me but I have a passion to understand what is going on. So, I will be asking more questions than probably submitting in the form of a debate.

My first concern is, if we said free zone rather than free economic zone, is there a big difference? And if we choose to be too broad, does that mean anything passes in that place called the Free Zone; is it omnibus? Or is it only about economics? In that case, it is like taxation. Is it about business regulation? What are the exceptions in this Free Zone? 

I am asking because I understand elsewhere in the world, there are free zones, which are also free gun zones. So, guns can be traded freely; GMOs can be traded freely. Free constitutional zones exist in the world and so, anything happens about lawlessness. So, what is it that we are targeting here? And if we are targeting just about trade and economic activity, isn’t it better that the committee continues to emphasise the usage of free economic zone rather than free zone?

Madam Speaker, my fear is even worsened by the fact that there is no policy. I am shocked by hon. Byabagambi- what is it that guides the business there in the absence of policy? Is it that anything can be introduced in that zone and anything can happen there? I need help because I am also worried. If anything can happen, then we are looking at things like homosexuality and drugs. It is a free zone. Anything goes: dumping substandard- What goes on there?

Madam Speaker, the second thing, here, you trade in anything. You trade in narcotics. You trade in anything. It is a free zone. I need help. I told you it is not my area of expertise.

The second thing that I want to understand is that going by what happens in our country, the whole of Uganda looks like a free economic zone- the whole of Uganda. You look at the tax holidays and subsidies that are available to especially the foreign investors and it looks more like a whole free zone. You are talking about a country where there is no Minimum Wage Bill and therefore, you are employed on the terms and wishes and aspirations- it is like a free zone –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You said you only have questions, which you have asked? Okay, half a minute to conclude your question.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, what happens in the absence of a minimum wage? What happens in the absence of a national identity card? What happens in the issues of porous borders and immigration weaknesses in regard to these free zones? Once I have that assurance, then I will think that the country is protected and the local people and traders are protected. As of now, I am not very sure this free zone can help us.  

5.31
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the minister for bringing this Bill. As colleagues have said, it is long overdue, much as we still have many questions to ponder on issues to do with infrastructure and scales. 

When you look at page 3, the committee has enumerated a number of socio-economic challenges, which we as a country will have to overcome and this relates to the various policies and ministries that are supposed to work together with Ministry of Finance to ensure that once this Bill becomes an Act, we will be able to get the utmost economic benefit from the law.

The committee has highlighted issues to do with unemployment, high levels of poverty, prolonged trade balance deficits, high rural urban migration and more importantly, Uganda being a land locked country. As a leader from West Nile, I have personally come to see what this free zone, if at all we are to go by the amendments that hon. Alaso has brought forward and that is if the minister will buy it, to call the Bill “The Free Economic Zones.”

In West Nile, in the recent past, we have had running battles with URA, where our people have been getting access to cheaper manufactured products from across the borders. You find goods from China and Dubai crossing into Congo where they are cheaper and people go to buy them from there and they bring and sell in Arua. But recently, there was a slight change where the Congolese raised taxes on these manufactured goods. Instead, it is the other way round – the Congolese are coming to buy petrol from Arua and selling in DRC, which has also boomed trade in the region. 

So, I am tempted to believe that this Bill, if enacted, will give us some economic benefits and this will go a long way in alleviating unemployment and putting some incomes in the pockets of our people and keeping the youth busy. 

So, my appeal to the august House is that we must fast-track this Bill and where necessary, the minister should liaise with other sister ministers to see that there is a comprehensive policy to guide us because free economic trade zones are a recipe for fast-tracking development. 
As you are aware, our region is lagging behind in terms of poverty alleviation statistics. Therefore, this is one of the Bills that my region will support highly and I appeal for support and for fast-tracking. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

5.35
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi West County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During his contribution, hon. Ruhunda sighted an example of how our friends and brothers in Rwanda have perfected some of the policies and laws that were passed here and I wonder whether it would be mistake if we also tried and copied from them where they have perfected. To me, copying your neighbours is also not a bad thing so that we come and copy and apply what we have done.
The committee chairperson said they benchmarked in Kenya. I am not sure where else they did but we wish we would be privy to some of the reports they have made - what they found and whether we cannot begin from there. If they got policies from those countries, can’t we look also at the places that they are following since Members are uncomfortable about lack of policies especially on this free zones matters? Can we be helped and we get these things? 

Madam Speaker, around 2006/2007, I was Minister for Lands and I was given a task but there was a good policy through which we wanted to establish a free trade zone in Rakai. In Rakai, there is a good airstrip, which was constructed during Amin’s time and it is not being used and somebody wanted to use it because of the nearby lake - water transport - but somehow, there was a bit of politics and it was abandoned. I do not know why we cannot do it from here and see how we can develop some of the infrastructure that we have and have some of these zones developed and help Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.38
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for work well done and I know very well that free zones, if well utilized, in some of the countries studied show that they can improve on economic performance. But I speak from a labour union point of view because we have dealt with this matter and analysed a lot of operations of free zones in the various countries in the world and the traditional paradigm under which free zones are built are that we are trying to put an exclusive zone, make sure that there are certain conditions that operate in that zone, trying to think that it will lead to competitiveness.

In terms of labour, most of the zones that have not performed have tried to make the labour rights of workers, or even violations allowed built on a very wrong paradigm; that you can have growth without implementing labour standards and that notion has been found not to work in the sense that immediately you do not have observation of labour standards, the end result will be lack of competitiveness or low competitiveness because of poor quality goods arising out of the poor performance and productivity of the workers. 

When you look at the thoughts behind this law, we pray that we shall try to make sure that we build it using the new paradigm that we could have what is called “good growth.” Good growth is where you track economic growth in relation to decent work. The argument is that good growth and decent work and the issues that relate to core labour standards are inseparable, inter-related and mutually supportive and this is where you find countries like Brazil that have followed this paradigm where you have economic growth indicators that are okay. But also, the livelihood of the people and the workers also improved and it was not a situation where you have economic growth and you have what I call the economic indicators but the welfare of the people has gone down. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the committee tried to analyse on page 7 that in several countries, the exemptions and incentives were clearly stipulated in the law. I hope that we stipulate what are the incentives so that we make sure that the rights of the workers are not violated? If in this country we are already violating rights of workers recklessly and you bring an economic free zone, it will be terrible because if already where there is no free zone –(Member timed out_)

5.41
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the few previous speakers about the free zones and to assert that the committee needed to inform this Parliament about the good lessons that were learnt from elsewhere to inform our decisions on moving forward in the establishing of a law to govern free zones. For instance, I have just read on page 3 that lack of successful modern entrepreneurial cadre; inadequate fixed capital; inadequate industrial base – this analyses the economic situation at hand. But the immediate question that I want to ask is, Do you think that the establishment of free zones answers these inadequacies that we have? If they do not answer, what else haven’t we done; when we are moving through the Customs Union, the Regional Integration that we have got, and the Free Market Economy that Uganda has been experiencing since 1986?

So, we need to be convinced that the establishment of free zones is going to be a very important incentive for foreign direct investment including domestic investment; something superior to what has been offered so far should come out of them. 

I would also like to ask, who is likely to use this law in order to address the structural economic deformities that we have and how can this law be used without a policy? 

In my view, we should not hurry to fast-track this law as my friend said. I would rather  suggest that we first examine the advantages of establishing free trade zones; have a policy in place so that we do not suffer the bandwagon effect; because some other states have free zones, then we should also have them. I have failed to understand what exactly we are likely to benefit from making a law to establish free zones without a policy in the first place and also, to get information on how they have been successful elsewhere and how we will benefit from them as a country. 

5.44
MS CHRISTINE ABIA BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a country where we import toothpicks and needles from china and we are garneringhere without even a policy to create a free economic zone - this country should actually be crying and asking what the economists in the Ministry of Finance are doing to this country. 

First and foremost, you are talking about creation of employment through backward and forward linkages – I visited Mukwano Industry here in Kampala. This country cannot even produce enough sun-flower to supply that industry; it is operating at 60 per cent under capacity. How dare you talk about a free zone? I would like Government to inform me and the people of Arua, what foreign direct investment have we gained in form of employment?

They are talking about backward and forward linkages; like at the backward and forward linkages between the industrial sector and the agricultural sector. I have just told you that that industry is operating at 60 percent under capacity. So, what kind of crazy idea is this that it should be fast-tracked? This should not be fast-tracked; someone should do some right thinking in economics for goodness sake. 

Secondly, when you look at this statement; “In addition, where investment incentives are provided, they have not been harmonised.” Do we even have any policy in this country directing, which kind of investor should get incentives? It is always a directive. If you cannot protect your own domestic industries and to create employment for our people so that our people are no longer abused and our girls are no longer slept with in those shops, how dare you talk about a free zone? 

Even with those who have got 100 percent tax holiday, what employment opportunities have they created? Why are the young people running on bada bodas? Are we also going to create free zone areas for boda bodas; what a joke? 

We should not fall for this thing of best fit; we should not appear to be okay. In the UK, just the other day, they were debating as to whether it was not proper for the UK to remain outside the Union. What are we asking here, Madam Speaker? Even without the parent policy in place, what legislation are you creating? Who is going to enforce it and using what? If the Witchcraft Act cannot be operationalised because there is no parent policy in place, how can these 21st Century ministers come with such a piece of legislation and expect me to be part of it? How unfortunate!

Lastly, there is this every interesting point on page 4; that demonstration effect for new policies and reforms; “Zones can act as experimental laboratories”. Do you know the extent to which Ugandans what to be used as a lab on matters of an economy? Our country is landlocked; how many of these facilities have been created in Kenya by the way? (Member timed out_)

5.49
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have appreciated this Bill on free zones. I also want to say that it is actually paramount. I know there are arguments among academicians about the roles and the benefits of the free zones; you can ask very many questions. But free zones have been experimented elsewhere and they have worked very successfully. In my case studies, China that has recorded over 200 zones of this type, of various sizes and forms and they have contributed to the overall economic benefits to China. 

In Africa, while we are talking on regional integration, zones that are being created – it is paramount that we come down to the national level and look at how these zones can be created in terms of geographical areas and subject areas. I am sure we can refocus depending on the performance of these zones. 

The areas, which the committee did not put emphasis are those of labour relations which some members have pointed out. We need to really look at that. The issue of gender does not seem to be touched in this report. If you are going to encourage development in all dimensions, we need to look at how gender is going to be integrated in the entire development programmes that we are trying to develop. And also the issue of environment; I do not see it touched anywhere. 

So, issues of labour, gender and environment are fundamental and if we do not touch those, then our effort to engender free zones will not bear as much fruit as we want. Therefore, my emphasis is that we need to consider that exactly. And on the forward and backward linkages dimension, we should not just stop at the testable linkages but also to the very important variables namely issues of stability and security, the environment in which we want to establish these zones; the question of quality of the population that will be engaged or will actually engender the attraction of investment – whether direct foreign investment or even local investment.

Madam Speaker, if we can integrate those elements, I will be very happy with this law. And finally, of course, I will not forget the issue of the policy. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, many of the areas will become clearer when we go to the committee stage. So, I put the question that this Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

Clause, 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MRANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, in clause 2, the committee proposes that we replace definition of “Board” as follows: “’Board’ means the Uganda Free Zones Authority Board and ‘Business enterprise’ means an operator licensed under section 34.” The justification is that there is need to clearly define the above words for purposes of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only amendment under the interpretation section?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Madam Chair, because the next amendment is on clause 4.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing some members make changes? Let us skip it for now, just in case during the debate, some amendments emerge; we shall do it last.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 4(2), insert the word “port” between the words “free” and “zone”. The justification is that the restriction is only relevant to free ports. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it will read “free port zone”?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 4 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, in sub-clause (2), replace “building” with “any infrastructure”. The justification is that construction in free zones is not limited to buildings only. It also extends to roads and other infrastructure. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. May I find out from the minister what was the essence of putting “building” and why are we now replacing that word with “any infrastructure”? This is because whatever activity takes place there, attracts tax exemption. Are you saying that all infrastructures will now attract tax exemption?

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is your question?

MR EKANYA: I am seeking clarification from the minister - hon. Omach – what is the reason behind putting the word “building” instead of the word “infrastructure?”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Has he objected to the proposal for the word “infrastructure”?

MR EKANYA: No, the reason is that when we change it, it has wider implications on the certificate of financial implications that is tabled here. This is because “infrastructure” is so wide that it includes every facility in the place and has cost implications. In this free zone, there is tax exemption. And I think the intention of putting “building” was such that the buildings, which will be used for that activity, will be exempted.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. This amendment is coming from hon. Ekanya, who is a member of the committee. I have accepted the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, replace “Bureau” with “Authority” and thereafter, wherever it appears in the Bill. The justification is that this is a huge mandate, which requires an Authority with its own board. This is consistent with similar laws.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I am now speaking as the Shadow Minister of Finance. We were talking about Umeme and energy issues here – of unbundling, this week. And in this country, the reforms this government has brought have resulted in very many authorities. And this will increase costs. If Uganda Investment Authority has a problem, we should reform it, improve it and strengthen it instead of creating a new body where the Executive Director will be paid Shs 50 million, in addition to the entire staff. 

We just need to strengthen this institution and it will serve the purpose. All countries in Europe, for example, the British Government, have their passport offices being centralised to reduce costs. So, I object to this new body. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the aim of Government to utilise the Uganda Investment Authority was to reduce costs. And that is why when we were debating the principles for this Bill, we had considered Uganda Investment Authority. But the committee feels we should change this into an authority and make it its own rather than using Uganda Investment Authority.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, you heard the concern of hon. Members when they were debating the report. They were concerned that Uganda Investment Authority has a big challenge even with the current mandate that they are holding. So, if you are to reform with an opinion of strengthening it, it would be appropriate to do so with their current mandate. You cannot reform with an additional mandate. So, this additional mandate is quite huge and the committee’s opinion is that it should be given a separate authority to handle.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I wanted to give information to my committee chairperson; we sat with UIA in a retreat as members of the committee. They told us that this is a big mandate. We have visited the Namanve type of industrial areas that they had gazetted and they are still empty; we visited Mbarara with the COSASE and they are in big problems;and yet, this mandate is supposed to bring in a new industry. 

So, they conceded and said that if that mandate would be given to a different body – and there are members on that board, according to our proposal. The costs can be covered by the many projects they are doing – because they will be licensing and doing very many other things despite the simple salaries they are going to earn.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if I may also ask,how much of Uganda has the Uganda Investment Authority covered as we speak now?  Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the committee chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, replace the entire clause with the following new clauses: “Uganda Free Zones Authority Board: The governing body of the Authority shall be the Uganda Free Zones Authority Board.
Functions of the Board:
(1) 	The Board shall-
(a) 	be the policy-making organ of the authority;
(b) 	give direction to the Executive Director in connection with the management, performance, operational policies and implementation of the policies of the authority;
(c) 	on the recommendation of the Executive Director, approve such organisational structures, terms and conditions of service of staff of the authority;
(d) 	prescribe such administrative measures as may be required to safeguard all revenue of the authority;
(e) 	establish such committees as are necessary for the proper discharge of its functions under this Act; 
(f) 	subject to section 11, appoint, remove and suspend the members of staff of the Authority.

2) 	Composition of the Board
    (1) The following shall be the members of the board -
    (a) the Chairperson who shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity and possesses the relevant experience;
    (b) the Vice-Chairperson;
    (c) a representative from the ministry responsible for finance;
    (d) a representative from the ministry responsible for trade;
    (e) a representative from Uganda Investment Authority; 
    (f) a representative from the Uganda Revenue Authority;
    (g) a representative from the Uganda Land Commission. 

3) 	The minister shall appoint the chairperson and other members of the board.
4) 	The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be appointed from the private sector. 

Tenure and removal of members of the Board:
    (1) A member of the board shall serve a term of three years and may be reappointed for only one more term.
    (2) A member of the board may resign his or her office by writing to the minister and the resignations shall take effect one month from the date of receipt of the letter of resignation by the minister.
    (3) Where a member of the board dies or resigns, or otherwise, vacates office before the expiry of the term for which he or she was appointed, the minister may appoint another person in his or her place.
    (4) A member of the board may be removed from office by the minister if he or she -
    (a) becomes of unsound mind or is incapable of performing the duties of his or her office;
    (b) fails, omits or neglects to carry out his or her responsibilities as a board member;
    (c) has been adjudged or declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged; or 
    (d) is convicted of an offence punishable by more than three months imprisonment or is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty without the option of a fine;
    (e) fails to attend, without lawful excuse, three consecutive meetings of the Board or is absent from four Board meetings for a consecutive period of six months.

Meetings of the Board

The meetings of the Board shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in Schedule 2 of this Act.

Secretary to the Board

The Executive Director shall be the secretary to the Board.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question -

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am looking at the amendment to Clause 7 (1)(b). The direction should not be given to the Executive Director but to the Authority because the Executive Director is one of the officers of the Authority, not an end in himself.

And clause 7(4)(d) you are talking about, “…if he is convicted of an offence punishable by more than three months imprisonment or is convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty without an option of a fine.”  The issue of “option of a fine” should not apply; if you have been involved in fraud that is it. This is the only way we can fight corruption, Madam Chairperson. So, I beg that we stop at dishonesty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. What they are saying is that if the sentence is one where it has only fraud and there is no other option- That is what they are saying because there are those, which say either this or that when you are sentencing.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I understood it to say, “fraud or dishonesty without an option of a fine,” which means if I am convicted of fraud or dishonesty and I am judged that I pay a fine, therefore, I can become a member of the Board. People must know that when you are dishonest, it does not matter how you are punished. You are dishonest and you cannot be a member of the Board.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, what the committee is intending to achieve is rationality because more often than not- also it is important to look at the gravity. And if you may know, hon. Lwanga, if you include “fine” then you have hardly anyone eligible because if you are actually found on the street, maybe you have forgotten the traffic lights and you are driving through, they fine you, then you become ineligible for some of these jobs and so forth. It is the level of gravity that is being taken into consideration by the committee. But it is up to the Members of Parliament to decide otherwise.   

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I just have a small issue about gender. Normally, what happens to my sisters and friends is that they are just given one position and they say they have taken care of gender issues. In modern legislation, the issue of gender is taken care of in the composition. 

So, Mr Chairperson, there is a serious omission- so that women are not just put as Vice-Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you are being shy. Why don’t you say that –?

MR EKANYA: I am being kind to the Chairperson that in the composition of the Board, there should be gender consideration as prescribed by the Constitution- 50:50 ratio.

MR SSEBUNYA: Maybe, Madam Chair, we can propose that since the Chair and the Vice-Chair are from the private sector, we can say, “There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairperson, one of whom is a lady.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No

MR SSEBUNYA: Because others are institutional representatives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying there are no women who are from the ministries? We cannot run away from the Constitution. I think let us find a formulation that will enable us to fulfil the provisions of the Constitution. The one third must be visible somewhere. Can I have a formulation?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would propose that on composition of the Board under part 3, where it says, “The minister shall appoint a Chairperson and other Members of the board whereby the Board shall be composed of 50 percent of either gender-” (Interjections) - “and other members of the Board of whom at least a third shall be women as per the constitutional provision.”  “… At least a third of who shall be women.”

MR EKANYA: Members, when we are talking of gender we are not only talking about women and men. We are talking of several interest groups- persons with disability and others. So, my proposal is that in composition of the board, gender consideration shall always be taken care of where there will be a 50 percent ratio. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there are two proposals. Which one are we taking? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, whereas I support the proposal of one third, there is a complication here imposed by the composition that has been proposed because from each of these institutions, there will be departments specifically relevant to this Authority. For instance, when you talk about Uganda Revenue Authority, it will be the Department of Customs and the Commissioner in charge of Customs will inevitably be the member of the board on this Authority. So, in certain instances, it will be a bit complicated because this would have to depend on who is holding a particular position in that organisation that he is representing. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, it is exactly that patriarchy that we are trying to break through legislation that we know that everything is male-dominated in our institutions and that is why we provide for affirmative provisions in our legislation so that that commissioner or that institution that is dominated by men will have to do what it takes to promote within their rank an assistant commissioner who is a lady and send her over to participate in the Authority on behalf of that organisation. 

Secondly, we have a parent framework; we can no longer be oblivious to the provisions of our Constitution, Articles 32, 33 and other related articles. We can no longer be oblivious to them. We do not have a choice. So, if the amendment proposed to provide for gender parity in this Authority is okay, I would like to second it.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, before we proceed on whether one third or 50 percent should be women, can we get to know what the Constitution actually says. Does it provide for at least one third or does it provide for 50 percent?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still not knowledgeable about the Constitution?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I vividly recall that in this House, we passed that we should have not only a third but 40 percent minimum and as you may recall, I have been visiting different parliaments with the Committee on Equal Opportunities to learn about the best parliamentary practices in reference to issues of gender equality and gender equity in performance and in line with the Constitution. 

I would like to agree with hon. Alaso- and I am happy an amendment has been moved that we look at the issue of composition if we are to take into consideration the gender parity that exists and I, therefore, ask the chairperson to accept the amendment that we should have a composition of this that reflects the gender parity to the tune of 40 percent. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But parity is not 40 percent. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I just wanted to give information that in Cabinet, no board is passed where gender is not considered; that is a principle. A minister is thrown back to make sure that gender issues have been taken care of. So, we just need a smart formulation that will enhance what already exists in the Constitution. It is a third to begin with, as we move towards the details of hon. Ekanya of what position; is it vice, is it chair? 

Let us go by the principle which is within the Constitution whereby the minister in charge will always remember that first of all, it will be difficult for him or her to pass that board in Cabinet and also when we are making other appointments in ministries, we shall always remember that; but 40 or 50 percent, I do not think we can enforce it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have a formulation that a minimum of 30 percent of either gender. Can you formulate it, hon. Wafula?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes, I would like to propose that “the minister shall ensure that at least a third of the board are women –“

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of either gender. She can have three men and five women. It should be a third of either gender. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “The minister shall ensure that at least a third of the members of the board are of either gender.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, now that is on the composition. Hon. Members, do we accept hon. Wafula’s formulation?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is fine. Do you accept hon. Wafula’s formulation? Let us hear the minister and then we shall go back to the issue of sentence – 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If the minister and the committee do not care, there is value addition because this is supposed to be a one-stop centre to facilitate serious business. I would recommend an inclusion of the Department of Immigration - these who handle work permits and travel documents so that the business people are not bothered about this. Just the minister can balance up the positions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, do you have any objections to an additional, moreover ex-oficio?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection with that but we would have to keep the number at seven. [Hon. Members: “Nine’]So, may be you may have to remove one of these which are already suggested there. 

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, I have an additional amendment on the composition. I propose that we add the representative of workers because we have noted that there are many labour issues in this – (Interjections) –I request that you protect me. When you look at the operations of these zones in other countries, workers are involved and this was to cure the fact that the violation of labour rights was a very serious matter. 

So, we would think that if we have someone representing the workers, he would assist to factor in the issues of rights and other aspects even at the level of the board and operations of the – and this would really cure a lot of things. So, we propose that workers be represented. We also propose that we put a clause that “the workers representatives shall be nominated by the federations of labour unions” and that one sorts out the matter, so that you can be able to assist us in terms of trying to make sure that we do not go to the old mentality of violation of workers in these economic zones. And this is a situation that has happened in most countries, to improve on the observance of the rights of workers.

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chairperson, on the issue of the composition of workers, already these Members are going to be paid from the Consolidated Fund and already they are workers. How are we going to reconcile this? Now, if we choose someone who is already working, don’t you think that we are going to contravene this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he wants to bring in the aspect of labour relations, labour rights and so forth. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, if his proposal was to be sustainable or acceptable, then you would have to look for a representative from the ministry responsible for labour and normally, in some institutions - because I served in the Uganda Investment Authority - there used to be a certain gentleman who used to be the commissioner for labour who would always sit on the board and that would bring up the number to nine, which is uneven and we would close the chapter.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: But, Madam Chair, unless it is objected to by the minister, the committee has no problem with that. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, on the question of numbers here, we need to look at it because there is chairperson and vice-chairperson.  We do not need to go to nine because any of these members can be a chair and a vice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Then the whole civil service will take over this institution.

MR EKANYA: So, we go to nine? Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have the private sector to balance the civil servants.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I really need justification for having a Uganda Revenue Authority person on this board. We do not have Uganda Revenue Authority people on boards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, what is the rationale of the URA officer?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I was providing information here –

MR RKANYA: They will supervise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supervise what?

MR EKANYA: This institution in terms of taxes and compliance. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, you recall in definitions, we were looking at these free zones operating outside the customs area and each time goods move into and out of the customs area, the Uganda Revenue Authority is involved. So, it is a central player in the activities of the freezone.  In fact, it was identified as a key collaborator somewhere in one of the clauses. The Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Revenue Authority and so –

THE CHAIRPERSON: To formulate policy? What are the functions of the Board? Policy-making organ of the Authority, give direction to the –

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, they are actually the ones responsible for regulating various customs issues relating to the movement of goods in the export zones and Free Trade Areas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t that come under the Finance Bill?

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, URA is a department of the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, if the Ministry of Finance is represented, then you do not need URA if you are efficient and that is what it should be. We have the Ministry of Finance, which is representing the ministry plus all the departments under the ministry including URA and so forth; you remove URA.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, the Authority is going to be independent. Two, what are the activities going to be done in those free zones? You are going to import, you are going to re-export and any policies formulated within that law will be having people on the ground to advise what you are going to do on the Board as a policy and the key player in that will be the Uganda Revenue Authority.  

MR EKANYA: No.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. Because the re-export you are going to make in those free zones- who is going to do it because in that Bill, there is where you are going to re-export after goods have arrived here and any challenge within that zone will be done by the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over it briefly?  

MR EKANYA: I beg to move that we delete “Uganda Revenue Authority” as proposed by hon. Lwanga because there will be conflict of interest. The Uganda Revenue Authority is supposed to license and discipline and there will be conflict of interest. If you read this law comprehensively, the Minister of Finance represents interests of the Uganda Revenue Authority.

MS AKOL: I thank you, hon. chair. I want to bring it to the attention of the Members that in every free zone, there is going to be a customs point, which will be run by the Uganda Revenue Authority. And also in the activities of the Board, (d) says that “prescribe such administrative measures as may be required to safeguard all revenue of the Authority” and the key player here is the Uganda Revenue Authority. So, it is an activity that involves the Uganda Revenue Authority and you cannot do without them. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can you focus on the functions of the Board? What are the functions of this Board? It is policy. The operations will be done by URA automatically but not policy. So, we either have URA or Finance.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, from wherever we have benchmarked on this, we have the revenue authorities involved in those particular jurisdictions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On the Board?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, on the board and even Kenya here, Athi River and the Shannon Free Zone in Malaysia, they are there. There is no way you can create a Free Zone Authority without involving the authority responsible for customs operations. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, youare mixing operations with policy. Operationally, they will be there and there is no question about it. They will be there managing the free zones but policy.

MR KATOTO:The free zone has got several activities involved and it is a huge thing whereby, where we have benchmarked, these revenue people are also involved on the Board and they have a representative because they will have issues of import, export, bringing in this and that and so,they have a lot of issues to explain. If they are not represented here, then it will be difficult. So, where we have benchmarked, these people are also included.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us stand over this amendment and we get some more information. Let us go to others while we think. Let us stand over that one. - No, do not drop it; let us stand over while we think.

MR LWANGA: I am taking you back to 7 (4) (b) Madam Chairperson,   because I proposed that the Executive Director gives direction to the Authority and you did not rule on that.

Secondly -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are standing over the whole amendment because there is that one; there is also the issue of the function and the issue of composition. So, let us stand over clause 7.

Clause 8

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, functions of the Bureau, which is now an Authority - sub-clause (2) insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (q) as follows: “Advise the minister on all matters relating to the development and operation of the free zones, implement government policy relating to free zones.”

Two in sub-clause (2) (i) replace “Town and Country Planning Act” with “Physical Planning Act, 2010”. The justification is that the Town and Country Planning Act Cap. 246 was repealed by the Physical Planning Act, 2010.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question - 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I would agree with their proposal which is obvious on the amendment in (2)(i) where they are replacing “Town and Country Planning Act” with “Physical Planning Act”, which is okay. 

But on the first two, I have a problem. First, advise the minister in all matters relating to development and operation of the free zones. Taking the minister into the operational and implementation arm, which is supposed to be the ambit of the Authority and I do not know how this comes about. That is number one.

Number two, if you look at the existing clause 8 (2) “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1),the Authority shall have the following functions under that sub-section - (b) to advise the Government on all matters relating to free zones and on its own initiative to make recommendations to Government on policy, legal, financial and other issues that may affect the work of the Authority and the performance of free zones and to advise on best practices for implementation of free zones in Uganda.” I think that as far as advice is concerned, that is well captured and to put it the way it is put here in the proposed amendment would be stretching the minister’s role. 

Then to implement Government policy in relating to free zones, I thought that existing clause 9 of the Bill is adequate, Mr Chairperson of the committee - where it says, “The minister may, in writing give directions to the board on matters of a policy nature and the Board shall give effect to such directives.” So, what value are you adding by putting “implement Government policy” when you are already told that when the directives are given, they must be put into effect?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for your proposal, hon. Chair?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 8 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 11, Madam Chair, Executive Director in sub-clause (1), insert between “shall” and “appoint”, “on the recommendation of the board.” The justification is that the board should recommend a person for appointment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read out your proposed new sentence.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, (1) insert between “shall” and “appoint” the word “on recommendation of the board”; “the minister shall, on recommendation of the board, appoint the executive director of the authority.”

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to ask hon. Ruhindi the legal implication of making it mandatory, making the Board to recommend because in a situation where by the minister disagrees with the Board, then, there will be no appointment and this sometimes leads to lobbying and corruption. We have seen a situation of some institutions and when the ED is appointed, then he becomes compromised. Why don’t we say that “may be appointed on the recommendation of the Board” so that there is open leverage for the Cabinet on recommendation of Parliament and so on, so that we do not tie the hands of Government?

MR SASSAGA: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee and we foresaw a loophole where by a minister can jump up and pick anybody regardless of their repute and integrity. We said that if we can include the Board, at least, we have a hand towards an input that the Board can recommend instead of the minister bringing somebody and imposing him there. We discussed it and we saw in that good repute and faith, that the board could be involved at some stage especially by making a recommendation. It was in that wisdom. 

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, I do not know if this is how we shall be working because you have grouped us into committees and I do believe that Members who belong to particular committees must attend committee meetings and make great input within those committees. But at the time when we need their wisdom and their input, such Members are always nowhere. We look for such an opportunity where their great wisdom could have been involved in the committee report and other than cominghere and begin shattering what the committee has done. But it was in that good wisdom upon various consultations and we saw that it is good for the Board to come up and be involved in the recommendations. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In fact, the hon. Member is right.We should not allow Members who voluntarily absented themselves from the committee to now make their proposals from the Floor. It is not fair to the other Members.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I had put this proposal to the Attorney-General because you see, we are not making a law for today. We have had a situation of UNRA where even the death of one engineer is linked to the fight. Therefore, these matters are very serious. That is why instead of using the word “shall”, we say “may”, because it is not a minister that appoints alone. 

Some of these decisions are taken at Cabinet level through networking of how a government works. But if you put “shall” into the law, then Cabinet and even Parliament cannot recommend to the minister responsible to take appropriate action. Therefore, I need the intervention of the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then what is the role of the minister? Is it a formality after the board has interviewed nine candidates and selected one, and then they say, “Minister, this is the one approved”? I want to know what the role of the minister is in this appointment.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I can write a thesis on this matter, but briefly, hon. Ekanya is developing a fair compromise that we need to look at carefully. However, the use of words; if you say, “The minister shall, on recommendation of the Board, appoint the Executive Director of the Bureau of Authority”, that means that appointing is the one, which directly qualifies the role of the minister. Recommendation is recommendation. When you recommend, a recommendation is not absolute. Because you have recommended to me and more often than not in some of these institutions, a recommendation is either of two or three people. You leave it to the appointing authority to choose one. However, that is also problematic where you do not provide numbers of those you are recommending. What he is proposing in this appointing process is complicated. 

If you say that the minister in his own wisdom should appoint the executive director without even consulting the board and then the executive director has got to report to the board - he does not report to the minister - you create problems of loyalty, because the person will always actually report to the person who appointed him or her and sometimes bypass the board and create problems and impasse in the organisation.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chair. You see, the argument of the Attorney-General is putting us in more trouble. The law must be very clear. If you start saying “may”, you are trying to put a lot of loopholes and actually the minister, most likely, will not even consult the board because you have put the word “may”. 

Secondly, the Attorney-General is arguing that you can have the board recommending to the minister and I think that is good, the board should be involved. If the minister is not satisfied, the automatic thing will be that the minister will tell the board, “I am not satisfied; bring other names”. But you must condition the minister to a recommendation not that he or she might refuse the recommendation but it means that he or she will never appoint until another recommendation. So, what the minister does will be to request the Board that, “Okay, you have brought three members or whatever; I am not satisfied, bring others.”

So, the argument should be in the formulation of the committee, because you are conditioning the minister to appoint from a recommendation. If the minister is not satisfied, then the minister will ask for an additional recommendation, which has been the procedure in most of the institutions that bring in the minister. But if you start leaving the law, to put “may”, definitely, the minister will be right not even to consult the Board, which will bring a lot of trouble. This has been the trouble in most of these boards, where there is a lot of fighting.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chair. I do not know why the contention is on “shall” because that is what was in the Bill. The word “shall” came with the Bill; it is not coming from our committee. Our amendment was only on the recommendations of the board. The original formulation of the Bill had the word “shall.” So, it should not raise any contentions.

MR RUHINDI: Let me conclude my submission, Madam Chair. The submission of hon. Lyomoki was going to be my conclusion and I agreed with his submission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR KABAJO:  This is actually about clause 8. The reason is that –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have left that clause.

MR KABAJO: No, Madam Chair, let me just explain myself. From what I have heard, we passed it without any amendment. Whereas I remember that the committee had proposed something about “Town and Country Planning Act” that one is –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But they abandoned it. The chairperson abandoned it and said he is no longer pursuing those amendments. Let us move to Clause 12.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, what we abandoned was sub clause (2) (1), which talks about inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (q) as follows: “Advise the minister an all matters relating to the development and operation of free zones and implement Government policy relating to free zones.”

When the Attorney-General gave material facts on why we should not include this, I conceded. But we maintained sub clause (2) (i), which replaces “Town and Country Planning Act”, with “The Physical Planning Act, 2010” because the justification was valid.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the way you have drafted these documents, your proposed amendments are: one, on the advice and the other on implementation. Those are the two I see from what you wrote here.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, we have no option because the other law was repealed and replaced by another law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will be a consequential amendment. Okay, I now put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we delete clause 17. The justification is that all investment must be included in the strategic plan and would, therefore, be appropriated by Parliament under Article 155 of the Constitution of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is it?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, as it is, at the moment, clause 17 talks about powers to invest. It says thus: “The Authority may, with prior approval of the minister, invest, as it considers fit, any monies of the Authority not immediately required for use.” But the committee is proposing that all investment must be included in the strategic plan and would, therefore, be appropriated by Parliament under Article 155 of the Constitution of Uganda. So, we are proposing that this provision be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not see any contradiction.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chair, from clause 14, which we have just approved, you find that the Bureau or the authority shall have different sources of funds. One of them shall be the appropriation from Parliament. But that is not all. There may be other sources of funds where the Authority can get money. In that sense, I do not see any problem having clause 17 because the funds of the Authority are not exclusive. So, I suggest that we maintain clause 17.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 16, which we have just passed, reads thus: “The secretariat shall prepare and submit to the Board for its approval, estimates of revenue and expenditure of the Authority on a date appointed by the minister to enable the President to submit the national estimates of revenue and expenditure to Parliament under Article 155 of the Constitution.”

In other words, they will prepare a plan and a budget to be appropriated by Parliament. So, we should not provide another window where management will have a leeway to invest as they wish without going through the appropriate process or approval by Parliament. That is where I see a contradiction. Clause 16 addresses this problem. When they want to invest, they will make proposals in their plans and submit all that to Government and subsequently, to Parliament for approval and once that is done, they will have the liberty to invest.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I am a member of this committee. We interacted with the members and got to realise that this is going to be a self-accounting body. And if that is the case, what will it be required to do under Article 155 (2)? It will be required to plan depending on the revenue collected. But who will be responsible to plan and appropriate that money? That money should be forwarded inthe budget activities. And once that is done, this self-accounting body, those activities budgeted in the strategic plan must be appropriated by Parliament.

So, we realised that when we give power to invest by this self-accounting body – which is not consistent with what other authorities do– we will be conflicting with other laws. So, as a self-accounting body, it must operate on the same page with other self-accounting bodies during appropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, on clause 21, about a developer of a free zone – in 21 (3), we propose that we insert the words, “or registered” after the word “incorporated.”

This would now read as follows: “21 (3)A developer shall be a company incorporated or registered in Uganda for the sole purpose of developing operating a free zone.”
The justification is that foreign companies need not to be incorporated to operate in Uganda, rather they are required to be registered in Uganda.

In 21 (4), we propose that it is rephrased as follows: “The developer shall demonstrate capacity and competence to develop and manage a free zone.” The justification is that the Authority should be able to undertake a wholesome evaluation and conduct due diligence on all the parameters highlighted in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) as well as other parameters, which details must be prescribed in the regulations. Which means that (a), (b) and (c) will be dropped, Madam Chair.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Chair. What would you use to measure capacity and competence? Supposing some Ugandans who have been operating in Kamuli, for example, have set up a company and can manage a free zone in Kamuli; what would you use to measure their competence and capacity?

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The problem we found with (a)(b) and (c) is that we have written evidence of its financial status. How do you do that, when somebody is just coming into the country to start a free zone? “(b) Submit an audit report.” – I am just beginning the free zone; an audit report is done at the end of a financial year. 
“(c) Submit evidence of its previous commercial or free zone experience.” I may be beginning a new thing. Hon. Wafula Oguttu, in addition to being a Member of Parliament, you may want to establish a free zone in Kamuli. So, how can you have a previous experience in free zones when you are just beginning? You can put together some funds and ask Government to help you gazette a free zone. So, that is why we dropped these three sections.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: This one I am referring to is ambiguous. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want them to stop at (3)? Don’t you want them to say anything in (4)?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We should not add 4; the other three are sufficient. Financial muscle and experience are enough. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssebunya, is saying that, for instance, if you look at 21(4)(b), if you are new, you are a fresher, you cannot have audit reports from recognised auditors approved by that authority because you are just coming in and then, on previous experience, you may also just be starting – that is what he was saying, it locks out the new people. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Actually, I am very mindful about new people. Previously, I wanted it expunged but when I saw “commercial experience”, that satisfied me. If we have been traders and we are pooling resources together to set up a free zone – that is catered for. But we must also show that we have the money to do that work. So, what we are proposing is redundant. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, on (b) “Submit audited reports from a recognised auditor.” The only words we need to delete is “Approved by the Authority”. If hon. Wafula and hon. Akol want to establish a free zone, they should be doing business and they should have audited reports that they can jointly submit to the Bureau. We need to avoid a situation where people just come and say, “I have money”; they fake bank statements and so forth. In fact, I do not want to reveal information that I have about so many investors that we have had in this country. So, I agree that we delete (b) which says, “Approved by the Authority”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, supposing two or three young people from the Faculty of Technology in Makerere graduating this January, 2014, come in February and say, “We have got these ideas and we want to start”. Where do you want them to get the audited accounts; aren’t you discriminating against the young people?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the best way is to go with committee recommendations. But in order to take care of hon. Wafula Oguttu’s worry, we add at the end and say, “The developer shall demonstrate capacity and competency to develop and manage a free zone under criteria prescribed by the minister in the regulations”. So, it will be up to the minister to know that, for instance, an incoming company requires this and note it in the regulations; that kind of thing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are amending the chairperson’s proposal? Okay, I put the question that clause 21(b) be amended as proposed by the chair and the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 22, “separation and arrangement of a free zone.” In clause 22(1), replace “demarcate” with “identify”. The justification is “Demarcation” means surveying, which is a cost to the developer. So, if this is accepted, then it would read: 22(i) “A developer shall clearly identify the free zone area it proposes to establish”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, on clause 24, “application for a developers licence”, insert a new paragraph (g) immediately after paragraph (f).“(g) The period in which the free zone shall be operationalised.” Then delete 24(3). The justification is to avoid quack investors and the provision encourages inefficiency; this should not be legislated for.
 
MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the deletion could be sustainable. But I am not sure though; aren’t we making it very rigid; where, for instance, there is need for some extra information to be given and we tie the hands of the Authority to demand it. You say we are going to open Pandora’s Box of inefficiency – I wish to hear what my colleagues have to say about that. 

But certainly, the addition of (g), “the period in which the free zone shall be operationalised” is taking care of 24(q). What would he be putting in the project implementation plan for establishing the free zones with clear indicators and timelines? I thought that actually captures the chairperson’s proposal – (Interjections) – yes, implementation. Certainly, when you are giving a project implementation plan, you are also indicating your timelines when it will be operational; when you will be doing other things and so forth. For establishing the free zone – what is establishing; something must be operational; that is my understanding.

MR LUGOLOBI: Madam Chairperson, I think (q) is at the pre-operation phase; when you are still planning the establishment of the zone. So, (q) is meant to indicate the period when you expect to operate the zone; for how long do you need the licence?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, then that is (f) “the period for which the free zone will operate.”

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at the amendment, which you are talking of - (g). I thought we could insert a new one, but (g) is almost the same as (q).

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, “factors to be considered in granting a licence.”Replace paragraphs (a) and (b) with the following: “The developers shall demonstrate capacity and competence to develop and manage a free zone.” 

The justification is that the Authority should be able to undertake a wholesome evaluation and conduct due diligence on all the parameters highlighted in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) as well as other parameters, which details must be prescribed in regulations.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, we should borrow a leaf from the other one – where we amended the same language. This is because here, the committee is even not clear on its proposal. It says: “Replace paragraphs (a) and (b) with the following…” But when it comes to justification, it says, “The Authority should be able to undertake a wholesome evaluation and conduct due diligence on all the parameters highlighted in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)”. So, they are now bringing in (c) in the justification and yet, they omitted it in their proposal for amendment. 

And, of course, if you look at clause 25 – if I were to go with their argument, they would also have included (d). But if we take the other amendment, we had already made, we could still use the same arrangement by saying, “The developer shall demonstrate capacity and competence to develop and manage a free zone under criteria prescribed by the minister in the regulations.” And that would suffice.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I concede.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, I wanted to add (f) to read as follows: “The labour and socio-economic interests of workers shall be promoted.” And that is for the purpose of curing – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is paragraph (g) because we already have (f).

DR LYOMOKI: No, (f) will become (g).

THE SPEAKER: What was your amendment?

DR LYOMOKI: The amendment was such that we add something to deal with the issues of labour. It reads: “The labour and socio-economic interests of workers shall be promoted.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: But how will you do that when you are granting a licence?

DR LYOMOKI: The point here is that if you look at clause 25(e), this is an area where we are trying to safeguard economic interests of Uganda. But you know that in these zones, one of the biggest violations take place in labour. And this is the point we have been raising. And if you look at the whole Bill, there is no provision that caters for that area. 

So, what I am trying to do is to find an area, which could cure that situation so that from the beginning of granting the licence, the board makes sure that they try to look at the economic interests of workers. If you are an organisation or company that has been violating rights like in Kenya and you come to do the same thing here, then you will not be given a licence.

MR SSEBUNYA: Hon. Lyomoki, if I am beginning a company and yet, I have not employed anybody – I just need a licence. So, how do you – maybe, that could come in as an overriding statement somewhere or maybe in the regulations. But if I am just seeking a licence, there is no way I can have employees.

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, I understand that and of course, the minister is trying to guide – that maybe, it could come in the regulations. But if we do not provide anything to do with labour rights, I am telling you that this is going to be one of the biggest problems we are going to have in this area. Then, we shall find workers and everyone else fighting against this; because we have experience world-over that this is an area where there has been a lot of violation of workers’ rights. And immediately you introduce these zones and you do not protect labour, it becomes an attack on labour; and this has been the song throughout the world.

So, what we are trying to do is to introduce a clause in this Bill so that we make sure that these zones do not become labour zones that violate workers’ rights. So, what I am asking is: Where should we put something so that we can have a law that is acceptable to everyone? So, that is the point I am trying to emphasise.

MR KABAJO:  Madam Chair, what I would like to know is this: If these free zones are supposed to conform to the laws of Uganda and there are laws talking about labour, rights and so forth, why do we need to put a special provision in this Bill for that? Anybody coming to operate in Uganda must conform to the laws of Uganda – that is why some Asians who raped someone were taken to court; they do not have to put a specific provision in the investment code that “if you are an investor and you rape someone, you will be taken to court”.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. The real reason you have these zones – if you are reasoning like that, then why do you have the free zones? The real reason – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, can you give us an example of the right which you want to protect so that we can appreciate your position?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I can help him. I thank God that you have been in this Parliament longer than some of us. Just in Apparel Tri-Star AGOA industry, girls were being allowed to go to the toilet only once or twice a day. Do we want such a terrible working condition again in Uganda? And there was a petition to this Parliament regarding the same. In Bangladesh, they are called “sweet shops” – workers died because of heat.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, don’t we have specific labour laws on this country where such provisions are catered for? I thought we have labour laws in this country where such provisions are clearly catered for?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, with due respect to Dr Lyomoki, this can be covered under the regulations. 

DR LYOMOKI: But if it is quiet in the law, how will it come in the regulations? What I am trying to cure – if you look at what happens in Kenya, workers, especially women have collapsed and died. What happens in the export processing bonds – one of the things these people will have to do is to refuse trade unions, any rights of workers – and if you look at all these zones – because we have done a lot of study on this and we have had a lot of international meetings with ILO on this matter. So, you find workers collapsing and dying. Even in Kenya, next door, women who have babies are not allowed to breastfeed them and a lot of other terrible things.

So, if you do not provide for workers’ rights in the parent law, you will even have the Board not being able to implement them because you have talked of an economic free zone and you are saying that there should be incentives. And the greatest sufferers of this are workers because there is belief that if you have cheap labour, then you can be able to invest. So, you pay them low salaries, you do not allow women to go on maternity leave – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do appreciate what you are saying but why don’t we enhance the minimum wage law – the Act relating to the conditions of work so that they are uniform. This is because if we enact this one for free zones, what will happen in the textile factories, in agriculture? I do appreciate it but I do not know how we can do a good job without – 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chair. What I was thinking is this: If you look at the whole of this Bill, the only section where you can import something to do with this is clause 25. This is because it is where you name factors to be considered before granting a licence. In all other sections, issues of labour would not fit. So, that is why I was saying that if you could provide something about observance of labour rights – (Interjections)– Yes, you are trying to put a situation where even in the regulations or wherever, everyone will know that you have to recognise workers’ rights.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, propose.

DR LYOMOKI: So, the proposal is that we put paragraph (f) to read: “The labour and socio-economic rights of workers will be promoted.” (Interjections) Okay, it should be (g). Why I was putting it as (f) is it because there was (f) which says, “Any other matter, which the Authority may regard as relevant to the application has been taken into account”. So, I was saying that we would put this one before that and then this one comes after- any other matter. That is what I was thinking.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, it appears that- first of all, hon. Lyomoki should be clear that he is objecting to the proposal made by the committee because the committee is proposing to rephrase the entire clause 25 in this expression: “The developers shall demonstrate capacity and competence to develop and manage a free zone under criteria prescribed by the minister in the regulations,” like we have done in the previous provision. 

In those regulations, as the Minister of Finance is saying, we could then improve and broaden the areas of concern like those ones hon. Lyomoki is bringing. If his amendment was to be sustained, it would mean that we maintain (a) to (f). Is that the position?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I propose that we bring that amendment under clause 77? We can improve on clause 77 and make specific reference to the economic rights?

MR EKANYA: Yes, it is okay but also, when we go to the regulations, we should make it mandatory that regulations are laid on Table.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, formulate the same so that when we get to clause 77, we will bring the specific issue of labour rights. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 26: “processing, grant or refusal of licence to develop free zone.” In sub-clause (1), the committee proposes to replace “three months” with “one month.” So, it would now read, “The Authority shall, within one month after receipt of an application or of the additional information or clarification referred to in section 24(3), investigate and prepare a detailed report in respect of each applicant.”

In sub-clause (5) insert, at the end of the paragraph, “…within a month,” and it would now read, “A person aggrieved by a decision of the Authority under sub-section (4) may appeal to the minister as provided in section 76, within a month.”

Madam Chair, serious developers do not have a lot of time to wait to be licenced; and this provision would minimise wastage of time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, why are you tying the Authority’s hands? You say, “Within three months” but it can be one week or two weeks; it can even be two months. The old provision is safe. It says “within,” either on the lower side but the higher is three months. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the committee thought three months was on the higher side, so-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, “within.”

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: So, they had proposed- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It can be two weeks, it can be a week.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: But if it is in the wisdom of the House that we maintain it, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us maintain it. Otherwise, we are going to really tie them. You will make them work 24 hours a day.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I concede, Madam Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 26 - 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I agree that we maintain it but the reference in clause 26 (5) should be section 75 not 76 because clause 76 deals with offences and penalties and clause 75 deals with service of notices and other documents. So, it should be clause 75 and notclause 76.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let that be corrected.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I also need your opinion on the committee proposal on clause 26(5). Is “within a month” fine or- Because this is an addition; it was not captured before in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: They appeal within a month? 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Reading the original provision, there was no limit on when somebody would appeal. That means the licence application could be rejected and then, that person comes after a year and writes objecting. So, there is a need to put a limit within which the person should appeal but again one month is a bit too short; at least, within three months that person can – so, I am proposing that instead of “within a month” it says “within three months.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chair, to prepare an appeal, you may require a lot of documents. You may require minutes from the Authority; you write to them, they are not there; they are being typed. If you say one month, you may lock out people. It may be too restrictive. I think “within three months” will be fine.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I agree to three months.   

MR WAMAKUYU: Not clause 75 but clause 71. Look at clause 71. It is not clause 75.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is 71? Can you check it? 

MR WAMAKUYU: Yes. It reads, “Appeal against refusal, revocationand so forth.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR EKANYA: Clause 29(3), there is something about building a wall fence. As you said, young people- do we require a wall fence in all free zones? We have talked about airports, ports and so forth, farms and so forth. Maybe, we just put “strong security” but “wall fence” might be too costly. 

MR SSEBUNYA: It says, “The developer shall erect and maintain a strong perimeter wall or fence around the free zone because this one is a customs-free area and it must be controlled by Uganda Revenue Authority at the gate.” Within this Bill, they say you must even provide for the office of Uganda Revenue Authority like in the bonds. So, we need this fence. Otherwise, the goods will go out into the public and then compete with the domestic manufacturers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR WAMAKUYU: Clause 33(2) - it is consequential. It is Clause 71 not clause 76.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 33 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, Clause 44, replace the provisions with the following: “(i) A developer and an operator of a business enterprise, shall be granted exemptions from existing and future taxes and duties payable under the relevant tax laws on all free zone imports for use in the eligible business activities of the business enterprise including machinery and equipment, spare parts, tools or materials –“(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Procedure, Madam Chairperson. I never wanted to interrupt my Vice-Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But are you not a member of the committee?   

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. I am not debating. I am just requesting that we stand over this and we internalise with the chairperson because what he is trying to read conflicts with other laws. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Member, didn’t you sign this report? 

MR KAKOOZA: I signed this report but it was too late to inform them and I thought that I would bring it to the attention of the Floor. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want it stood over?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, we should stand over it and then we harmonise positions because it is conflicting with other laws.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, you know, we had not done research on this matter. Even the Rules of Procedure of Parliament do not allow legislation in anticipation. So, if we really say, “even future taxes…” and also when we do research, look at regulation 16 of the East African Community Customs Act, it is not detailed like this. The Government of Uganda is supposed to harmonise and come up with a list. So, this clause seems to be – I want to use a kind word to the chairperson - what we need to do is just take what the regulations say, the EAC Act and the laws of Uganda. This one will tie the hand of the Commissioner General; will tie the hand of even Parliament because even with legislation in Parliament here, you cannot adjust taxes. It is like the case in the UK. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I suggest that we retain the present formulation.

MR EKANYA: Yes, the formulation and even add just the words “and the laws of Uganda” here - the East African Community Customs Management Act and any other legislation as by the Act of Parliament. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: But Madam Chairperson, I thought it would be appropriate for me first to present the proposed amendments and then he could raise his concern. 

MR KAKOOZA: I have said so that the first statement itself is conflicting with the EAC Customs Management Act and you know, with the National Council of Ministers with taxes, they fit in the EAC to change the protocol. It is Articles 29 and 31 of the Customs Union Act. When they read the budget, they sit in the Council of Ministers and that is why the budget is read the same day. 

Two, there is the Bank of Uganda Act. If you read it, it also conflicts with the exemption. Three, the domestic laws – the Value Added Tax and the Income Tax, exemptions are prescribed within the laws. So, I request the chairperson that we should stand over it and by tomorrow, when we come, we will have harmonised the formula.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think to be fair, let us sleep over it because they also have clause 7, so that we reflect. Minister, I do not know – 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, the speed at which we were going, I thought we would finish this Bill today and as far as clause 44 is concerned, we as the Ministry of Finance have these issues that hon. Kakooza is raising. For instance, the one that they have just read definitely conflicts with the East African Community Customs Union Protocol. So, we were going to say that we do not accept it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you objecting to his proposal? 

MR OMACH: We are going to object to this one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to retain your formulation? 

MR OMACH: Yes, with some amendments; the amendments that would come in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, whenare you going to bring in some amendments to clause 44?

MR OMACH: We would, if they insist on some areas because there are some other things, which they are bringing in here; if they are only dealing with goods, which are outside the free zones. For instance, we are saying that about 20 percent of the goods produced can be sold within the country. So, that particular 20 percent would be subject to the taxes of the area as prescribed by the laws of Uganda but anything, which is within the free zone area, should not be subjected to these taxes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, all you are saying is that we all need to reflect on it. Let us sleep over it and go to Clause 45. 

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 49 on goods brought into a free port zone; insert a new sub clause (3) as follows: 
“(3) Goods which constitute a hazard or which are likely to adversely affect other goods or which require installations shall only be admitted to a free port zone specially designed to receive them.” The justification is that it is transferred from clause 54(3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you brought it forward from clause 54 to 49. It is part of the law and you are just moving its position.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 49 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 53, Madam Chairperson, “application for removal of goods from a free port zone.” In sub clause (4) replace “Bureau” with “minister.” The justification is that the appeal should be made to the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 53, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.


Clause 57

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, “Disposal of movable assets from a free port zone.” In sub clause (2) insert the words “provided that” immediately after the words, “import levy” appearing in the second last line. The justification is to correct an error.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 57, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 67 – 

MR LWANGA: I suggest that we stand over 67 because it closely relates to clause 44 that we stood over. It is talking about taxes and these include the income taxes that are part of this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, minister?

MR OMACH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we stand over 67.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: On Clause 71, Madam Chair, “Appeals against refusal, revocation of license.” Rephrase sub-clause (3) as follows: “Upon receipt of any appeal, the minister shall appoint at least three public officials to hear any representations made by the appellant and the Authority and the official or officials shall report to the minister who shall, on receipt of the report, determine the appeal.”

In sub-clause (4) (b), replace “issue” with “review” and it would read, “(b) require the Authority to review a license.” The justification is that the minister should appoint public officials even outside the ministry and secondly, the minister should not order the Authority to issue a license but rather to review their decisions.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, this is not correct because the assumption always is to think that ministers work in isolation of the institutions they head. These are matters that are some times very technical and complicated and you need the entire ministerial infrastructure to address a problem of this nature. And that is the work of the minister and this is why in the interpretation section, you refer to “the minister responsible for” - meaning that you head an institution and you work with an institution.

Therefore, this idea of bringing in public officials is absolutely not necessary at all. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. So, we object to this amendment.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. We foresee a situation where the Bureau or the Authority could look at the qualifications being tabled by the so-called investor or somebody intending to put up a free zone and the qualification being tabled does not meet the minimum standards and the Authority in this case says, “No. We cannot grant you a license because you do not meet the normal standards.”  But a minister also being human, might move a directive and say, “No. I have directed that you should give him a license.”  So, we wanted to see how we can curtail a bit of those - it was in that respect.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, if I just wake up and appoint hon. Wafula Oguttu as a public officer and I say “I am now appointing you to be on that board”, I then pick up hon. Nankabirwa from Fisheries and put her on – what are their qualifications  in respect to giving  advice to the minister in this matter?

MR EKANYA: Especially hon. Nankabirwa. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we leave the minister with the technical people who know the subject because you are going to pick a Reverend, a Sheikh and say, “Now, you are the three public officials?” I do not know what you are going to do.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes, you can advise.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Every minister who is appointed is accountable to his or her portfolio. If a minister makes a mistake because of being humane, we have various fora where that minister can be brought to book. So, I just wanted to give this information to my colleague so that he should not get worried because we have opportunities to handle such cases.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, what we wanted as a committee is to cushion the minister. I know that some ministers here have been censured for just hearsay that somebody took a bribe. But somebody might want to put up a tunnel in a free zone and it is going to pollute Lake Victoria and so, once you refuse as a minister, you have no – so, you might have used this provision to at least hire professional people to make for you a decision and then, you are free to take it or not.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but you just said public officers. Suppose they appoint me, what do I know about free zones? How will I be able to advise the minister? Who are these three public officials that you are thinking of? Who are they and where are you going to get them from?  

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, we had not gone into details to consider who the three public officials would be but I concede. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that –so, the chair has abandoned the first part of the amendment. What is the second one?

MR KABAJO: There was another amendment in sub-clause 4 (b) replace “issue” with “review”. I am requesting a clarification whether the chairperson of the committee has also abandoned that second -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Requiring the Authority to review?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, hon. Omach knows this, that normally, when licenses are objected, the applicant can seek for a review so that fresh information is presented and more Government information is gathered. So, the review should be allowed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I request this august House to support the amendment on (4) (b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Speak to it again. Read it as you want it.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: (4) (b) requires the Authority to review a license.

MR EKANYA: I am sorry but it is normally that once the Authority refuses, the applicants apply to the minister and it now becomes administrative review. The minister can then use the machinery of officials within the ministry like the PS, the Commissioner and others, which goes to a higher level and not the Authority again.  

DR LYOMOKI: There is a mix up of the whole language because what the clause is saying is that if the minister, for instance, decides that the Bureau was wrong or whatever, then they should require the Bureau to issue a license and that is what it means. But If you say (4) (b,) the minister may require the Bureau to review the license. It does not flow because what this one is trying to say is that if the minister in his or her view, the license should be given, then the minister will require the Bureau to issue the license and that is all. So, the terminology here is very clearer than the word “review”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, he is determining an appeal and after reading through the appeal, he can either dismiss it or he can say, “I confirm or I do not agree with your reasons. You issue the license.” That is what he is saying.  So, this one is okay because he can direct you to issue.  It is okay as it is. Hon. Members, I put the question – yes?

MR EKANYA: The word is always “to review” and not to issue because you see, when you use the word “issue” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. He is dealing with an appeal.

DR LYOMOKI: There is an English problem here. This is a very clear English word and if you bring –

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is an appeal - they have rejected and then you appeal to the minister. So, either you will say, “Hon. Ekanya, I have dismissed your appeal, you go home.” Or you can say, “I am directing the authority; you now issue, the reasons you rejected were not good, let this person get his licence” and you issue.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, my clarification is, at what stage does a minister use the ministerial machinery to review and then require the Authority to issue?

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is the one, because he has sat and looked at the appeal. He can dismiss it, if he is not satisfied with the reasons. If he is not satisfied with the authority, he will say “You issue; I am not satisfied with your reasons for rejecting.” So, the section is okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 71 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, have you formulated?

MR LYOMOKI: Yes, I have formulated one and we add (h) which, reads as follows: “Labour standards to be observed by enterprises operating within the free zone.” ‘Labour standards’ is a technical term. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, can you help us improve it?

MR RUHINDI: I would have a problem with that one. That would be more or less enacting provisions in abstract. What he intends to do, (g) says “generally for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and other relevant laws.” That would in my opinion bring out the idea that when you are giving out a license, ensure that other relevant laws are complied with or will be complied with at least by giving you a plan ahead that, for instance, we intend to employ these numbers of people, these are the safeguards we intend to employ to put in our factory and so on and so forth. That, in my opinion, would capture it. But if you say that they should provide for labour standards, it is as if it is going to be a new thing. But we are talking about standards already existing in the legislation. So, “generally, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and other relevant laws”, in my opinion would be adequate enough.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, if you look at clause 77 and you start from clause 77(2), it says, “Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1) regulations made under this section may provide for the following: - the performance procedures to be observed by enterprises operating within the free zone.” I was just adding that labour standards should be observed because if we continue delegating labour issues- initially, I had an argument and we conceded that we could provide something under this. But again, if we are pushed away on labour issues, I think really -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me see how I can help you. Supposing between 77(1) and (2) we introduce another one “in making the regulations, the minister shall have regard to existing labour laws.” Would that be sufficient?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, that is right. Thank you very much.

MR MULONGO: I would be happy to include “environment” other than just “labour” such that we have environmental laws. We have labour laws, because these two are very critical.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to encourage the Attorney-General to be a bit more specific. I wish you knew the things that happen to people in this country, people working for 20 hours a day without having a break for the weekend in this town. It would do no harm; let us put labour and environment.

MR RUHINDI: First, I concede to those two with amendments: “generally for giving effect to the provisions of this Act, labour laws, environmental laws, and other relevant laws.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is alright.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I have an amendment to clause 77(1)“The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, which regulations shall be laid before Parliament for its information.”

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: It would be better we first deal with what the Deputy Attorney-General was introducing because he was bringing in a different clause and then, we move to what he is proposing. Because before we concluded on the new clause, he is bringing in something outside the proposed new clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us first deal with the introduced new clause as proposed by the Attorney-General. Is that okay? Let us deal with the first one: The labour, environment and other laws. 

MR RUHINDI: My proposal was in 77(2)(g). Where I was saying; “Generally, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act, labour laws, environmental laws and other relevant laws”, so that they are given effect by this organisation when they are granting a licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I think the sequence is not right because saying “without prejudice, the general effect of subsection 1, regulations made under this section may provide for the following- you know, if it comes at the end of (g) the English is wrong; you are speaking in Luganda. Let us just add that one and also before the (g), we add that new clause which we have proposed and then we have the (g), because it is always there. (g)is a saving clause, which carries all the views, which we have not thought about. Hon. Members, I put the question - 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I would like to amend clause 77(1) to read as follows: “The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations, which shall be laid before Parliament for approval for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, suppose we are on recess or we are unable to do the work; it means the regulations will not come into force? They can lay on Table but now, if you say we must also approve the regulations, we might delay the work.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, that is really the practice. I am happy you are the chairperson of the Commonwealth. That is really the modern practice. About two months ago, we approved the regulations on PPDA. The issue is, it is laid here, it goes to a committee to verify, take care of issues of Dr Lyomoki and others, and then once it is laid to the House, it is not for debate unless you have an issue with a given section. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then, we stop at laying. We do not say, “with approval”, because we are setting additional conditions to the operations.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not have any problem with laying and normally, laying means that this instrument is brought to your attention. And you can also have the opportunity of saying; “how could this delegated authority be exercised in such a manner?” But to require – because we are more or less setting a precedent - PPDA Regulations are as good as substantive provisions of an Act of Parliament. But if you have got to talk in terms of all regulations because once you set a precedent, you will have to follow it, but you find that you have got to bring here every statutory instrument for approval by Parliament when in a whole session we pass about 25 Bills in this House. And let me tell you, in a day about 100 statutory instruments will go through the Office of the First Parliamentary Counsel. So, if you have got to require all those to come here for approval by Parliament, you are asking for the impossible.

MR EKANYA: Therefore, can we say that he can lay the regulation for consideration by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but consideration by the committee means they must report back to the House.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, we were guided by – when we were considering the PPDA Regulations, the trouble we went through trying to approve those regulations – we spent almost a whole yearand that is why those regulations have not been implemented yet. So, the only compromise should be that they lay the regulations on Table so that whoever has issues can raise them because if they are laid on Table, then everybody will have access to them. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: That is agreed – the minister shall lay regulations on Table.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I now put the question – 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I just want to seek your guidance. When you say, “the minister may, by statutory instrument ....” – wouldn’t it be proper for us to make it compulsory? I am saying this because the problem we have with most of these Acts is that they are actually not being operationalised by ministers; they are not coming up with regulations yet, when they appear or when you look at the budget performance, most of them usually say that they submitted to the First Parliamentary Counsel and are only waiting for the outcome. So, what if we make it compulsory?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us adopt the use of the word “shall.” Okay, I now put the question that clause 77 be amended as variously proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to
.
The Schedule

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I wish to propose that we insert Second Schedule to guide the functions of the Board as follows: “Second Schedule: 
Meetings of the board –“(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, since we already stood over the functions of the Board and this proposed Schedule 2 is also talking about the same; why don’t we look at both of them together when we get to handle the provisions on the Board? It would be better that way rather than looking at it now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair of the committee, can we convince you to allow us stand over this so that we do it together with clauses 7 and 44?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, actually, if the committee could agree to the original positions of clause 44 and 67, we would be able to finalise this Bill today. You know that the only clause we stood over is 2, which is the interpretation and there are only two interpretations that are pertaining there. Otherwise, as far as second schedule is concerned, as Ministry of Finance, we have no objection to what they are presenting. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it has an impact on clause 44. There are issues of quorum, for example, because we now do not know yet whether we have nine or seven people. So, let us do them together, clause 44 should be handled together with the second schedule.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, while we were here, as a committee, we consulted and agreed not to insist on the proposal that was made. So, I now concede on clause 44 to enable us proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you conceding on in clause 44? No, hon. Members, we have already agreed to stand over three areas: Interpretation, 2, 7, 44 and 67. You reflect on them and we complete tomorrow.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 44 was to the effect that we had not consulted and there seems to have been an error. But as you have advised, let us take it on, tomorrow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, just refine it. There is no harm because it is only one night.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE(GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Free Zones Bill, 2012” and has passed clause 1, stood over clause 2; passed clauses 3, 4, 5, 6, stood over clause 7; passed clauses, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 ,39, 40, 41, 42, 43, stood over 44; passed clause 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, stood over 67; passed clauses 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, and stood over the  second schedule  and has not yet passed the title.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

8.02
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, it is improper, while the House is still handling a report for a Government minister to go to the public and takes a position as if this House is just a ceremonial institution. I raise this in relation to a statement attributed to hon. Muloni, who is quoted to have said that “Umeme will stay.” Therefore, may I request that the Government Chief Whip directs the minister to come and clarify that position tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Government Chief Whip, I do not know whether you saw it; I also saw a headline in the papers. 

8.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I am standing to request for guidance. Normally, when a committee is handling something, I see Members getting out before even the committee has concluded a meeting and they address the press; and the media report that MPs have said this. When we are discussing issues here, I see Members going out to address the press before Parliament makes a decision. My colleague may have said it; but maybe, all of us have been making that same mistake. So, I beg for your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for those who have been doing it, it is an act of indiscipline because you are pre-judging the issue. So, if the minister did say that when we had just started considering the report, it is not right. And you Members should also stop addressing press conferences and taking positions before we resolve a matter. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the good thing is that the report is out. We are not going back to investigate. I pray that Members of Parliament do not get threatened by whatever is being said. We are executing duties on behalf of the entire population. Nobody should be intimidated by statements that are being made. Let us be patient; we bring the report here and we decide independently. Otherwise, anybody can go out to make statements just to confute or to intimidate. This is my prayer as a Member of Parliament. 

DR LYOMOKI: But, Madam Speaker, we should not treat this matter lightly. That is contempt of Parliament. The ministers are saying that it was okay for the minister to go and make a statement as if whatever will come out of this Parliament will be disregarded. Is that what the frontbench is saying?

Let the minister come tomorrow and state that actually, she does not care about what Parliament resolves. They should not protect the minister. Let her come and make her statement here. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, tomorrow, we shall resume debate on that report. So, we shall seek clarification. 

I want to thank you very much, hon. Members, for the work done today. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.06 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 5 December 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
