Tuesday, 6 December 2016

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to amend the Order Paper by deferring item 3(ii) because the ministry is not yet ready. I also want to defer item No.7. We shall consider it on Thursday. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable members, Uganda has been participating in climate change meetings. Last year, a delegation went to the Conference of the Parties 21 (COP 21) but no report has ever been brought to this House. Last month, another delegation went to COP 22 in Marrakech to deal with issues of climate change; again, no report has come. 

However, I am concerned that Government has sent out teams to our constituencies to talk to people about climate change in our absence. I think it is standard practice that if ministers and delegations are going to our constituencies, we should be informed, but they are busy running around and we do not know what they are saying about us. Therefore, I would like to know from the Government what role you want us, the MPs, to play on the issues of climate change because we have been excluded. We shall want an explanation about that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. (Applause) 

In the public gallery, we have students of St Mugagga Senior Secondary School, Mpigi. They are represented by hon. John Bosco Lubyayi and hon. Sarah Nakawunde. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause) 

We also have 29 district councillors from Lamwo, led by the district speaker. They are represented by hon. Hilary Onek and hon. Molly Lanyero. You are welcome. They are here to attend our proceedings.  (Applause)

Honourable members, I had given you notice that Prof. David Ssali is coming here to talk to you about health and wellness through nutrition, dermatology and herbal science medicine. The talk is tomorrow at 11 o’clock in the Member’s Lounge. 

I also want to inform you, honourable members, that tomorrow evening, at the Imperial Royale Hotel, the Busoga Tourism Initiative is launching a book on Busoga. It will be after the session. So, when we finish here, you can go to Imperial Royale, look at the book and buy it. It is called, “The Best of Busoga”. Thank you so much. 

2.58
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 5 October, I raised a matter of national importance. I first of all thanked Government for finally giving development and production licences to oil and gas companies after three years and also new exploration areas. However, I made a plea to Government to lay on the Table the development plan and copies of those licences as required by the law we made. I requested that Government gives us a comprehensive update on what is going to happen in the areas of the refinery, where Russians come and go, and on Total’s new pipeline going to Tanzania; how they are going to engage the local community especially on land acquisition? 

It was promised that a comprehensive report would be brought to the Floor of Parliament after two weeks. It is now two months and we are going for the Christmas recess and yet we have not got that update. For us who are on the ground, we now see oil companies coming back without even being assured that the 48 per cent local content, which was provided for in the law, is going to be taken care of. 

Madam Speaker, I request the ministry to give us a report as a matter of urgency before we go for the Christmas recess, and assure this country that we shall benefit from the oil and gas. 

3.00
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a disease outbreak that is affecting Eucalyptus plantations in Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa and Kabarole. Most of our plantations are drying up because of this disease, which we do not know. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Forestry Authority go there and investigate and give us a solution because our people are losing out; their plantations are drying up in large numbers. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Energy, do you have anything to say concerning the issues raised by hon. Mukitale?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, we are still preparing the report; so, it is not here today. The response will come with the comprehensive statement. 

THE SPEAKER:  It has been two months, honourable minister. 

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, we had not specified a date but we shall bring a report to this honourable House. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I want that statement on Thursday. I think two months is long enough; bring it on Thursday. (Applause)

MR LOKERIS: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Water and Environment, there is the issue of the disease affecting the Eucalyptus.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru):  Madam Speaker, I promise to cause the Ministry of Water and Environment to deliver this report as quickly as possible; probably, next Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Ssebagala.


3.02
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue you have raised about ministers going to our constituencies and launching various programmes without our knowledge is a big concern. 

As you have said, Madam Speaker, it is our practice that whenever a minister is going to visit or to launch any programme in our constituencies, we must be informed. However, it is becoming a culture that ministers carry out programmes in various constituencies without the knowledge of Members of Parliament. 

I think, Madam Speaker, as you have directed, the Prime Minister should put it in writing and we are given copies that whenever there are programmes that are going to be carried out in constituencies, Members of Parliament should be in the know and should be invited. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. There were some other matters, which were brought to my attention, but I did not think they qualified for this particular item. Therefore, I ask hon. Othieno to write to the Minister of Local Government about his issue. Hon. Abala, give me the names and we shall write to the police. The other one, we shall handle later in the week. Hon. Burundo, your matter does not qualify; it borders on diplomatic conflict and so I will not allow it to be brought to this Floor.

The Ministry of Gender and Social Development has organised a meeting on the Green Jobs Programme and poverty reduction on Thursday, 8 December at the Imperial Royale Hotel. I encourage Members to attend. They are going to discuss the Songhai Model, which I have personally seen. I went to Benin and I saw what they were doing. I also sent a few Members of Parliament there. I, therefore, encourage Members to come on Thursday morning so that we are given information about that for our growth; it is very impressive. Thank you.

3.04
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Madam Speaker, I would like to explain the concern that has been raised by you and other Members that ministers go around the country without informing the Members of Parliament on the issue of climate change.

First, I want to say that it is a bad omission that Members of Parliament are not informed. However, it was not a secret move. We were concerned, as Government, that there is a big problem in the country and the country is going to suffer from famine because of poor rains. Therefore, Government formed a Cabinet committee on climate change and it was briefed by the director in charge of the climate department. 

It was, therefore, decided in Cabinet that the country must be informed. Already, the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness has told us which areas are facing serious problems. Therefore, that action was taken as an emergency so that the country is not taken unaware. People have to be told that there is a problem coming and it is caused by climate change, which we have no control over.

Since it was a bit urgent, the team went around. I apologise on behalf of Government if colleagues felt that they were left out. This will not happen again in future. However, we were trying to save; it is said that a stitch in time saves nine. This is what we were trying to do on behalf of even Members of Parliament because even if you were informed, I think the best you could have done was to join the team. However, now that you were not informed, and we are sorry about that and we will not do it again, you could, I am sure, thank the team for saving the situation. (Laughter) Otherwise, there was nothing sinister about that –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, part of the activities which Government is not inviting us for have financial implications and as MPs, we play an oversight role. 

Just recently, in my constituency, the President, along with the Minister for Kampala, gave out about Shs 100 million. I was surprised to read it in the newspapers after the function was performed in my constituency, almost near my residence. I do not know, as an MP, to which accounting officer I have to go and find out whether that money is put to proper use. When I was listening to the Prime Minister, he only talked about famine. I am sure the issue in my constituency had nothing to do with famine, but it was done hurriedly.

My point of order, therefore, is: is it in any minimum order –(Laughter)– for the Prime Minister to come and say that some activities which Government performs are being done very fast because if they invite MPs, they could be delayed? Is he in order to mislead this august House? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know about the details of those other programmes. However, Prime Minister, what we want is to give them a script that they are going to speak about, not to talk about Members of Parliament. Some of those who have gone there have been talking about the Members of those constituencies in their absence – de-mobilising. Please tell them to concentrate on climate change and not talk about the Members of Parliament. They are de-mobilising our voters.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that while they do not want to involve us by saying that we will delay the exercise, they use our opponents while distributing these materials. So, certainly, they are busy de-campaigning Members of Parliament on the ground. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, there is no harm in sending out the information to all of us.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will still supplement by saying that though they have their key information to pass on, we also form part of the Government as we are the people’s representatives. It would, therefore, be prudent for us to work as a team. 

If the issue is about famine, we have been raising this issue here. If it is about climate change, we have participated highly on that. Therefore, it is not prudent for them to go in isolation without informing us. It should be even we, Members of Parliament, to mobilise our people. Therefore, Government should take this seriously; Cabinet cannot work without us and we must work as a team.

THE SPEAKER: When they leave, we shall be the ones to do the follow up. We should be the ones to do the follow-up.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ELECTION OF LOCAL COUNCILS AND COUNCILLORS FOR WORKERS

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Justice? Let us go to the next item.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, whereas I would not have a problem with going to the next item, I would like to say that we receive these items on the Order Paper in good time and we prepare for the sitting of the House. When a matter is listed, and more importantly a matter to do with election of local councils and councillors for workers, it is pertinent that the responsible minister is here to tell the country what is happening.

District councils are not fully constituted. We are soon going for the Christmas recess, Madam Speaker. Such a matter is of great public importance and it cannot be wished away just like that. May we demand an explanation from Government as to why they consulted the Office of the Speaker, listed items and at the last hour, they are abandoned them without any regret or remorse? Is it allowed to skip such an important and critical item, when Government is fully represented here and there is no response from them? 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I received a text of a statement and so I expected the minister to be here. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, as I always say, indeed I am sorry for this. However, we do not really know what happened to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. As of now, I cannot tell lies to my colleagues because I am not an angel and I cannot tell you what I do not know. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate your decision to go to the next item because that is the only solution. Otherwise, I do not know what I can do now. We cannot ask the House to adjourn because this minister is not here. I beg that we go forward. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee.

MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, we could go forward but this matter, as hon. Ssekikubo has pointed out, is a matter for which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, confirmed. They told the country that we shall have Local Council (LC) elections not later than January and it is good that this matter has come up while we have LCs in our midst here. 

Madam Speaker, we are talking of something that is unconstitutional because Article 61 (2) gives a timeframe for these elections. What we have done as a committee is to engage the ministries and Government departments. There were two key problems. One problem was money; the Electoral Commission had wanted over Shs 30 billion. We sat with them together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and good enough, they assured us that about Shs 13 billion would be provided. 

The remaining issue was that of the Electoral Commission because its mandate was to expire around 17th of November. I am sure this one is being handled by the Appointments Committee. We also have the assurance of the Attorney-General in writing that even if the Electoral Commission’s mandate expired, the Commission and the technical officers are there doing the technical work. 

What Parliament now requires is a proposal for amendments that are consequential to the methodology of lining up. We agreed to change the modality to lining up but it has consequences on the registers of voters, nomination of candidates and so on. According to the Attorney-General, that required amendment of certain provisions of the Local Governments Act. 

Madam Speaker, we are proceeding for our Christmas recess. Unless the minister is actually directed to present the amendments of the Local Governments Act– I have been informed that the amendments of the Local Governments Act are actually ready. The minister should come, present them so that the committee can handle them during recess. The Electoral Commission also assured us that everything is set to have these elections in January. Therefore, this kind of delay is unnecessary. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that you instruct the Prime Minister to direct the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to present amendments of the Local Governments Act before we go for recess. I thank you.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The information I would like to give the House is that the minister has been sent on special assignment but he will be ready tomorrow with a statement. That is the latest information I have received, Madam Speaker. The minister will be here tomorrow with the required information.
  
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the President addressed this country and told the country that he had nominated or appointed 87 ministers to help him run the Government and deliver this country to a middle-income status. We know that there are more than three ministers in each ministry but every time an important issue is brought on the Floor of Parliament, the ministers are not there to answer the questions. 

Hunger is a big issue all over the country and we see the Government now coming up at the last moment when people are already starving. However, the hunger would not have been there if this Government had bought food and put it in silos. We see our neighbours coming to buy food, taking it and keeping it in their silos- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are talking about LC elections; do not divert the issue. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of the LCI elections is grave; there is no government in those villages. We were told that in January, we are going to have elections of LCIs. So, we cannot treat this casually. 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, we stand by what we said. We are on course and come January, we shall have elections for LCs.

Colleagues are talking about money; we now have the money, and the Electoral Commission is being handled by the Appointments Committee. As a ministry, we have an option of coming up with regulations. I am being honest and we shall stick to our promise. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Parliament is going on recess. So, if you are going to bring your regulations or amendments, you need to factor that into our programme. You may arrive here while people are in Kibuku eating meat. 

MR RONALD MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure this august House that the Government is not interested in LCI elections. In the Ninth Parliament, we raised this issue; for 16 years, we have not had LCI elections. 

I am a member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and we have been engaging the ministers. What we are interested in as the august House is for the Government to set a date. We are talking of January but which date have we set aside for the elections? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has said that in January 2017, the Government will be able to run elections. Is the honourable member in order to say that the Government is not interested in handling LCI elections?

THE SPEAKER: That is his perception. Honourable members, join me in welcoming a team from the National Assembly of Kenya. They are administrative assistants and they include: Doreen Chepkirui, Mrs Linah Kimuge, Maimuna Kawasi, Lydia Mwangi, Maureen Atamba and Maryan Haji. Welcome to our National Assembly (Applause) 

As the Prime Minister has said, let us have this tomorrow because we need to see if it involves budgeting, among others. However, I would like to inform the House and the country that the Appointments Committee has completed the vetting of the Electoral Commission. What is remaining is for them to be sworn in. We have already done our part on this side. (Applause)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank you for the directive. However, I would like you to further direct the Ministry of Local Government in particular to come up with the Bills, if any, and the regulations as well if there are any. 

To the best of my recollection, when we amended the law, we did not give the ministry any delegated authority to make regulations pursuant to the amendment. However, if we did, then it is my prayer that you direct the Minister of Local Government to lay on the Table the regulations for us to be able to prepare our people for the elections. Otherwise, this may just be a hullabaloo and we may continue meandering when people are not serious and committed to the cause of democracy and justice in this country. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, you must demonstrate to the House and the country that you are actually preparing for these elections and not just talking. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS AND PROPERTIES

3.25
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The volume of the report was so big that I did not bring it along, but I will lay it on the Table after I finish reading the summary. However, it is uploaded on the iPads. I stand to present a report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the oversight visits to selected Uganda missions abroad during the period of August to November 2016 to assess and appraise the following: 

    1. The extent of the implementation of the mission charters.
    2. The management of fixed assets at the respective missions.
    3. The working relationship amongst the staff and the staffing levels/welfare versus the mandate of the missions.
    4. The relationship of the missions with key Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) in Uganda in a bid to promote commercial diplomacy.
    5. The delivery of consular services.
    6. The situation of Ugandans in the diaspora, their achievements and challenges.

The committee’s findings highlighted herein will go a long way in informing the impending consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper and other policy decisions by the House.

The extent of implementation of mission charters and the relationship of the missions with key MDAs in Uganda in a bid to promote commercial diplomacy: In the attainment of their mandate, Uganda missions abroad are guided by mission charters. These charters are largely derived from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Strategic Investment Plan II and are geared towards the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals, National Development Plan II and Vision 2040.

The aggregated thrust of the various charters in the missions visited is the promotion of Uganda as a favourable trade tourism, education and investment hub with a focus on regional integration, peace and security. However, achieving all this is extremely difficult with the meagre resources that are available to the embassies or missions. Some work is being done, however; for example, the Nairobi Mission with its “baby” consulate of Mombasa have facilitated trade in the northern corridor by significantly reducing the travel time of trucks from Mombasa to Kampala by the reduction of roadblocks from 123 to only seven. 

It is noteworthy that despite the fact that Uganda continues to receive numerous students seeking education opportunities, the persistent strikes in some public education institutions, such as Makerere University, are beginning to scare away prospective students from foreign countries like Nigeria and Ethiopia, among others. Likewise, Ugandan students on Islamic scholarships in foreign countries are not given enough details on the requirements, which makes them get stranded when they reach these countries, for example, those in Egypt and Sudan.

Management of Fixed Assets at the Respective Missions

The management of fixed assets at the missions largely revolves around the management of buildings. It is worth noting that while some missions such as Nairobi, Kigali, Addis Ababa and Cairo have their own buildings, others like Khartoum and Abuja rent the office buildings that they occupy. Besides, all missions rent accommodation for the Foreign Service Officers.

The committee noted the deplorable state of some mission buildings such as the official residence in Cairo. The rate of infrastructural decay is worrying; it requires urgent budgetary enhancement and appropriate comprehensive property management structures to cover all the missions abroad. I put a chart that shows the status of the buildings at the various missions owned by the Government of Uganda.

In Nairobi, we have a chancery which was renovated – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the Members can read that by themselves.

MS MUTONYI: I would like to mention that in Mombasa, we have property under Uganda Property Holdings Limited. They have five residential houses, two office blocks, two commercial buildings, one car port and twelve warehouses. There is a reason as to why I am mentioning this. In Cairo - You will find these things in the report.

There are also vacant plots of land. The land acquired from the Nigerian Government, which is 2.5 acres, may be repossessed anytime as a result of failure by Government of Uganda to develop it. In Addis Ababa, a 2.5 acre piece of land, fully paid for by the Government of Uganda, has been encroached on by a private developer who has fenced it off.

This is still in relation to the properties that Uganda Property Holdings Limited is looking after: There is concern that the revenue accruing to the various properties held by Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL) in Mombasa and London is significantly low. The committee was informed by the management of UPHL in Mombasa that in the Financial Year 2015/2016, only Shs 6.7 billion was generated from the 22 properties plus the two from London. Shs 4.3 billion out of the Shs 6.7 billion was spent on operational costs and Shs 2.2 billion for re-investment, leaving Shs 150 million only as net profit to be shared by the shareholders. However, a single building in Nairobi - the Uganda House in its dilapidated form - fetched Shs 1.06 billion in remittances to the Consolidated Fund for the year 2015/2016. The Government of Uganda is, therefore, getting a raw deal from UPHL.

Staffing Levels, Welfare, Working Relationships 

Of the six missions visited by the committee, three, that is, Khartoum, Abuja and Cairo, did not have substantive heads of mission. The host countries may view this as lack of commitment to diplomatic relations from the Government of Uganda. This is coupled with other existing serious staffing gaps, which may impede the realisation of the mission charters. 

The committee noted that in the missions visited, a cordial working relationship was reported amongst the staff and between the staff and mission heads. While this is commendable, it should be noted that there remain reports of friction between some politically appointed mission heads and some staff in the missions largely premised on working methods.

Delivery of Consular Services

The delivery of consular services is one of the integral functions of the Uganda missions abroad. This entails the processing of visa applications for nationals of other countries wishing to visit Uganda, facilitation of the registration of births and deaths of Ugandans, establishing and registering Ugandans within a specific mission's jurisdiction, and rescuing distressed Ugandans. Through the provision of consular services, and within the limits of international law, Uganda missions abroad protect the interest of Uganda and its nationals within their jurisdiction. 

In a bid to provide consular services, some missions such as Nairobi, Rwanda, Addis Ababa and Cairo have created databases for Ugandan nationals that have reported to the missions. However, many Ugandans do not report to missions but only seek help from the missions after landing into problems. The committee notes that this is crucial especially with rampant cases of human trafficking. There is also the need to market Uganda as a favourable tourism and trade destination and the pursuit of markets for Ugandan products.

The Situation of Ugandans in the Diaspora, their Achievements and Challenges

The committee notes that increased people movement across the world has aided the mobility of Ugandans in pursuit of opportunities in various parts of the world. Today, the diaspora plays a significant role in contributing to the country’s GDP through direct foreign exchange, knowledge and skills transfer. Coupled with the externalization of labour and its attendant challenges of human trafficking and the poor working conditions in some countries, Uganda missions abroad have found themselves grappling with the management of affairs related to Ugandans in the diaspora.

Many of these distressed Ugandans rush to the embassies seeking help and yet the missions do not have the resources to help them. In 2015/2016 alone, authorities intercepted 100 Ugandan girls at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport on their way to Arab countries. Another batch of 34 girls was intercepted in Kigali. Over 35 Ugandan girls were intercepted in Cairo having gone through Dar es Salaam. However, earlier on, about 60 girls had gone through Cairo International Airport without being noticed. 

In some countries such as Rwanda, Kenya and Egypt Ugandans living in those counties have formed associations for the ease of engagement with the missions and host authority. However, though they would expect the East African Community hospitality and brotherliness, the reverse is what they have experienced. They are harassed at border points and renewal of their work permits is delayed. In Sudan, Ugandans working with international organisations are denied renewal of work permits and visas even if they still have running contracts with those organisations.

There are Ugandans who have stayed for long in Sudan but are not allowed to leave unless they pay large sums of money in taxes. There is even general harassment of Ugandans, which also affected members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs recently at the airport in Khartoum. Nevertheless, Ugandans in Rwanda informed the committee that they were making good money in selling food, clothes from Uganda and some had restaurants.

Recommendations

From the foregoing observations, the committee recommends, under the implementation of the mission charters, that the missions should periodically revise their charters to monitor and evaluate the extent of achieving and progressively modifying their targets in line with Uganda’s development objectives and the realities in the host countries. On the basis of the report of the periodic reviews of the status of the mission charters, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should prioritize resource allocations to missions abroad bearing in mind that these missions are the face of Uganda, instead of causing lamentation every time.

Our prayer to Members of Parliament is that in appropriating resources, critically look at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that we improve the country’s image. Madam Speaker, we have the power to appropriate funds, especially in the coming financial year, to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that we can help the missions.

On the relationships of the missions with key MDAs in Uganda in a bid to promote commercial diplomacy, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should consider posting and facilitating attachés to the respective missions.

On the missions that continue to incur expenditure on rent, Government should allocate resources to acquire property and/or develop vacant pieces of land in those different mission areas. This will save the country from continuous expenditure on rent and potentially generate NTR from letting out space. We should also explore the issue of mortgages to avert high costs of rent at the missions and embassies.

On the UPHL, the committee recommends that Government considers improving the staffing and operational capacities of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and transfers the custodianship of properties currently under UPHL to the Uganda missions in respective countries. Parliament should also investigate the management of UPHL in relation to the management of the assets and revenue collection.

On staffing gaps, Ministry of Foreign Affairs should conduct a human resource audit of all missions and engage the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in a phased manner, to fill in the existing gaps. Government should also look into appointing and posting substantive heads of mission in Abuja, Cairo and Sudan. Given that the Sudanese Government has seven different attachés in Uganda, Uganda should consider reciprocating with an attaché to serve the security interests of Uganda. 

On motivation of Foreign Service officers, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should consider enhancing the Foreign Service officers’ allowances and education allowance for their children due to the harsh economic realities.

On improving the plight of Ugandans in the diaspora, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should develop a comprehensive diaspora policy to streamline the role and operations of the missions abroad in managing affairs of Ugandans in the diaspora. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also help in facilitating the missions to help distressed Ugandans.

On improving the provision of consular services, all missions should endeavour to establish databases of Ugandans living in their jurisdictions. Ministry of Foreign Affairs should allocate resources for awareness creation through the mass media in Uganda to sensitize Ugandans on the need to register with Ugandan missions in foreign countries whenever they travel out of the country. This will enable them to get acquainted with the services provided by the embassies and missions.

In combating human trafficking, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has to aggressively address the loopholes in immigration management such as issuance of passports, border surveillance, inter-agency coordination with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other security agencies. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should streamline the entire process of externalisation of labour, including tasking licensed labour export companies to avail to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the details of the destinations and addresses to which the Ugandan workers are exported. This will ease follow-up by the Uganda embassies and missions.

On harassment of the Ugandan traders at the borders and delays in issuance of renewal of work permits, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should intervene to eliminate these barriers of integration. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should engage with their counterparts in Sudan on the issue of harassment and refusal to renew visas and work permits of Ugandans working in international organisations. 

The committee was informed that the Sudanese authorities were alleging that the Uganda Government was also denying the renewal of work permits of the Sudanese. However, we carried out investigations and we found out that these were lies because immigration officers in Uganda informed us that they have never denied any Sudanese a work permit or even its renewal. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should sustain the $10,000 for the commemoration of Uganda’s Independence Day in the various missions, given that this is the only avenue for awareness creation on Uganda’s tourism, education, investment, and trade opportunities. 

The committee is optimistic that the outcome of this report will be a general improvement in budgetary allocations, staffing, management systems and support supervision in all Uganda missions abroad. This will go a long way in enhancing their efficiency and effectiveness. I beg to move. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a full report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on missions and embassies. I beg to lay on the Table the annexes and the minutes of the meetings of the committee from where the report I have just read was derived. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Honourable members, I have some difficulty; I understand the minister who was assigned to come and attend this sitting on behalf of the foreign office had an eye operation and cannot come today. I do not know whether anyone is standing in for him for purposes of the debate. Hon. Muruli, I understand you are the acting Government Chief Whip this afternoon. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, yes I am, but we cannot anticipate the direction the debate will take. I am just thinking along your line of thought. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I can understand the dilemma that this Parliament is faced with, but you might recall that last week, a matter was brought on this Floor concerning the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and many of the issues were put to hold awaiting a full statement. In fact, the chairperson promised that she would be coming up with a statement. So, it would not have been taken as abrupt. 

Secondly, there is a substantive minister and two state ministers. I wonder whether all the three had an eye operation. I know some are elderly but still their eyes are able to see. 

On that premise, let the minister say he is in charge and allow us to debate this very important statement. After all, it is a report of Parliament. The Leader of Government Business and the Vice-President are here. We are competently constituted. We shall proceed with or without their input. 

THE SPEAKER: I can confirm that hon. Oryem is in Austria and hon. Mateke, who was assigned to be here today, is the one who had a cataract operation. However, can’t the senior minister come tomorrow and we have this debate?

3.51
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, your proposal is not bad. However, we do not know what has happened until we check. However, I am suggesting that the House continues and we shall avail the Hansard to the ministers responsible to read and come and respond. 

That is the best option because we cannot clarify now in the absence of the minister. However, any clarification required will be recorded and we shall ask the minister to read and come back here. Thank you. 

MR KASIBANTE: I am raising this procedural issue in line with Rule 103 of our Rules of Procedure which says, “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.” 

Madam Speaker, it is evident that you were not notified about who was delegated after the two could not attend. We have had enough scenarios of ministers hiding during very serious issues. We have just seen this happen on the issue of elections of councillors. I also personally raised the matter about the brutality being meted out on the street vendors in Kampala. You gave a directive to the effect that the minister appears with a statement on Tuesday, which is today. The minister is not here and neither is the minister of state and we are only getting excuses from the First Deputy Prime Minister. Yesterday, somebody was saying we have people with PhDs in excuses and that is why we are failing economically.

Madam Speaker, this is the rule and whoever is not living by the rule is actually defying it. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right to summon these ministers to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for some disciplinary action because they are defying the very rules this Parliament made. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, at the close of the last sitting, you had directed the Clerk to come up with an attendance list of ministers, but they have continued to abuse this with impunity. It is time your Chair acts decisively, Madam Speaker, otherwise they will take it for granted and as a result, this House will be bogged down by failure of ministers to be present and we will be blamed.

Madam Speaker, may I remind you that you had tasked the Clerk to come up with a list of attendance of ministers in this House. We are waiting for it and this is the time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is directed to come here tomorrow so that we have this debate and get responses - without fail.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have Mr John Bosco Olwoch, the Speaker of Agago District Local Council. He has come with his deputy, Mr John Bosco Oloya. They are represented by hon. Judith Franca and hon. Makmot. You are welcome. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Where are my commissioners? Can I request Commissioner Ali to lay the papers? (Laughter)

3.56
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to lay on the Table financial statements for:
    i) New Vision Printing and Publishing Company Limited for the year ended 30 June 2015.
    ii) The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited for the year ended 31 December 2014.
    iii) National Planning Authority for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    iv) Pride Microfinance Limited for the year ended 31 December 2014.
    v) The Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Trust for the year ended 31 December 2013.
    vi) Mbarara-Nkenda and Tororo-Lira Power Transmission Lines Project for the year ended 31 December 2014.
    vii) Amber House Limited for the year ended 31 December 2013
    viii) Road Sector Support Project I ADF loan Nos.2100150009644 and 2100150013494 and grant No.2100155004668 Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana-Kyanika Road for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    ix) Road Sector Support Project II – ADF loan No.2100150015793, ID No.P-Ug-DBO-018 for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    x) Bank of Uganda – Credit Reference Bureau Disposition Fund BMZ-ID.2007 65 305 for the year ended 30 June 2015.
    xi) Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project – divestiture and redundancy accounts for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xii) Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited Electricity Sector Development Project, Kawanda–Masaka Power Transmission Line for the year ended 31 December 2014.
    xiii) Uganda Posts Limited for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xiv) National Information Technology Authority for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xv) Insurance Regulatory Authority for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xvi) Uganda Wildlife Education Centre for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xvii) Engineering audit report on a selected sample of road/bridge contracts implemented by Uganda National Roads Authority for financial year 2014/2015.
    xviii) The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited for the year ended 31 December 2013.
    xix) Uganda Wildlife Training Institute, Kasese for the year ended 30 June 2014.
    xx) Post Bank Uganda Limited for the year ended 31 December 2014.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Ali. (Applause) I did not know he was very popular. You can see how popular you are, General. (Laughter) 

All those reports are sent to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for expeditious perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO KUWAIT DINARS 3.5 MILLION (US$11.32 MILLION) FROM THE KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 33 KV AND 11 KV DISTRIBUTION PROJECT IN SIX DISTRICTS OF UGANDA NAMELY; KIRYANDONGO, KIBAALE, NEBBI, BUSHENYI, KASESE AND RUKUNGIRI

4.04
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, the Members of the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow up to Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million, equivalent to US$ 11.32 million, from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development to finance the construction of the 33 kV and 11 kV distribution project in six districts of Uganda, namely Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri in accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of  the Parliamentary Rules Of Procedure. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 17 August 2016, and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. 

The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Members can read that.

MR BATEGEKA: I am going to summarise, Madam Speaker. The committee also held meetings with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and the Rural Electrification Agency (REA). We also had a field visit and inspection to one of the proposed implementation sites of this project in Kiryandongo. 

Background

I will be quick, Madam Speaker. For any country, adequate supply of electricity is a necessity for development. Development for any country is also measured by the amount of power consumed. Addressing this infrastructural bottleneck is evident in many sub-Saharan African countries and it is important for several reasons. It is needed to engender a stronger supply response and raise potential growth. 

An added consideration for many low-income developing countries is the importance of improved supply of electricity infrastructure to foster economic diversification and structural transformation. In the absence of reliable electricity supply, for example, it is difficult for economies to transit from low to high productivity activities. 

At the centre of Uganda’s growth and development strategy is a programme of infrastructure investment in projects that address electricity production and supply infrastructure gap. The Government of Uganda, in partnership with the donors, has increasingly made significant development allocations for rural electrification projects. These investments are aimed at improving the rural electrification transmission network thus contributing to easing access to electricity. 

Since 2006, REA has built over 7,000 kilometres of medium voltage lines and over 4,000 kilometres of low voltage. These investments have so far increased power coverage from one per cent to 20 per cent to date. This project aims to further extend the rural power line coverage by construction of a 285-kilometre network in the districts of Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri. The project is critical to facilitating the implementation of the rural electrification programme to increase accessing and unlocking suppressed demand.

The Project Objectives

The major objective of this project is to contribute to the implementation of the Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan 2013-2022.

The specific objectives of this project include the following:
    i. Spur rural development through the provision of cost effective energy alternatives.
    ii. Curb rural-urban migration through the provision of services and opportunities in rural parts of Uganda.
    iii. Improve the health of vulnerable minorities, especially women and children, through the replacement of kerosene as a source of energy.
    iv. Meet the current and future demand in beneficiary rural areas.
    v. Make accessible the energy generated by providing enough distribution lines to absorb the energy generated.

Madam Speaker, with those objectives in mind, let us look at the loan terms. This is a concessional loan. The loan amount is Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million. The loan period is 25 years with a grace period of four years. The interest rate is 1.5 per cent per annum on the disbursed and outstanding loan amount. The service charge is 0.5 per cent per annum on the disbursed and outstanding loan amount and a commitment charge of 0.5 per cent per annum on the undisbursed loan amount. Let us now turn to the observations and recommendations of the committee.  

Observations and Recommendations

Fulfilment of Loan Conditions

The committee observed that Government has been slow in fulfilment of loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt financed projects for rural electrification. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should ensure speedy fulfilment of effective loan conditions of the financing agreement for the loan in order for the committed funds to be released by the Kuwait Fund on time to guarantee the timely implementation of this project.

Generation and Access to Electricity 

The committee welcomes Government’s deliberate efforts of investing largely in the generation of power. However, there is still a mismatch in the electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure necessary to evacuate the power and make it available to consumers. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government streamlines this mismatch between generation, transmission and distribution over the medium term in order to ensure that the medium term target of 30 per cent access to electricity is attained but also ensuring that all generated power is consumed.

Inadequate Government Counterpart Funding 

The committee noted that the majority of debt financed by rural electrification projects require Government counterpart funding for payment of taxes and for compensation of project affected persons. For the period 2015 to 2019, the required Government counterpart funding for rural electrification projects to be financed by debt is estimated at Shs 102 billion. For this particular project, Government counterpart funding is estimated at Kuwait Dinars 1.288 million for acquisition of land for right of way, taxes and audit fees among others. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government makes a firm commitment to provide counterpart funding for all loan projects where there is low absorption due to lack of counterpart funding. All future loans whose counterpart funding is not provided in beneficiary sector budgets will not be submitted to Parliament for approval. 

Arrears for Wayleaves Compensation

The committee noted that the financial requirements for wayleaves compensation continue to escalate as new rural electrification projects are embarked on. The situation is expected to get worse when REA, over the next years, implements a number of debt financed rural electrification projects, including this particular one. As at the end of October 2015, the outstanding wayleaves bill verified by the Chief Government Valuer stood at approximately Shs 19 billion for completed and ongoing rural electrification projects.

The committee, therefore, recommends the following:
    a) Government should, over the medium-term, prioritise the provision of funds to settle the arrears. 
    b) The Rural Electrification Agency should complete the wayleaves acquisition process before engagement of the contractors. This will minimise redundancy of the equipment on site and possible interest charges on the idle equipment.

    c) Government should consider acquiring a central corridor for infrastructure projects to reduce on repeated compensation whenever infrastructure projects are implemented, to accommodate, among others, power lines, water pipes, communication infrastructure and road reserves.

    d) The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should expedite the rollout of the World Bank funded project on electronic land registry and preparation of standard valuations for different parts of the country. 

    e) As a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should enhance the capacity of the valuation department, which is now too thinly manned, to cope with the demand for land valuation especially for infrastructure development projects.

    f) Following what happened when the Government Chief Valuer and UNRA disagreed on the valuation amount along Entebbe Express Highway that led to diversion of the road, Government should consider setting up a land Ombudsman to arbitrate in cases where there is disagreement in land valuation.

Electricity Generation and Cost

The committee observed that though there has been an increase in the country’s electricity generation capacity, the average cost of electricity in the country has remained high. Ugandan producers and consumers continue to incur a high cost composition of energy as part of the overall production cost. This makes Uganda’s manufactured goods uncompetitive compared to products from countries like India, China and South Africa which have fairly sufficient quantities and competitive prices of energy. These countries have an energy mix which costs between 4-8 US cents per kilowatt hour compared to Uganda’s 16 US cents per kilowatt hour.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government steps up efforts to increase power supply, that is, timely implementation of ongoing energy generation projects and renegotiation of Bujagali Hydropower Station. This will gradually help reduce energy prices to about 7 US cents per kilowatt hour by 2017.

In addition, Government should consider making it a building requirement that all housing plans in the city and urban authorities above a certain threshold should have solar installations. This should go a long way towards saving grid power for industry and encourage job creation and production for export. 

Government should also consider other off-grid energy sources as part of the existing energy mix for easier access and to reduce the cost of connecting isolated areas as well as reduce pressure on the existing grid power and reduce costs of wind, solar, off-grid micro and pico hydros on small rivers. 

Productive Use of Electricity

The committee observed that although there has been increased effort towards the strengthening of the transmission and distribution network in rural areas, which has improved power supply reliability in the rural areas, the productive use of this electricity is still very low. 

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that the drive to step up electrification and end-user connections is followed by efforts to encourage effective use of electricity in these rural areas.

In addition, Government should consider provision of appropriate incentives for industries located in rural areas to spur rural industrialisation especially in agro processing for value addition and job creation in rural areas. This should be followed with the urgent need for rural power intensification by setting up power transformers in growth areas.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million, equivalent to $ 11.32 million, from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development to finance the construction of the 33kV and 11kV distribution project in six districts of Uganda namely, Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri, be approved subject to the above recommendations. I beg to report. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the signed report by members of the committee and related documents that we used in reviewing this loan, which include -
    a) signed minutes;
    b) the ministers brief on the proposal, that is, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the user ministry; 
    c) the project appraisal documents; 
    d) the loan approval guide; 
    e) the Rural Electrification Agency Project summary report; 
    f) agreed minutes of negotiation; 
    g) the draft loan financing agreement; and 
    h) the Rural Electrification Strategic Plan.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on National Economy. Honourable members, I confirm that the report has been signed by more than one-third of the members. Therefore, it is eligible for debate. 

4.21
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for the report. 

Madam Speaker, given the relative peace and stability in the country, many Ugandans are now involved in production. Furthermore, now that there is a programme for youth livelihood and women entrepreneurship, many of our people down there in the villages and our districts are willing to work. However, with the absence of electricity, most of them are usually bogged down, especially now that power is useful not only in value addition but also in preservation of agricultural inputs. Therefore, this project is very good for our rural people, and we are aware that 86 per cent of them are involved in the informal sector. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee’s report that the prices of power in this country are very high. Every day on TV, we see reports of people dying as they try to connect power illegally because they cannot afford it. Therefore, as Government is trying to undertake this very good initiative, they should also try to review the prices of power in this country. It is not good to have power lines only and the people are not actually accessing and utilising the power.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the committee’s recommendation. I request the House to also support it and pass this loan request. I thank you.

4.23
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have invested a lot in generating power - talk about Karuma, Ayago, Isimba, among others, which will soon begin to generate a lot of electricity for this country. However, once power is generated and not evacuated and distributed for consumption, then that will be a big loss to this country. Therefore, I would like to support the committee’s recommendation that Parliament grants Government authority to get this loan so that some of the areas like Kasese, Rukungiri and Bushenyi, among others, get power in the villages, since we have also supported the same process in other areas.

Madam Speaker, I am concerned because normally, when this programme for rural electrification is being done, compensation for wayleaves becomes a problem. I would like Government to take this very seriously because if it is not done, very soon communities will begin rejecting requests and demanding that unless they are paid first, power lines will not pass on their land. This is becoming a problem even in my constituency.

Madam Speaker, on the cost of power, I would like the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to tell us exactly where the problem is, especially in the Elgon area where we still have continuous illegal power connections. These illegal connections lead to very serious power loss and this is why the cost of electricity is high and charged on others. Why has it become very difficult for Government to ensure that there are no illegal connections in the Elgon area?

Recently, a report was given and we had lost over Shs 17 billion. This is recovered by charging other people highly and through Government compensations. Therefore, the Government and the Ministry of Energy should come out very strongly and fight these illegal connections so that we can reduce on the cost of electricity in the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for this elaborate report. 

Rural electrification is very important. We need to support this project because it will help ensure that power goes to different parts of the districts. Without this money, you will find that power will run along the main roads and will not reach areas like schools, hospitals and headquarters in rural areas.

I can give you a typical example of Koboko; we claim to have power and we are rejoicing but the power only runs along the main road. The schools, health centres and headquarters in rural areas do not access this power. Therefore, let us hope that after funding these six districts, we shall also move to other districts like Koboko, so that we can have power in all our rural areas in Koboko District.

Madam Speaker, the issue of counterpart funding is very important. When the condition is set that Government must give a certain amount of money, the donor usually gives their part of the money but at the end of the day, Government does not provide its counterpart funding. As a result, the project delays, interest accumulates and we have to pay back the loan plus the accumulated interest. 

In future, Government should be serious; we should not pass the budget unless it has the counterpart funding. Otherwise, we shall get the money but we shall never implement the project. This is very serious; I would like the minister to tell us whether that money is present and as we pass this loan request, will that money be available? Without that, we are creating more problems than solutions. 

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of electricity generated. The power that we generate, which is hydro power, is not enough for industries. Even if we put up industries, the power will not be enough for them. Therefore, in case you want to provide power, it should be enough for industries, lighting and even for irrigation machines. Power should not be limited to specific areas; it must be used for various reasons in various areas. I support this motion to grant the loan. Let us hope that we shall soon get more for the other districts. Thank you very much.

4.28
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I support the recommendation. However, as this is for a common good, we need assurance from the user ministry. This is because we have got the experience where people come here and plead for loans and we approve them even before they have performed their primary roles.

Can we get assured that as soon as we consent to this loan, the money will be borrowed and rightly absorbed, so that it does not have negative financial implications in form of interest? I still remember when the Minister of Finance stated here that some of the money borrowed got delayed because we did not prepare adequately. Therefore, we need assurance from the user ministry this time round that they have prepared adequately.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of the cost of electricity in this country. We have been trying to support the rural areas, but if you compare the benefits we are getting from the centre, especially from Kampala, to those got in Adjumani, here we get electricity more cheaply. Could we be told what the challenge is? How do we ensure that the rural districts also get power at a lower cost than what they are getting it at now? 

Much of the power supplied is like satellite power; it goes only to the headquarters where we have the business community. The majority of the people cannot use this power. How can we enrich the usage of this power so that our people develop?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in relation to compensation, the major problem is planning. Let us help our urban centres so that they are well planned and when we get this project, compensation issues may be reduced further. Many of the town councils and municipalities will be settled when these projects start. The major issues are planning and compensation. The ministry in charge of planning should collaborate with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development so that some of these issues are sorted out. Thank you.

4.31
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also join colleagues to support the motion. 

We agreed at one time that on the issue of compensation for wayleaves, since these are many projects going to rural areas, Government would only afford to compensate high voltage areas. However, for low voltage areas, which go deep in the villages, we proposed that we, the leaders, would mobilise communities to allow Government to invest. There are several of them; if Government goes on compensating each and every area, it is going to be expensive.

There was an issue brought up on power theft. I am from Bugisu area, Elgon County, where they allege there is a lot of power theft. However, honourable members, there was an operation called Operation Sigma in Kampala that was also for illegal connections. I think everywhere in the country there is an element of power theft and not only in the Elgon area. However, we are trying to manage that as leaders.

I agreed with my people in the area and we mobilised people. I spoke to the wanainchi who said the there was no compensation for the line from Muyembe to Namalu. We are now in the process of giving UNRA a road from Muyembe to Namalu. Because UNRA does not have money, we have agreed as a community to build the road and Government will pay the money in due course. I, therefore, encourage colleagues to mobilise communities to access power. If we insist on compensation, there are many claims and Government will not be able to fund all of them.

The committee told us about their field tours. I wonder whether they have seen areas where these projects have already collapsed because of shoddy work. We have seen areas where they have put up lines but they have neither commissioned nor handed them over to Umeme or other entities. Therefore, as we pass this loan request, let us be mindful of shoddy work. I have seen many lines in the Elgon region that have totally collapsed. The Committee on Natural Resources recently had a meeting with Umeme and we advised them to – (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR WAMAKUYU: They get projects from the Rural Electrification Agency and they have to agree on the time for maintenance. What is now happening is that Umeme is charging an escrow account, which has no money. The issue of shoddy work should be looked into.

Lastly, is the counterpart funding provided for in the budget? I am a member of the committee but I am not aware of this loan. May the committee chairperson educate us; otherwise, Government is incurring a lot of expenses on unutilised funds and they are paying costs. I beg to support the motion, subject to those amendments.

THE SPEAKER: It is not the Government incurring the costs but the tax payers.

4.36
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to support this motion because as Uganda, we are on the road to industrialisation and our people’s emphasis in both rural and urban areas has gone towards small scale industries. This is true in places like Busia Municipality, for example, where I am a leader.

The major challenge that we have with power is the implementer, Umeme. I pray this challenge does not occur in Kasese and other districts we have recommended for this project. In Busia, our people have to use boda bodas to go to Tororo – the Umeme regional office that services five districts. They are still using the colonial districts to service our people. We have many times requested that a service office be created in Busia as it is central to serve Namayingo, Bugiri and other nearby districts. It is good that the minister is here.

During the planning, things are done well, but the problem starts with implementation. The implementers do not give the right number of transformers, for example, that were indicated in the project. We have a challenge in most urban centres of this country where we have rural electrification projects being implemented. In Busia Municipality, for instance, for the 30 years that the NRM has been in power, we still have load shedding. When you ask Umeme what the problem is, they say that they do not have enough transformers.  

I would like to support my colleague who talked about planning. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development must come to the ground to assess the needs for power and align their planning to suit the energy needs - (Member timed out) 

4.38
MR MUYANJA MBABABLI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for coming out with a comprehensive study and report on electricity. However, there are three points that were not captured.

Power is still very expensive. Power losses are still very high, and power is lost during transmission, from illegal connections and failure to pay bills. All these matters need to be captured because each percentage loss of power is now equivalent to US$ 4 million. This means that by the time we assessed power last year, the loss of power was at about 38 per cent and yet by the time of the disbanding of Uganda Electricity Board (UEB), the power loss was at 17 per cent. You can now imagine what a loss means if a percentage of power loss is equivalent to US$ 4 million. The committee should address ways and means to save power losses.

Apart from power losses, there is abundant electricity in rural areas because people are not using power. There must be a marketing drive in order to interest the rural poor to use electricity. I am of the opinion that power should be connected on credit to each house and the connection fees are paid gradually, so that there is a market drive – (Member timed out.) 

4.40
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. I support the motion that Parliament approves the request for Government to borrow this money. However, I am not happy with the finance minister who is not here to receive our comments. 

Nevertheless, there is an issue with the early procurement of service providers. We are going to get this money and then we shall hear about procurement and works guidelines. We need early procurement of service providers.

On the issue of compensation and right of way, we have projects that are not moving because the contractor has no access to the site. On this note, I would like to request that people get compensated early enough so that contractors have access to the land for work.

I would also like to request that we do not again go into the business of UNRA getting money and paying it out to contractors for compensations. How do you give money to a contractor who does not even know the owner of the land? I propose that this money goes to the lands ministry because they know the land owners. You may give this money to the energy ministry and yet they do not know the land owners.

Madam Speaker, there are constituencies and districts without power in this country. It is good that some districts have power, but did the committee consider districts without power? There are districts, if I am not mistaken – (Member timed out.)

4.43
LT (RTD) CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the committee for this report. This means that I do support the motion. However, I want to know from the chairperson and the members of the committee about a loan from the Islamic Development Bank, which was supposed to be passed in the previous Parliament. It was supposed to cover some districts, including my district and my constituency. People from Rural Electrification Agency in Kamwokya came to my constituency informing the locals that before 2016, they would have received power. Until now, nothing has been supplied. 

Looking at the issue of power coverage, some districts have coverage of over 70 per cent while others have less than 10 per cent. What is the problem? Where did the money from this loan go? Was the money received and if so, where is it?

Secondly, I pray that as we pass this loan request, the issue of corruption is dealt with. If it is not dealt with, most of this money will be taken by corrupt people and the locals will not receive the services. 

Thirdly, I want to stress clearly that when we are passing these loan – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you are talking about your constituency or district, it is important that you mention it for the Hansard; do not assume that the minister knows where you come from. You talked about your constituency and did not name it; you mentioned your district and did not name it. 

LT (RTD) AMODOI: My constituency is Toroma County in Katakwi -



4.45
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was listening to the report from the committee, I recalled that as a House we have always supported Ministry of Energy to improve the lives of our people but we, the Uganda taxpayers, often meet the cost of refurbishing aging facilities and getting the loans. We know very well that we privatised most of the energy sector, so we need the energy sector to be aware that we are facilitating them. 

As others decry illegal connections, Kampala residents are being encouraged to go back to illegal connections. Now, we have the prepaid Yaka, but it can take one six months in Kampala to access a meter for Yaka. People are willing to pay, but Umeme is stalling the process. That means there are corrupt people who want the people of Kampala to go back to the post-paid system. 

Therefore, as you are streamlining the energy sector, the service providers are frustrating the people who want to change to the pre-paid system. Actually, now, it is corruption at play if you want to get a pre-paid system. It is not as easy as getting a SIM card. It is very hard and expensive; you cannot easily access it. Therefore, we want the minister to talk to Umeme not to frustrate the people who want to pay for the power services – (Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. We visited Namanve, an industrial park. The industries that are established there have the ability to pay for the power which they want to use in their factories. However, it is a nightmare for them. They are crying for transformers and connections which are not there – 

THE SPEAKER:  In the industrial park?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, in Namanve Industrial Park. There are industries without transformers. The wires are connected but they need high voltage transformers to connect to their factories. So, much as we are passing this loan, the agencies which supply power must also have a market driven strategy so that people who can manage their bills are serviced quickly, because they are able to pay. It has a very high multiplier effect – 

THE SPEAKER: You are now smuggling. Hon. Naggayi, please conclude. 

MR NAGGAYI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The intention of privatising some of these utilities was to have efficiency. So when we see that privatising some of – (Member timed out.)

4.49
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Kumi Municipality. First, I want to appreciate the committee for the effort that they put in. I know God is finally going to bless us as a country. 

Madam Speaker, I have a concern because with the formulation of the Rural Electrification Agency, it seems we are focusing our attention on the rural areas and forgetting the urban centres. I represent Kumi Municipality and I will state clearly that most of our urban centres are getting darker and darker by the day. You have neglected them because you think we are okay. Therefore, as you are getting loans for the rural areas, you should also bring a paper here asking for a loan to put security lights in all our urban centres, so that we balance. 

That aside, I think it is high time that we considered asking our ministries, whenever they come for a loan request, to come with a loan performance report for the previous loans issued to them. That will help us to check the performance of these loans. If we just continue granting them, they will bring us more problems. 

The other thing I want to say is that the poles used by our service providers rot; they are of poor quality. I wonder what the ministry can do concerning that particular matter. These poles are very expensive and yet they do not take long. Within a very short time, they are rotten – (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for this report. I support any effort to increase rural access to electricity from the current 18 per cent to at least an average of 40 per cent. I do so because we are mostly using charcoal. We are complaining about climate change challenges but until we get affordable power, we shall continue causing deforestation. 

I would like the other arm of Government to fast-track the operationalisation of the Tree Planting Act, 2003 which up to now Government has failed to do. When we choose to go hydro, it means we are depending on the river flow; so, how can we be the ones encouraging cutting of trees and yet we are investing in dams? That is challenge No.1. 

Now, challenge No.2 is that we are generating a lot of power and consuming less because of failures in transmission and distribution. At the end of the day, the cost recovery tariffs charged are for what you even do not consume. This is where Ugandans are missing the point. Therefore, I urge that we make sure that the power we do generate is consumed, so that we do not punish citizens who are using this power because of stolen power, technical failures. The generators are making a lot of money from Government even when we are not putting this power to use.

The other issue is on compensation; we cannot be the same government looking for access for the Standard Gauge Railway, the pipeline then the wayleave. Madam Speaker, this country can save a lot of money if land acquisition in done in an inter-ministerial arrangement instead of the Standard Gauge Railway moving in isolation.

THE SPEAKER: I was a bit shocked by what hon. Kakooza said about the industrial parks; I thought the idea was that we put the facilities there and these people just move in. I hope somebody will explain to us why transformers are not there.

4.54
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the committee for the report and I support any effort by Government to increase the electricity coverage in the country, as my colleague has said.

A lot has been said but I would like to emphasise the issue of compensation because the funds also include the aspect of compensation to the people who live along the road.

Madam Speaker, I request the Ministry of Energy to closely monitor these agencies. We are at pains to hear that plans for road construction are underway, and we begin wondering how to handle the effect of compensation with some people receiving money and others not. These are poor villagers whose livelihood depends on this land. If you do not want to compensate, do not let the project pass through their land. 

However, in a situation where some people are paid and others are not, you cause a lot of conflict in the community. Therefore, these people should learn how to manage conflict and compensate people adequately so that everybody gets the money. They should take that into consideration.

Secondly is the issue of cost of installation. Just this morning, I received a phone call from one of the secondary schools in my district. It is a small secondary school that is just starting up. For power to be installed, they have been asked to pay Shs 500,000. Thus, the cost of installation will curtail the members of the community from accessing this electricity. Is there a way they can make it cheaper? If that is the amount charged on an institution, what about individual houses? If the cost is not reduced – (Member timed out.)

4.56
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report and I support the proposal that permission be granted to Government to borrow money for the extension of this very important line to the districts that have been mentioned.

However, I want to emphasise my own understanding of “access” and “utilisation”. It appears that when an electricity line passes through an area, that it is enough for Government to consider that area an area with access to electricity. It is very important that Government reciprocates the good faith shown by locals in availing the land through compensation because in many areas, lines have been passed through people’s land but they have not been compensated.

I have a case in my own constituency; two sub-counties in Amac and Agali, where the main transmission line coming from Jinja is passing. There is a sub-county headquarters, a health centre IV, and a secondary school along the line but they do not have electricity. People are demanding for it and threatening to cut down the poles. Therefore, I hope that for the one that Government is going to construct, the locals will be taken care of.

In fact, it beats my understanding how the suppliers of electricity think in this country; they are the ones going to sell electricity but they want you to pay. If you take your product to the market – I think it is important that we review the policy such that whenever your building plan is approved, the electricity suppliers are also part of it. They should bring the pole in front of your house so that your role will be to wire the house and have it connected and you start paying bills –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Electricity is very important for our day-to-day life. As many of my colleagues have said, we need not target only the business centres. Many of our districts, especially in northern Uganda, had only the business centres targeted when connection was done. They did not mind about the schools and health centres and yet health centres are more important than the business centres.

Madam Speaker, I suggest that we look at all the angles; let us consider the health centres, the schools as well as the business centres.

On the issue of compensation, the report says that we have Shs 18 billion to be used for the compensation for the wayleave. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification from you; why do you accumulate all this much? Where are we going to get this Shs 18 billion for compensation? 

When I was following up the issue of compensation in my district, I found that someone would be demanding for only Shs 150,000 while others only Shs 200,000. Why didn’t you compensate those people during the process of connecting? Why accumulate all that up to now?

Madam Speaker, my district of Amuru was connected in 2013 and as I speak, for the last two months, there is no power in my district because of the compensation issues. When the people of the rural electrification project went, they motivated our people; they registered their property and promised them compensation. There is one person who stopped the power line from passing through his area and for the last two months, my constituency is still in darkness. 

I suggest that we get the best way to promote rural electrification; it should be motivated by the people in that area. Let us not raise people’s hopes that there is money for compensation whenever power lines pass through someone’s land.

Let us get a way of reducing the cost on Government. People can sit together and allow for a power line to pass through their area even without compensation. However, the rural electrification people are raising people’s hopes to expect compensation.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I would like to support and thank the committee for the very good report. Thank you.

5.02
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee and support the motion. I believe that the name “Nebbi” here is mentioned in relation to the expansion which is about to go to Nyagak Power Station. 

Madam Speaker, most of us know that West Nile gets power from a generator in Arua but with the coming of Nyagak Power Station, everybody expected that eventually the cost of power would reduce as we generate from Nyagak. Unfortunately, that has not happened. We still have expensive power.

Secondly, from what members have talked here, I see us facing the issue of mapping in terms of power line routes as well as the institutions and entities, where the consumption will be. Isn’t it possible for the consuming ministries and entities to do this mapping early enough in order for them to negotiate with the people along the power line routes? We also need to be prepared and know what to do. 

The ministry concerned already knows the targeted health centres and schools that will benefit from the power in the area. When it is time for installation, things will be made easier since they would have already negotiated with the stakeholders. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.04
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you and the Members of Parliament for the support you rendered to our family, when I lost my mother. 

We have had loan requests several times in this Parliament but they are not improving our economy. I would wish that the committee prioritises agriculture loans to improve our production. It should also prioritise irrigation issues as well as loans on the health sector and education. It will be very great for me as a person.

The key question that I would like to ask the committee is how will this loan increase the revenue that the Uganda Revenue Authority will collect? These are the questions that I want you to begin asking. We are also talking about electricity but how will these loans reduce on the cost of electricity to the consumers? 

As I speak, I have a rice miller in my sub county of Pabbo, which we used to operate on a generator. The profit we were getting when we were operating it on a generator is better than when we connected it to electricity. Therefore, how will this reduce the cost of electricity? 

We have been given a grace period of four years before paying off our debts. Is it possible for this project to be implemented within four years? We have seen it before where we have taken loans but the implementation process has taken long. 

The ministry is telling us that this project will be implemented within 15 months. I do not think this is practical. We have not seen it in the loans that have been borrowed. Please, I hope this is taken into consideration. Thank you very much. 

5.06
MS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report well written. I concur with their findings and strongly support their recommendations.

From the observations, it is very clear that the length of distribution sometimes is not commensurate to the connectivity at household level and this is a very big concern. I would like to ask the ministry to incorporate some innovations so that at least for every length of lines that are put in place, a certain minimum number of households are connected and such reports are given to us as Members’ representatives.

Madam Speaker, you also realise that one of the issues that has come up on the Floor, which I also have to emphasise, is that we need a clear message. Let us get a clear message as representatives of the people. Are we paying for wayleaves or not? If we are not, has there been comprehensive consultation with the communities who are going to be served with these lines? 

If we do not get that clear, we are likely to go out there and give conflicting information. Therefore, let the ministry tell us what the status is. Are the people going to pay for wayleaves or are we going to go there as a community and convince them because we know they need the electricity? If we are to convince them, what kind of message are we supposed to give them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.08
MS JENNIFER KYOMUHENDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): I would like to thank the committee for a job well done and I would also like to support the request to approve the loan. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the committee; they talked about the loan that is going to fund electricity in six districts, including Kibaale. I would like to know whether it is the greater Kibaale or the smaller Kibaale of today? Kagadi District, which is very productive, was part of Kibaale and it is one of the districts that have fast growing and productive villages. We are also affected by lack of power in our areas. 

Madam Speaker, another problem that I have in the villages during power distribution is when they do not harmonise the distribution and the connectivity process. Power lines go through swamps where there is no activity while schools and hospitals are left out in the connection process. I, therefore, advise the departments concerned that the people going to do the scope at the beginning should include the representatives of people and other leaders so that we can have power in the right places. 

Another problem that we have always had as Government is that we sometimes get these loans when we are not ready with our backup. I would like to advise the Government to always have a backup plan so that when we put in our loan requests, we at least have something to start with to avoid delaying the project. Thank you. 

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to one issue that was raised by one of our honourable members concerning compensation. As Government, we have a lot of challenges in regards to compensation. 

I would like to report to you, Madam Speaker, that when honourable colleagues are here, they speak a different language. When it comes to compensation and they are out in their constituencies, they forget about the oath of legislature -(Interjections)- I am speaking out of experience. 

Madam Speaker, there is an on-going project around Nakaseke and an acre of land was valued at Shs 200 million and everybody knows that. When we had a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Government Chief Valuer and UNRA, we tried to revise these prices. I am sorry to say that the honourable colleagues were not with us; they were with the people. 

It is true, as the honourable from Bugisu, where there is no metre, said the costs of compensation have greatly affected the project. If you try to talk to the people, the leaders will advise the people to go and demonstrate because Government has money. This is a fact because I have experienced it. 

Madam Speaker, I am appealing to honourable colleagues that when the issue of compensation comes in, let us be fair. Under the Land Fund alone, the honourable members here have made matters very difficult. They advise the landlords not to accept the money if a certain rate is not met. We have tried to have dialogue with them but I thought as a Member of Parliament, I will have to say this in the House so that- (Interruption) 

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister has consistently blamed honourable members of Parliament for supporting the voters that voted for them. Yet, whenever the rural electrification project agents move to a particular area, they normally gather the community and bring a Government valuer to value the properties of the community. Is she in order to blackmail the honourable members of Parliament? She said that they are the ones that are making her work difficult, yet they are not. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know the circumstances that the minister is talking about but I know that under the Constitution, if the Government is going to acquire land for public purposes, the people are entitled to urgent and adequate compensation. (Applause)

MS NAMUGANZA: You are right, Madam Speaker; the people are entitled but I am raising the issue of over exaggerated costs. Some of these costs fall on our side to the extent of the Chief Government Valuer, who is under my ministry, thinking that he has personal interest or the ministry has interest, which interest is sometimes derived out of political influence.

I would also like to say that the project which is under way is a Government project. We appreciate that electricity is vital and if it can be supplied to many of these rural areas – first of all, we know that a lot of agricultural produce is being lost because of poor preservation.

It is true the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has been given responsibilities on compensation. We have been dialoguing and having inter-ministerial meetings and much of that responsibility now is with the Ministry of Lands.

However, let us cooperate and see that where we have to compensate, we give fair and adequate compensation and not because of political interference or influence. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, no member has been named; so, we will just take the information. 

5.15
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns: one, I would like to suggest to the honourable members that time and again, we have talked about corruption and here we are struggling to get a loan to facilitate rural electrification. 

I suggest that as we pass this loan, we should task the concerned minister and the technocrats - that is the Permanent Secretary and the others - to assure us that this money this time round is not going to be stolen so that we pass the loan to do the work.

Secondly, we are here struggling to get the money but tomorrow, you will find shoddy work going on. What does this mean? They will erect the poles today and the following week, they will collapse. This is very serious; they planted electricity poles in my place and within a year – I am coming to that where they said that in Bugisu, they steal power. They bring old transformers and within a day, they break down. 

Now, on the point of Bugisu sub-region stealing power - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute for you to talk about theft of power in the region.

MR BURUNDO: There is no snake bite but the problem is that people are not sensitised when power is brought in an area. 

Secondly, we have a problem of very high costs of paying for power. It is not only in my place but everywhere. Therefore, if there is a power line passing on top of your residence and you have a local person who has seen the power and has a phone, he will be tempted to do wrong things. It is equivalent to not keeping your house under key and lock and you have valuable things there. The thief will always be encouraged to go and steal.

5.19
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work well done. However, my challenge is that at the end of the day when funds are approved and the rural electrification is done, it is only the town dwellers or people in the city centres that will benefit.

My appeal is, if a connection is going to take place, then we kindly request that the minister or the chairperson should ensure that our schools are connected. We need public institutions like sub-county headquarters and health centres to be electrified. 

I am speaking out of experience; poles were set in Kitgum District but a few people are connected to the lines. We are still in the dark ages. It is like we are in the 1960s and yet Uganda is one of the first countries to be connected with electricity. We, therefore, really need to do something. 

Secondly, I also represent northern Uganda on climate change. When electricity is connected to the rural person at the village level, we shall cut down on the high rates of cutting down trees and burning charcoal and I think that many people will reduce on the charcoal burning because the electricity – (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Electricity is very important but the unfortunate thing is the way we get it. Sometimes, there are a lot of issues that surround some of these loans. Today, people are pleading and tomorrow they will still plead but when they get the money, they get all the ways not to do the right thing. This is very common with Ministry of Energy. This is the reality. Whenever we ask for reports from the Minister of Energy and Minerals they rarely come and this is on record. That is why we should tell these members that they need to listen; that we must fight corruption without discussion. 

Secondly, the people who are supposed to be compensated must be compensated.

Thirdly, I would like the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to give us a comprehensive plan for connecting electricity in this country. I would like to give a simple example: in 2011, poles were put in a trading centre called Akisim in Ngora District. From that time up to today, the poles are actually lying on the ground and nothing has been done. 

However, when you look at some of these things today, you will never know what next but I am sure we shall be getting more loans. That is why we should be aware that after that place, where next are we going so that we are aware. That is how we can monitor and manage some of these issues at hand.

Madam Speaker, another critical issue is that I wonder why, according to the report, the Ministry of Lands - (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with such a wonderful report. I support their recommendations.

Madam Speaker, sometimes people think that it is just political to say that we have excess power capacity in this country. What is generated now is around 850 Megawatts and what we are able to consume during peak hours is under 600 Megawatts. However, over the next two years, we will be generating over 1,600 Megawatts. 

Currently, access to rural areas is just seven per cent and at the national level, it is just 16 per cent. Therefore, the recommendations of this report to Parliament are very timely; that we need to invest in the distribution infrastructure.

However, there is a paradox and this is where it becomes interesting. Over the last six years, we have borrowed over US$538 million to boost our infrastructure capacity in the transmission. However, out of that, we have been able to spend under US$150 million.

A review of what has been spent over the last six years is an average of around 30 per cent. On that, we are paying huge interest as commitment fee. The question therefore is: do we need more loans in order to boost the infrastructure or do we need to focus on what the problem is? Why do we have the lowest absorption capacity in the building of infrastructure? I think that is what Parliament should address itself to.

We have raised the issue of counterpart funding with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Power supply is taken as a very casual issue; there is no remorse and concern that Ugandans have to pay a huge expense.

Therefore, the problem is that we are not utilising the money that we are borrowing. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.27
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the ministry, this Parliament and our committee for providing a facility for Busheyi. 

In my constituency, Igara West, rural electrification is not more than five per cent. It is only centres around the tea factories that have electricity. Therefore, I am hopeful that this will spur growth and help development in our rural areas. 

Madam Speaker, I find three key national issues being subdued in this report and unless we lift them out and recognise their importance, we are likely to lose them. One of the issues is what my colleague has just said, loan absorption; the performance of this Government in terms of implementation of our loans. I think this should not be the discussion on this small loan. I think this matter is big. The Committee on National Economy should study the whole aspect of how we are performing in terms of the loans that we acquire and give us its report and recommendations. 

The second is the issue of land registration, administration and evaluation. It is mentioned in the report and you heard the honourable minister blame the Members of Parliament. I think the issue of land administration, management and evaluation is a big one. We should not lose it in this report. I think the Committee on Natural Resources should study and give us some concrete recommendations on how to improve land management and administration in this country.

The third issue is illegal connections; power theft particularly in the Elgon area. I think it is dangerous for us to keep on talking about it and just bypass it. I heard a Member say that it is expensive in that region; it cannot be expensive in one region. 

We cannot talk of power losses and corruption and we ignore this problem. I was in an area called Bulambuli and I can confirm this. It is an area where almost all homesteads are connected but without meters. The connections are by simple wire loops.

This is so dangerous and unethical. I would like to propose that our committee should not just keep making small comments on this. Can you visit this area, study the problem and make recommendations on what we should do? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.30
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the way in which we get power and the failure by the people to utilise it yet the agency continues to do the same job but without sensitisation.

It is unfortunate that the Minister of Trade and Industry is not here. That minister needs a copy of this report more than anyone does. The minister should read this report because at the moment, the population of Uganda is increasing year after year and we have more youth; we therefore need rural industrialisation. If we share this report with that ministry, we shall use the power and be able to pay the loans and the interest.

If we keep on getting power and yet we are not using it, at a certain point, we shall fail to pay the loans and we shall regret.

The next issue is about loan repayment. Loan requests come to Parliament but we do not see any progress in loan repayment. I think it is high time we got regular reports about loan payments –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is on compensation. Many electricity projects have been frustrated due to lack of cooperation from the rural population because they feel that they are missing out on compensation. From what we are saying here, we have not agreed on what we should do on compensation yet Article 26 of Constitution protects one from deprivation of your property if Government is going to acquire your land and the payment should be prompt, fair and adequate.

However, mine is to stress the fairness. If we are trying to say that wayleaves should be cheaper than actual acquisition of land, how are we going to sensitise these rural folks and come to a middle ground so that they realise that they should not demand for so much but it is a benefit for all of us and so it should be at a fair amount. 

That brings me to the Chief Government Valuer’s office; it is very frustrating to go there and you find only about three staff members yet you need them in various places. We have suffered, for instance, when we go to court and we need them to value land for Government can pay. 

I would like to support the provision in the report that that office should be beefed up to have more staff members. It does not fall upon the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development alone but also the Ministry of Public Service. Thank you.

5.34
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I have some observations.

One, in western Uganda, most of the projects that are coming up especially in relation to loans go to the traditional districts leaving out the new ones. 

I would imagine that the loan request was perhaps submitted when the new districts were not yet created but Mitooma District was created seven years ago. I, therefore, recommend that when these projects are drawn for the regions, the new districts should also be considered. 

Secondly, is the way the electricity poles are put up; I have some areas in Mitooma District in my constituency of Ruhinda, where electricity poles are almost in the road and they curtail the expansion of the roads. I propose that the committee takes it up with the relevant authorities such that when implementing such projects, they should put road reservations in consideration.

In relation to that, they also affect some plots of individuals. Instead of putting them in road reserves, you find that they have put them about 150 metres cutting across some individual plots. 

Lastly, when these projects are coming up in the constituencies, they come with many workers and yet the locals can be mobilised and sensitised so that they can earn a living from the project as well. I thank you.

5.37
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise up to support the proposal by the committee but allow me to present the following concerns.

The readiness of the ministry requesting for this loan: At times we pass loans and, Madam Speaker, through your leadership, this Parliament has passed many loans. However, using these loans to their designated priorities is a challenge. I would like the ministry to tell us when they will commence on this project for which they are requesting loans. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether there is a policy when we are partnering with these countries that give us loans; why do they attach a lot of conditions? At what level are we supposed to evaluate these conditions vis-à-vis our ability and economic situation. 

For example, the French loan for rural electrification was passed in 2013 but - I was in the rural electrification and the French were asking for so many things. They said they would like the money to be changed from US dollars - at what level do we analyse all these underlying issues that delay the projects from commencing. Shouldn’t the ministry deal with those conditions before they come to the Parliament to request for the passing of these loans? 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)


5.39
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): I would like to also support the motion but I have a few concerns to raise. 

The first is the issue of surveying for these electricity lines; before these lines are taken to an area, there must be a clear survey of where they are going to pass, and which villages and parishes are going to be reached. However, I do not see the concerned agencies doing this. It would be prudent that we get a copy of the surveys. If this project is coming to Budadiri East where I represent, where is the survey showing where these lines are going to pass.

Secondly, I would like to clarify on the issue of power theft in Bugisu region, particularly. We all condemn the act as leaders because the lines are illegally tapped and electricity is killing people; we cannot condone such acts. However, the concern is if the lines are being brought to a sub county and they end in a nearby trading centre, it is tempting for these villagers to hook and take the lines to their respective villages. 

Why don’t we ensure a complete job? Why would you take the lines and end just in a nearby trading centre, making people see light only at the neighbourhood? This tempts them to hook the lines dangerously using barbed wires –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the beginning I was told that there was something they were still consulting on item 4 but they are now reporting that they are also ready with it. Maybe we should receive that before the minister comes because they are all on the same sector.

5.42
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am an electrical/telecommunications professional engineer registered with the Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers. I would like to applaud the committee for the rich report they have presented and I am in total support of the motion. 

I would also like to thank the implementing agency, which is the Rural Electrification Agency, for the professional work done at least for the projects in my constituency. 

Madam Speaker, I say they are professional because we might never have an incident where we are using hooks to tap electricity because they have become innovative and installed insulated cables, which even reduce the risk for people getting shocked by power. 

In Kibale County, there is a problem on the regulation side. The people who regulate – the service territory managers - need to do us a favour to harmonise connection fees. Madam Speaker, I have two projects which were completed in two neighbouring parishes in my constituency but the connection fees are exorbitantly different. One service manager is charging Shs 130,000 to get connected whereas in the neighbouring parish, the other service manager is charging Shs 600,000. I have a scenario where one parish has actually rejected the project and for over one year, no single person has been connected to power.

I was planning to ask this question during the Prime Minister’s Question Time but I think it is high time the regulator came out to regulate and harmonise the connection fees. Otherwise, it is a very bad experience. I have no explanation to give to the two neighbouring parishes. They actually look at me as a traitor because maybe I favoured one parish to be connected at a lower cost than the other. This is where I need to be helped and advised.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I was the last person to speak but I have used less than one minute.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, let me invite the vice-chairperson of the committee, hon. Bategeka, to present the second report quickly.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 71 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO US$100 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE GRID EXPANSION AND REINFORCEMENT PROJECT

5.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, members of the Committee on the National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 71 million, equivalent to $100 million from the International Development Association (IDA) to finance the grid expansion and reinforcement project in accordance with Rule 166(2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 14 September 2016 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report. In the interest of time, I will skip some areas since the report is uploaded. 

Project objectives

The project development objective is to increase availability and efficiency of bulk electricity supply in the project areas and this is particularly in northern Uganda - Gulu, Nebbi and Arua districts. Madam Speaker, this will be the first grid expansion to northern Uganda. It will help in the evacuation of power from the new generation sites such as Karuma and Isimba hydropower stations. We are talking about transmission.

Project beneficiaries

The project beneficiaries are the current and future electricity consumers in the project areas of Gulu, Nebbi and Arua districts. Approximately, 1.6 million people will benefit from the increased availability of electricity supply. The proposed project will benefit existing grid-connected consumers including residential, commercial and industrial consumers by meeting their suppressed demand and improving efficiency.

Project components

Madam Speaker, I will briefly talk about the components because the committee made some adjustments. Basically, the project has three components:
    a) Construction of transmission infrastructure, valued at $80 million. These include the wires, substation works, engineering construction supervision and implementation.
    b) Project implementation and operational support –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I suggest that since we have been discussing the first loan, it would be prudent to pass the first one and then go for this one.

THE SPEAKER: My intention is that the minister should speak to both of them before we take a vote. Please, present the report.

MR BATEGEKA: Component (b) is project implementation and operational support, which includes a project implementation unit under the rubric of capacity assessment and project implementation support as well as modernisation of Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd (UETCL) system and biodiversity offset. The two components shall support UETCL.

    c) Sectoral strengthening for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. It has three sub-components: coordination and supervision of social safeguards, sector skill assessment and sector skill strengthening.

I have highlighted these issues because we discussed them in-depth at the committee level.

Observations and recommendations

Mismatch between electricity generation, transmission and distribution

The committee observed that the Government has prioritised the implementation of electricity generation projects in the country by both public and private actors. However, implementation of generation and transmission projects has not been able to move at the same pace to ensure that all the power generated by both the public and private actors is fully evacuated and connected onto the national grid. 

For example, findings from the committee’s visit to the Bujagali hydropower plant in Jinja revealed that the plant had an installed generation capacity of 250MW, but actual power generation was still below 60 per cent.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should ensure that for the new and upcoming power generation projects, plans for evacuating power from these plants be prepared well in advance and implemented in time to ensure that the built power plants are fully utilised. This will save the country from incurring losses as a result of paying for power that is generated by these plants, but not consumed.

Low disbursement rates among UETCL debt-financed projects

The committee noted the low average disbursement, which stands at 30 per cent of UETCL loans against original project lifetimes as at 31 March 2016. The low disbursement rates are attributed to poor project preparedness of UETCL, especially through lack of sites for contractors to start the works, delays in Government counterpart funds and delays in compensations of projects-affected persons among others.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that all proposed electricity projects presented before Cabinet should be scrutinised to ensure that preparatory stages such as feasibility studies and compensation of project-affected persons have been carried out before they are further submitted to Parliament for approval.

Inadequate Government counterpart funding

The committee noted that the majority of debt-financed projects require Government counterpart funding for payment of taxes and compensations of project-affected persons. The committee recommends that Government makes a firm commitment to provide counterpart funding for all debt-financed projects and have it ring-fenced. All future debt-financed projects whose counterpart funding is not provided in the beneficiary sector budget should not be submitted to Parliament for approval.

Fulfilment of loan conditions

The committee observed that Government has been slow in fulfilling loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger disbursements of committed funds for the implementation of debt-financed projects.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure speedy fulfillment of loan conditions of the financing agreements in order for the committed funds to be released promptly to guarantee the timely implementation of this project.
 
Wayleaves compensation 
The committee noted that the financial requirement for wayleaves compensation continued to escalate as new projects get on board. 

The committee recommends as follows:
    i) That UETCL completes the way-leaves acquisition process before engagement of the contractors. This will minimise redundancy on the equipment at site and possible interest charges on the idle equipment.
    ii) That Government considers acquiring a central corridor for infrastructure projects to reduce on repeated compensation whenever infrastructure projects are implemented, to accommodate among others, power lines, water pipes, communication infrastructure and road reserve. 
    iii) That as a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should enhance the capacity of its valuation department, which is now too thinly manned.
    iv) That Government should consider setting up a land Ombudsman to arbitrate in cases where there are disagreements relating to land evaluations.

Development of Feasibility Studies on Energy Projects
The committee observed that there is low development of feasibility studies on energy projects, particularly in the generation and transmission segments. While some progress has been registered on mini-hydro power stations, large projects have hitherto taken too long in the development phase.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) accelerates the development of feasibility study reports and catalog of all projects in the energy/power sector in the generation and transmission segments in order to make them ready for investment and in order to attract long-term financing in the energy sector. Government should further utilise domestic resources to finance feasibility studies on infrastructure projects instead of using loan financing. 

Dependency on external consultants 
The committee recommends  that UETCL  scales up  plans for building the capacity  of its  staff especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing  electricity transmission projects in order to cut down on the exorbitant amounts of projects funded and funds spent on consultancy services towards conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission projects.

Capacity Building 
The committee recommends that Government should set up a dedicated institution, which will constantly address the capacity constraints within the power sector for the project. Government should ensure that the power sector staff who will benefit from the capacity building components of this project are bonded.

Regarding slow implementation of energy projects, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, together with UETCL, prioritises the interconnection of the country’s electricity grid with that of the neighbours in the region by expediting the implementation of the interconnection of electric grids of the five Nile Equatorial Lake Countries Project, as this will increase on the supply and demand of electricity in the country.

Regarding delays in the payment of project-affected persons, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should transparently ensure that UETCL scales up the processing of such payments to ensure that the transmission corridor is handed over to the contractors in time. Once the acquisition is finalised, UETCL should further expedite the process of registering the acquired rights and secure the corridor in order to guard it against future encroachment, abuse and losses.

Regarding the refusal to grant right of way to transmission project lines by the project affected persons, the committee recommends that UETCL ensures that it utilises its communication strategy in order to provide adequate and timely information to the project affected persons on issues such as health and impacts of high voltage transmission lines so that such persons observe the 30-metre way-leave. UETCL should further ensure that any grievances arising from project affected persons are dealt with in a timely and adequate manner.

Regarding cost overruns, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, together with UETCL streamlines and shortens the time between the design and construction phases to minimise price fluctuations. 

Additionally, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should work closely with the procurement agency to reduce restrictions for contractors to increase competition and avoid possible ganging up for price fixing.

Regarding equitable distribution of electricity, the committee recommends that Government should consider prioritising the extension of grid power to island districts including the extension of a marine cable to Buvuma Islands as prioritised in the NDP II.

Madam Speaker, the committee finally recommends that the resources meant for UETCL capacity assessment, project implementation and training, sector skills assessment and sector strengthening programmes, totaling to US$7.3 million, should not be approved. 

In addition, the physical price contingency should be reduced from US$ 5.8 per cent to US$ 5 per cent of the total loans amount of US$ 87.2 million which is equivalent to US$4.36 million. Therefore, the total reduction including contingency is US$8.44 million from the US$100 million. Only resources for construction of the transmission line infrastructure, UETCL system modernisation, biodiversity off-set and coordination and supervision of social safeguards by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, amounting to US$91.56 million, including contingency funds should be provided for this project. In other words, the committee recommended a reduction of US$8.44 million from this loan. Of course there were many discussions on this matter with the beneficiaries and they still have issues.

Anyway, the committee recommends that  the request by Government to borrow SDR US$100 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the grid expansion and reinforcement projects be amended in view of the above recommendation to  US$ 91.56million and be approved subject to the above recommendation. I beg to report.

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to also say that because some issues were raised in the discussions, the committee developed guidelines and distributed these guidelines to all ministries, departments and agencies that the committee will need to approve loans. The requirements are many but I can mention are few of them - a comprehensive sector strategy plan, counterpart funding availability, a letter of commitment from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, infrastructure designs, and implementation status of ongoing aid funded projects among others. These have been distributed and are now standard requirements. So, some of the issues that have been raised in the discussion had been dealt with.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the report of the committee on this loan – grid expansion. I also beg to lay on the Table, documents that the committee considered including the signed minutes, the minister’s brief on the proposal, the project appraisal documents, the loan approval guide, status of implementation of transmission line and submission of projects and the energy sector development plan.

I beg to lay and thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the Members of the Committee on National Economy for that great work. I note that it has been signed by the necessary minimum number of Members.
	
Honourable members, the areas are basically the same and I think we have canvassed them. So, I will just allow three contributions by those who did not speak in the first one.

6.04
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing this elaborate report. I am here to support the loan request by Government to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project. 

Madam Speaker, we are also aware that the majority of our population in this country depend on very expensive energy options like kerosene and firewood, which have become so hazardous to their health. Therefore, with the approval of this loan request, I know it will go a long way to provide for the energy and power demands of our people in terms of doing business cheaply, increased productivity and also improving their livelihood.

Madam Speaker, I also totally agree with the recommendations of the committee, most especially on the equitable distribution of electricity. We have districts like Kotido that have not been prioritised at all by the Ministry of Energy. We are living in the third world; it is total darkness there. People have not seen electric power and do not know about it. When we come to Kampala, they ask, “Are you going to the light?” They mean where it is connected to electricity.

Therefore, with this expansion of the grid, I am sure Kotido will also have an opportunity to benefit because when power transmission reaches such areas, a lot will be done. It will be appreciated by the people.

Madam Speaker, I also urge Members to support this loan request because it will also go a long way to cover the remaining areas of this country to receive electricity and be able to do business that will also engage many of our young people to produce what will really take this country to the next level of development.

6.06
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the report that was presented by the committee today. However, allow me emphasize a few points, some of which have actually been stated. The first is the issue of cost. In my constituency Agago, there is an electricity line, but if you take count of how many people benefit from the electricity in Agago, you will really be disappointed. Therefore, we need to look at a way of bringing down costs so that our people can benefit from electricity. 

The other issue that was raised and which I cannot emphasize enough is the access of electricity by schools and hospitals among others. We have been approached and we should look at a multipronged approach to the problem we are facing today. 

We should also look at the solar issues - most of the schools and hospitals in our areas are using solar. If you are borrowing all this money on behalf of our people yet they cannot afford electricity, then we should be honest enough to look at other alternatives of accessing electricity. Otherwise, we have electricity lines passing through Agago, but most of the parts have no access to it.

Finally, is the danger – I think because of the problems of compensation, you find lines passing - imagine if there was any accident, what would happen to the rights of the innocent people? The planning issue as was stated also relates to the issue of compensation and needs to be looked at critically. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.09
MR LEE DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I would like to commend the committee for accepting the call for certain areas to be added to the national electricity grid through borrowing. It has been a long held aspiration of West Nile people that they must be on the national grid. Unfortunately, the President has always insisted that they do not have capacity. However, from the observations of the committee, it is now clear we need access to power and the power must be reliable.

Yesterday, I just returned from the constituency but while there I met the officials of WENRECO. They told me that Nyagak now generates about 3.5 megawatts and the load is 3.4. That means demand is growing each day. Therefore, with extension and addition to the national grid, we will certainly get the needed power. 

However, I have a few concerns I would like to raise. I have observed that Uganda does not have a national infrastructure master plan, which defines infrastructure corridors, priority infrastructures and areas that must be prioritised. The effect of this is that some areas have perennially remained poor while others progress.

In West Nile, a pole service costs more than it is here in Kampala. That is basically because the government has chosen to subsidise the people who use electricity in Kampala and made it very expensive for people who live in the rural areas. Therefore, how are we going to mainstream Goal 7 of the Sustainable Development Goals which says we must have affordable access to electricity if you choose to prioritise and make it cheap for people in certain areas to access power and very expensive for others to get power?

I, therefore, would like the committee to clearly look at such issues and put in their recommendations so that affordability of and access to electricity is a core component of design for this project so that we find it easy to approve them.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I wanted to hear from the committee whether given our level of indebtedness, they find it wise for the government to borrow. We have always had proclamation from the government that Uganda can now generate resources locally because our tax collection has increased. Have you explored local options that you now want us to continuously borrow? What would be the ratio of this debt to the GDP? I want to hear whether there is value for money because I didn’t hear in quantifiable terms what this will translate into if we invest in this project through borrowing? Thank you.

6.13
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the work well done. Yesterday, I tried to follow news on TV - there was an economic summit and at least there was a comment on power in African and particularly in Uganda.

Therefore, we still have a very big problem even when we want commercialize and industrialise agriculture, how do we industrialise without energy? When we talk about solar energy, I do not think we can have these small scale industries depending on solar energy. We need this hydroelectricity.
 
Yes, we have prioritised six districts in the second proposal. However, again the accessibility by the people is a problem. When I was still a local councilor, I happened to visit South Africa and we went to Soweto slum and we found temporary shelters. However, if you enter the houses, you find cookers, fridges and people are using electricity for everything.

However, here in Uganda, we need to do a little more for the poor community. Those who live in those slum areas are very poor but I think they were supported by their Government. How can we support our rural people better? When we take services to a district, we should not just follow the main roads.

Honourable minister, please tell those technical people to help us a little better because we are not being helped well. Right now, climate change is a reality. That is why we are even getting problems with our rainfall yet we do not have water for agriculture. Therefore, we are forever going to have problem and desertification is soon coming if we do not prioritise these and accessibility to electric power by the rural population.

You cannot just get seven per cent or less of the population accessing electricity and you claim that you have supplied electricity in this district. We need a lot more people to get -if there are people who will not be able to get, they should be few but we need more studies in that. The cost of electricity is just too much. I am a Member of Parliament but I use charcoal; for how long should we be using charcoal? At this point in time where we take electricity services, we need to do a little better. 

Honourable minister, let the technical people help us. We are not so technical but we would like to see our people do better. I would like to -(Member timed out.)

6.17
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to applaud the report of the committee for the excellent presentation. I have three points.

Firstly, I would like to thank the Government for bringing up this loan request for bridge extension especially in Northern Uganda, particularly my region in West Nile. The honourable member over there talked about Nyagak Bridge producing 3.3 megawatts. That is terribly inadequate. Right now the people are using this power for spreading their sleeping bags and mattresses, cooking not beans but lighting for discos and nothing serious like industrial development. 

Roofings (U) Ltd here uses 40 megawatts of power alone. How can a region of northern Uganda attract big industries when you have three or four megawatts? It is a joke. Therefore, I would like to applaud Government on this new power breed extension of 132 KVA to the region and other parts of Uganda. 

Secondly, I would like to applaud the idea of regional interbreed connections. In the case of Uganda, the region we should eye most is the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. Why, because when they wake up, they are going to develop the biggest capacity of hydro power generation in the whole world of more than 40,000 megawatts of power generation.

If we now extend our breed to those regions, by the time DRC will be ready, we shall be able to tap into that huge power and thereby reducing cost.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the issue of external consultants and using foreign consultants to undertake such major works; at the moment in this country, electricity generation is one of the major priority areas of expansion. However, we do not see commeasure development of capacity of our people to manage these huge enterprises. (Applause)

Therefore, I have been and I am still in and a great supporter of Government, let us prioritise skills development in the energy sector because it is one of our biggest development sector for which we need to manage ourselves. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Ninth Parliament, we had a very stormy debate on the cost of capacity building and we were assured by the Government that they needed that money to train our engineers. Therefore, I shall want to know, how many have they trained because we had refused and they said, “No, we would like to train”. We said if you are going to train and build capacity, okay. I shall want to know.

6.20
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There were two issues and I was trying to catch your eye on this. One is capacity building institutional support. In every project, they are putting capacity building, consultancy, and institutional support. Really that is not acceptable. The ministry must build its capacity so that we save on this.

The second area which we also queried strongly was the issue of contingency. You can see the chairperson of the committee mentioning a big disparity. In the first project, contingency was 15 per cent excluding compensation and this one, contingency is five per cent; there is no standard. We do not understand what is going on.

Why is it in a project? Government of Uganda puts contingency funding at 15 per cent and another one you put zero; on the donor you put 10 per cent and another you put five per cent? These are two areas, Madam Speaker, which I thought we should carry from what we agreed on in the Ninth Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the institutional memory.

6.21
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): I would like to say that the issue of rural electrification is good. However, when you go upcountry, there is serious load shedding. Power can be off for even two weeks and one may imagine that there is no electricity in that area. 
Therefore, as you think about the loan, you should also think about making power available. If power disappears for two weeks, do you expect yourself to be having electricity in such an area?

Secondly, is the issue of these transformers; people place small transformers in towns that cannot even operate the small industries that we have in the small districts around. Therefore, if this loan is to consider serious electrification, then there must be big transformers that can operate bigger industries other than the small ones that can work for a short time and it is no more.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the issue of compensation. The rural electrification passed in various people’s pieces of land and homes. They were others that they said like in my constituency that were promised Shs 200,000 but of course we have our brothers who are lawyers out there and who said, “No, the money they are paying you is very small. Come to me and I take these people to court.” Government was taken to court by some few people in Lira District. They were each paid some good money. However, the lawyers keep asking what we are still waiting for to institute cases.  The lawyers have asked people to register their names with them so that they can get a lot of money like Shs50 million instead of the Shs 200,000. So can we find a way of paying those people as we wait for the loan to mature? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The members who contributed to the other debate will not contribute to this one.

6.23
MS VERONICA BICHETERO ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan request. I would like to also thank the Committee on National Economy for a very comprehensive report presented.

My first point has already been made by the immediate past speaker on the availability and provision of electricity in the rural areas. Instead of load shedding and lack of provision – you have the power but it is like a white elephant.

We would like to ask the ministry concerned not to raise the ambitions of our people particularly in trading centres but they fail to work on the factories.

My other point goes to the engineers particularly in the ministry. In Eastern Uganda where Kaberamaido County is located, you find two lines but if one is connected to any of those lines - it is like we were given a fake deal. So, one is not supposed to -

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is just giving support for the arguments.

MS ISALA: This issue of two lines serving the same purpose – they just click one to deny you the other line. I had the same experience in Gulu where we had travelled with officials from the World Bank. We waited for electricity to do work for a very important project for Northern Uganda but there was no power. 

However, when we pressed harder, we were told that the power was coming from Jinja and diverting to Soroti. Later they said our line does not pass through Mbale and the Soroti line was dead. We do not want to contribute and support loans that do not have a meaningful effect on us. While I do support this loan request I hope that we get and borrow –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: I would like to thank the Member for giving way. The other information that I want to give is that most of our people have these power lines passing by their homes but they never benefit at all. I suggest that we have a policy that states that when an electricity pole passes through someone’s land, let the owner benefit from it – (Interjections) - it would be a good thing.

Secondly, most of our people in the villages have these poles at their homes but there is no connection. Let us have a deliberate effort to have these lines connected to those people who cannot afford – the poor of the poorest. This is the information I wanted to give you; the poor people are not connected. More information, granted. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Information to who again? He is not on the Floor. Please conclude, hon. Bichetero.  

MS ISALA: In conclusion, I would like to thank the Member for the information. Mine is an honest and holistic appeal that when we borrow this money in the name of our people, let us give them the service they deserve. Thank you.

6.28
MR KENNETH SOYEKWO (Independent, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): I support the committee’s request that we borrow this money.

However, Government injects a lot of money in these projects which is borrowed with interest. My challenge here is that while there are people who run these projects, there are those like WENRECO and Yaka who just collect money. Who are WENRECO and Yaka? These are the people in charge of collecting the tariffs but where does the money go and how does Government benefit from this? How sure are we that there is no corruption in between, and how do we benefit from it at the end of the day?

Madam Speaker, I beg to request the House to thoroughly investigate how Yaka is working in Uganda. Why can’t the regulatory authorities help collect this revenue for the Government? 

We could adopt the method URA uses to collect taxes and the money goes to a pool. Other examples of agencies that collect money that goes to the pool are lands ministry and immigration. If we adopted their criteria, it would help us receive all this money to benefit our people rather than having an investor whose working ways we do not know. These investors repatriate these monies back to their countries yet we are here fighting for a loan to finance a project, which at the end is not going to benefit the country. We need to think about this to get to know how our people can benefit from it. I thank you.

6.30 
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you. I am sure these loans are being borrowed in the best interests of this country and I thank the committee for a good job done in scrutinising it.

Looking at the first loans meant for rural electrification in those six districts – in the second loan, the element is to step up the grid to increase on the efficiency and transmission of electricity.

What I don’t see is that – okay, there are many assumptions that rural electrification is already in those areas. The truth of the matter is that is not the case. So, I wonder how the local people in whose interest this loan is being borrowed - this electricity line will just pass as people look at it. Therefore, we should also take into consideration that fact that rural electrification is increased in those areas so that the people benefit.

It is also indicated that this is being done in preparation once Karuma and Isimba dams are completed - we need to know that Karuma Dam could be completed in about three or four years from now. So why now yet while we wait for that interest will be accruing on some of these loans and at the end of it, Government would have accumulated a lot of debt? Thank you.

6.30
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion to borrow funds for rural electrification and also for the grid extension. 

However, I have some questions to ask. Bbaale County, which I represent - I think only about three per cent of that constituency, has electricity. The rest of the rural areas have no power. So I am asking, when this loan is approved, when will Bbaale get power? 

Secondly, I want to know, if these loans are approved like we are about to do, how much of this country will be covered by electricity using this loan? Thank you. 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Members for their brilliant contributions and support to these loans. It is commonly said that if there is no power, an area cannot develop. Therefore, it is prudent that we give support to these essential loans for energy development in the country. 

Members have been talking about high tariffs. Indeed, this pains but Government is working very hard to try to remodel the financing of already existing projects like Bujagali and introduce other energy mixes like the hydropower stations at Karuma, Isimba and smaller ones spread across the country. All these efforts are aimed at bringing the tariffs down so that we can become genuinely competitive with our neighbours. 

On the industrial parks, of course they are the first targets for power. So where they do not exist, power will be connected. 

Madam Speaker, compensation has become a very touchy issue. The law says we must compensate adequately, fairly and on time. However, we must be guided by some laws in order to compute the values. Therefore, we use the Government Valuer to achieve this.

However, in some circumstances, people just refuse and say: “I want you to pay me whatever I demand.” So, who is to guide Government payments? There must be an institution – one person may accept but the next one refuses. There must be a way to handle such people so that the country can develop - otherwise, somebody may simply be adamant and say: “I am not taking that money.” 

For Karamoja, when we took power to them - they were disturbing us asking for power. When the power got there – we told them the power is there but that if they prevented its coming, it would delay. However, there were colleagues who said we must do this or that before putting poles in their gardens, we had to pay, which was not good. So we must talk to our people about this. My colleague was complaining about the same and I told him that we must also take responsibility. 

On the slow supply of pre-paid meters, we shall talk to UMEME to supply them. The overall aim of power – you see, we aim at district headquarters, health centres, schools and any income generating schemes like factories. So where power has not reached and there are distribution lines, we shall endeavour to connect those places. 

In order to reduce the tariffs in Arua, we shall need to get this loan because we are going to connect Arua to the main grid so that instead of the 3.5 megawatts, we shall be getting power direct from that grid and this will benefit from the low costs, which come along with being on the main grid. 

Some members asked why Government is not doing connections – if there is a power line passing but you do not get connected for a number of months - there is a scheme to help connect you to the power so long as you have already put conduits in your house. We do not provide for the inside works; we only bring the pole near so that everybody gets power. 

Some said that power is going through swamps but where else should it pass to get to the other side? It must pass through the swamps and there is nothing we can do about that. I am sure my friend just wanted me to laugh. 

The other issue was about poles falling and rotting. The plan in the new lines is to get concrete poles. They are expensive, but in the long run, they tend to be cheaper because instead of these poles that break during every rainy season, the concrete ones last 15 or 20 years. 

I want to appeal to you honourable members about the second loan. This second loan, which we are asking for –(Interjections)– this one going to Arua and Northern Uganda - we discussed seriously about how we can implement this plan in the wake of so many loans, which have not been utilised. 

So that is why we are talking about the unit specifics to the project; we get officers on contract and their job will be to make sure the project is implemented on time. That is why we also talk about capacity building. We shall train our own people so that when the expatriates leave or when the project is over, we shall be able to continue with our own work. 

These loans were well thought out and I appeal to the honourable members and the committee to accept them the way we formulated them. Otherwise we shall not be able to implement them. We have got so many loans, which we need to implement and we are over stretched. So for this one, allow us to get these people on the ground so that we do not simply talk about low absorption and so on. 

I appeal to you - if you did not exploit that issue yourselves, please accept it the way we have requested for it for the good of our people. I know some people are saying that when power comes to an area, infrastructure measures also come but what shall we benefit? First of all, if you are to develop, you have to handle social capital overheads, which can trigger the development of other sectors. That is exactly what we are doing in order to develop our country. 

Therefore, I request the honourable members to approve this loan without any amendments of any form because it will not move on its own. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, thank you very much honourable minister. Honourable members, I put the question on the first loan that this House do approve the loan request in respect of the 33 KV and 11 KV Distribution Project in six districts of Uganda namely; Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in respect to the second one, the committee recommended that we reduce it by $8.44 million. So I put the question that this House do approve the – let me state the figure in the report. It became 91 – this is Kiryandongo. No, we do not do that - our committee has discussed and that is their recommendation. 

Honourable members, the question is that this House do approve the recommendation of the committee that the sum be reduced to $91.56 million as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, thank you very much for the work. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2:00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 December 2016, at 2.00 p.m.)
