Wednesday, 21 December 2005

Parliament met at 10.47 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you and to remind you again of the tight programme we have to handle before the end of the year and before elections. I appeal to you to be diligent and to advise our other friends to come in big numbers so that we can transact the business we have.

Honourable members, yesterday I had indicated that I was thinking of adjourning sometime this week to enable you to go for Christmas and then come back in the second week of January. However, after second thoughts I thought we might have to adjust this again because I realize that the second week of January is the period during which we have to get nominated. 

My thinking is that we transact business up to tomorrow or today as the case may be and then adjourn for Christmas. Thereafter we will come back next week on Tuesday for two or three days after which we will adjourn and have a normal recess so that you start your campaigns and any other activities for the whole January until elections on the 22nd or 23rd of February. You will then come back in March. 

I think this is better than interrupting your January holiday. Let us just come for two or three days and clear this urgent business. Among the business we have is that of the district of Budaka, the pension bill and others. Isn’t that a better alternative to calling you back in the second week of January? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether the adjournment of either today or tomorrow will mean the beginning of the Christmas recess.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it will be a Christmas recess, though very brief. The recess will be interrupted for two or three days. Normally the Christmas recess used to start early towards Christmas until February but this time you will have January and almost the whole of February. I think it is better that way; it will just be interrupted briefly.  You do not believe it is a Christmas recess? How long must a Christmas recess be?

MR KATUNTU: Well, Mr Speaker, I do not know but I was wondering whether it would be the ordinary recess with everything that goes with it. Will we retire to our villages until we are summoned formerly to come back? That is what I was thinking about.

THE SPEAKER: It is because of the nature of business we have to handle otherwise, I would have said that you can go for Christmas recess this week and come back sometime in the beginning of February. But having realized that you have activities yet there is also some work, which has to be done before the end of the year, I thought it is better if you go for a few days and come back on Tuesday, Wednesday and maybe Thursday and then go for that period.

10.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, since the nominations are in the second week of January, I would propose that we come back in the first week of January instead of interrupting the Christmas holiday next week. This is because I am afraid we may not have numbers early next week.

THE SPEAKER: That is a view.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the Parliamentary procedure which I normally follow, I am afraid I never consulted you on this matter that is of public importance. It is about an epidemic in Wakiso District.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us first agree on this. 

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following my honourable colleague the deputy Attorney General’s suggestion that we come back next week, we have a little problem regarding some of our colleagues. I wonder if the message has been driven home on the consequences of failure to accomplish certain legislative programmes. I do not think the message has reached home especially concerning matters pertaining to the issue we are debating now. 

If we do not realize a quorum between now and a certain period, I am afraid we will run into a serious constitutional and political problem. I do not know if that message is really getting home to some of our colleagues. I have heard some of our colleagues say that they are demoralized and half-hearted because they did not get nominated or because they did not get to go beyond the primaries. Can the government side help us to drive this message home about the enormity of the consequences of failure to pass this particular legislation?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, can we draw up a programme giving priority to certain items that must be cleared before a certain date? I am glad you have mentioned the issue of the new districts. How are we going to handle their budgetary situation unless we clear them now?

I request the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business who regularly liases with the headquarters of the NRM-O to call upon their members who went beyond the primaries and who are still with us and looking forward to coming back, to come and clear this matter.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, maybe I have to explain. Reacting to what hon. Mwesige has said, if you carried this matter to the first week of January suppose we are not ready to decide today on the current motion that is before us and which is a very important motion since it concerns our colleagues here representing these groups? That is why I think if we cannot do it this week, we should do it next week so that the Electoral Commission is in position to give guidelines to those people intending to represent those groups. That is why I think we should finish this issue this year rather than next year.

MR KAWANGA: Well, Mr Speaker, all this will depend on the equipping capabilities of the government or is it the Chief Whip, whatever is called, to be able to mobilise –((Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To correct you a bit before you proceed, in this Parliament under the Movement system we do not have a Chief Whip. (Applause) 

MR KAWANGA: Okay, I think there is a replacement by way of somebody who is chairman of the caucus. The chairman of the caucus or Leader of Government Business has been doing it very well in the past and I hope he can do it again. The question is if we can get assurance from the Leader of Government Business about whether we can get Members here. It would be futile to come next week if we simply cannot raise the numbers. I would like to hear from the Leader of Government Business on this issue then it would enable us to plan accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, do you want to respond?

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, as a beneficiary of this motion, I feel very sad that this is the way things are working out but I blame the Attorney General. He knew that at the end of the ten years this motion would have to come to this House. This motion should have come immediately after the expiry of ten years when people were still up and about. 

I have learnt of colleagues who have no intention of coming to Kampala until after the elections. Whatever the Rt hon. Prime Minister would do, these guys are out there to defend themselves. Furthermore, many people feel terribly threatened to sit in this House when their competitors are moving from house to house. 

I am afraid that we may not be able to realise the numbers in time for us to take this decision so that we who are the beneficiaries of this particular motion can actually participate in the elections, which are coming. I am really very saddened and I put the blame squarely on the head of the Attorney General for his failure to make this thing happen in good time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us be positive. We have not reached that stage of failure. The issue that is being debated is whether we should come next week or come back next year. Let us try to see and make an assessment but we have to come back next week if we do not make that decision today. Therefore, there is time between now and next week for you to mobilise your friends to come and make a decision. I would not like to take it to January because it may complicate the work of the Electoral Commission. We have to tell them what has happened so that they know and can give guidelines.  

11.00
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I do not think it is fair to blame the Attorney General because the agenda has been extremely large, if I may use that expression. We had to amend the Constitution and we have handled many other intricate issues; so I do not think it is fair to blame an individual. 

In fact, you should blame the government as a whole not just the minister. If you are to blame someone I will also blame myself not the Attorney General. That is really the first point I would like to make.

The second point I would like to make is that, it is unwise to make pledges here and say that this will happen. I can only appeal to all of you to turn up so that we transact business. Hon. Awori specialises in blaming the front bench yet even the back benchers –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Hansard record would back me concerning when this matter came up the first time on the 14th October. I brought it to the attention of the Speaker, the Leader of Government Business and the Attorney General that the period referred to in that Article of the Constitution had expired the previous Saturday. I was being very courteous to the government to remind them of a constitutional obligation that they should have attended to. 

However, instead of appreciating the kind information it looks like the Rt hon. Prime Minister thinks I am nagging him. Is he in order to imply that when he is given information in a most courteous format I am nagging, harassing and attacking the government? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, Members of Parliament have a mandate to provide oversight for the government. The implication of what the Prime Minister has said is that you are religiously carrying out the oversight role.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I wish you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is a consensus. When we adjourn today or tomorrow we shall adjourn to Tuesday next week for you to come for two or three days and then we go.  

Concerning the Order Paper, honourable members, we have to make a slight adjustment because there is a statement by the Minister of Works, Engineer Nasasira and another by hon. Mwesige on the new districts, which he had promised to make.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Mr Speaker, I am not being an alarmist and I am sorry I rushed a bit before we finished deliberating on the first issue. I am also sorry I never consulted you as per parliamentary procedure but my issue is one of life and death. There is a new epidemic in Wakiso District in form of a new eye disease called lowa-lowa or the African Eye worm. It attacks the conjunctiva of the eye; this is the area on top of the cornea, which is the transparent part of the eye. 

It is now a problem in Wakiso and I already have so many causalities at Mulago Hospital. I am raising this so that my colleagues here can know that if it is not handled very effectively and expeditiously, it will extend to other districts.

DR STEVEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, lowa-lowa is a worm disease and this particular worm is similar to the one, which causes swelling of the legs called elephantiasis. This worm instead of living in the lymphatic blood vessels lives under the skin and can cause very painful swelling of the skin. A fly called deer fly transmits it and this fly usually lives in places where there is rotting rubbish. 

It causes blindness because the worm wriggles its way under the skin and gets under the conjunctiva, which is the membrane covering the top of the eye and it can actually be seen there. It causes a reaction and can cause blindness. It is common in Western Africa and here it has been reported in West Nile but it might now be in Wakiso.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you very much, for the information. Mr Speaker, you may recall that I had to stoop in this Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sitenda Sebalu, I think your role was to just report that there is a problem and that you want government to handle it. The minister is here; let us hear what he is saying.

11.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen (Rtd.)) Jim Muhwezi: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for bringing this serious problem to the attention of government, and we are going to take appropriate action expeditiously. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
11.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have to present this paper to the Minister of Public Service and at the moment there is nothing I can do as he is not here. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean the Minister of Public Service or the Minister of Finance?  

PROF. SEMAKULA: Sir, this is a paper which concerns the pensions of members and the role of the Ministry of Finance was to provide the certificate of clearance. This has been presented to the Clerk and the Minister of Public Service.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we cannot hear the minister.

THE SPEAKER: He is saying that there is a document, which had to be presented to the Minister of Public Service who is not here. However, as a Minister of Finance, he has already communicated with the Clerk to Parliament and at an appropriate time we shall get necessary papers with the other documents.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS, (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr speaker. This is a statement we undertook to present to Parliament to clear the legal issues surrounding the election of women representatives and district local government councils in the districts that this Parliament created and that will take effect in July 2006.  

Mr Speaker, colleagues will recall that on the 20 July 2005 Parliament passed a resolution creating new districts. The said districts were in two categories; that is 13 districts, which took effect from 1 July 2005 and seven districts which are expected to take effect on 1 July 2006. At the moment the country has 69 districts, which are fully established and operational. The Electoral Commission is accordingly arranging for nominations and elections of district women representatives and district councils in these 69 districts.  

The other seven districts will remain on hold and exist only after the 1st of July 2006. The said districts do not have the political and administrative structures yet to make them operational. It is the view of my ministry that the Electoral Commission cannot hold elections in the above circumstances; that is in districts, which do not exist in practical terms

In view of the above facts, we advise the following as the way forward:
1.	That the Electoral Commission will hold Parliamentary and district local council elections between the 12th February and 12th March in 69 districts only.
2.	Elections for district women representatives and district councils in the remaining seven districts which take effect on 1 July 2006, will be held soon thereafter at a date to be fixed by the Electoral Commission. 

Immediately after the 1st of July 2006 and before the Electoral Commission holds elections in those districts, the said districts will be governed by interim district administrations as provided for in the Local Government Act.  

The districts that fall in this category are the districts of Oyam, Abim, Busiki, Dokolo, Bulisa and two other districts whose names are yet to be agreed on. 

This statement, Mr Speaker, is a result of wide consultations between my ministry, the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Local Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Will this also be the same position concerning mayors of the municipalities we created under the (No.2) Bill?

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Under what law will the Electoral Commission conduct these elections after the general elections?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, as you know, under Article 78 each district should have a woman member of Parliament. As soon as a district is created by Parliament and the effective date is fixed by Parliament, the Electoral Commission is enjoined to hold elections for a woman representative under the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act.

THE SPEAKER: What type of elections will they be since the Electoral Commission conducts general elections and by-elections?

MR MWESIGE: Well, in my view this will be a direct election and not be a by-election because this is not one of the circumstances under which a by-election takes place. As soon as a district is created that district must have a woman MP under the Constitution. Since there are seven districts, the Electoral Commission will hold elections in respect of those seven districts. 

Concerning district councils, as soon as a district is created there is always a provision for an interim district administration after which the Electoral Commission conducts general elections in those new districts.

This is different from constituencies created under Article 63 of the Constitution because when a constituency is created before a general election or after a general election, elections in that constituency take effect in the next general election. So, the case here is distinguishable from elections of directly elected MPs.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about the district of Budaka. Budaka was created on the 1st of July this year, but up to now the boundaries have not been defined. That is what we are trying to do and we had protested during the primary elections that since Budaka was already created and money had been submitted for running that district, it should have had its own primary elections. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister, is Budaka going to hold its own elections this year or next year?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, perhaps the Minister of Local Government will give a better clarification. But as far as I know, Budaka is not yet a district because its creation was deferred pending the resolution of conflicts within Pallisa itself. However, the Minister of Local Government is in a better position to answer that.

11.16
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you know, the Committee of this House in charge of Local Government and Public Service was mandated to carry out investigations and report to this House on its recommendations. I understand the committee has done its work but this House has not discussed its report so the matter still remains in that state.

11.17
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Mr Speaker, thank you and I thank the minister for the statement. I realise that at the end you say that other districts still have to have their names agreed upon. I want to ask you honourable minister that when you created Manafa District you said the name and the place would be agreed upon and yet you have conducted elections in that district. Why did you make such a difference in the case of Manafa District? Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I want it to be on record that hon. Kabwegyere, as the Minister of Local Government, does not carry out elections in any district. The honourable member is totally out of order to say that I carried out elections in Manafa District.  

Secondly, the issue of Manafa has again been subjected to the committee’s investigations and the leadership in the district have yet to agree on the name and the headquarters of the district. The honourable member who has raised this point is part and parcel of the leadership that I hope have been trying to get this matter sorted out. However, I understand that the committee of this House has made some recommendations, which are contained in their report. As we talk, similarly like the other point I made, this report is not yet a property of this House and therefore I cannot comment beyond that.

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, my concern is to the minister and deputy Attorney General. He is the one who issued this statement and I expected him to make clear clarifications on why elections were conducted in some un-agreed upon districts yet others according to his statement have been deferred. I wanted the Attorney General to explain that distinct difference.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the statement by the minister came as a result of a question that was put in this House in respect of districts that will come into being in July next year. You are indicating that in your district elections have already been held or preparations are going on but that is not a subject of this statement. It is a different question.

11.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Omwony Ojwok): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I only wish to make a correction on one of the names of the new districts as indicated in the statement by the minister. I have consulted with the minister and he took the name “Abin” from the resolution that was supposedly passed. This must have been a typographical error because the official name is “Abim”. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, it is noted. I think that ends the debate on the statement. Can we have the next statement by the honourable minister of Works?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, 13 December 2005, during the general debate in Parliament, hon. Mwandha raised concern about the stalled works on Jinja-Bugiri road. Hon. Mwandha was concerned that I had assured the House that following the termination of the contract, a new contractor would be hired and an emergency contractor immediately engaged to keep the road passable yet no action on both pledges had been affected.  

Mr Speaker, you accordingly requested government that Parliament be informed of the plans for this road. I am happy to stand here today to inform Parliament of the actions taken by government so far and the plans, which have been agreed with European Union to complete this project.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members will recall that following the termination of the contract on 25 February 2005, after the contractor Basil Reed Bouygues TP JV had abandoned the site for two months, I made a statement in this House on 3 March 2005 and informed Parliament of what had happened and what government was planning to do. 

I made another statement to Parliament on the 11 May 2005, and informed Parliament on the progress of engaging an emergency contractor for urgent works to keep the road passable and the process of procuring another contractor to complete the works that were abandoned by the previous contractor.

We had originally assumed with the concurrence of our development partners, the European Union, that a new contractor could be engaged on a “Fast Track” procurement process between June 2005 and September 2005. Our assumption was based on the understanding that the sub-contractors who were on site, those are the sub-contractors who were working with the other contractor that we terminated would reach an agreement to work with the selected main contractor so that the project keeps a “continuous status”. In other words, if we got that contractor with other sub-contractors it would in procurement look as if it was a continuous project rather than us procuring again.

In my statement of 11 May 2005, I did not tell this House a lie as was charged last week. Since my statement the following actions have been taken:

First, concerning what have we done with the emergency works, by the end of May 2005, M/s H & Young and Company (E.A) were engaged to carry out emergency works worth Shs 1.2 billion. Those who use this road will recall that the road was almost impassable because of the condition it had been abandoned in. There were ditches left open, uncompleted culvert work, major potholes and sections of the swamps were almost impassable.  Emergency Works dealt with these problems; ditches were filled; culverts were installed. Many sections that were almost impassable were reconstructed and tarmacked. Gravel diversions were also graded.  

Mr Speaker, on 26 September 2005, I invited Members of the Sessional Committee on Works, Housing and Communications, together with honourable members of Parliament, whose constituencies the project road traverses to join me to inspect the emergency works. We first held a meeting at Jinja with district leaders from Jinja, Iganga, Mayuge and Bugiri and we all inspected works and held and addressed many rallies along the project road.

I explained what government was doing as emergency work and the future of the projects.  The emergency work improved the condition of the road, especially from Iganga to Bugiri, a distance of 40 kilometres, which is now in a reasonable satisfactory condition.

Fresh potholes, however, have developed due to the aged road.  This road is too old!  New potholes are created every day, mainly 30 kilometres between Jinja and Bulange and 25 kilometres between Kakira and Bulange. 

To repair this section, an emergency work along the project road, my ministry with the support of the European Union has budgeted Shs 614 million as emergency maintenance due to the delay in the procurement in the main contractor as I will explain below. This work will start in January 2006.

Let me now say something about the procurement of a new contractor. This procurement has not been possible as earlier envisaged in my statement of 11 May 2005. I would like honourable members to appreciate that the funds for this project are a form of a grant from the European Union. The procurement process is a four-stage work: first, my ministry, then the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a national authorising office as per policies of European Union, then the European Union delegation in Kampala and finally the E.U headquarters in Brussels. Both Uganda Government and European Union procurement procedures have to be followed.  

The procurement process has been further complicated by the legal technicalities raised by the contractor who was terminated, resulting in the delay of the Fast Track procurement of the new contractor.  

The earlier intention of engaging the sub-contractors who were on the project, together with the main contractor from those who had tendered could not be concluded to the best interests of government and was finally abandoned in September 2005, when the sub-contractors would not conclude a reasonable agreement with the main contractors. In other words, we could not fit it as a project that was continuing.

Government with the concurrence of European Union was left with no option except to start the process of shortlisting the contractors based on the original tender of June 2003, as the quickest way of getting new contractors. In other words, when we did not bring the main contractor to work with the sub-contractors and, therefore, treat it as a continuous process, there was need to treat this as a new procurement.  The quickest way we could do it was to call back the contractors who had tendered when the other contractor whom we terminated had won the contract, to see whether they were interested and that we thought was the quickest way.  

This exercise was completed and finally approved by Brussels on 1 December 2005. This was a result of the Uganda Government negotiations with European Union in Brussels on 22 November 2005. On the same day, Brussels approved this way of tender. Tender documents were issued to the following short listed contractors:
1.	Reynolds Construction Company and Soltra, as a joint venture.
2.	Grenica and LTA
3.	Struberg International and Sogea Satel.

In accordance with European Union procurement guidelines, the bidders are given 70 days. Bids will therefore be submitted on the 10 February 2006. Tender evaluation is expected to be completed early March 2006, and the contract awarded as soon as the European Union has approved it.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to allay the fears of hon. Mwandha on the health of those living along the road, that there were no dangerous chemicals that were used. In his earlier statement, he was worried that there were dangerous chemicals used on the road and people were breathing them, which might lead to death. However, there were no dangerous chemicals used on the road and the health of those who are living along the road is not in danger.  Save for the dust nuisance in about 15 per cent of the length of the road where there is no tarmac.  The project road is 73 kilometres, but the place where there is no tarmac and there is dust is only about 15 kilometres. 

As honourable members are aware, 80 per cent of our roads are murram and yet heavy vehicles use these very roads throughout the country. We have not had deaths necessarily because of this dust.  Therefore, the only nuisance that we have on that road is dust. No body would want the dust but it is there for the time being.

Mr Speaker, I wish finally to apologise to all those we have inconvenienced by the delay of this project and ask for their patience. Government is cautious of this problem and is doing everything within its means together with the development partner, European Union, to solve it. I thank honourable members, for their attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

11.32
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Works for this statement. What I understood from the statement was that while he expected the new main contractor to start work on the road by August, this was not possible because of technicalities and one of the technicalities are the legal wrangles which arose out of the abscondment of the previous contractor. I would have thought that the minister would have come back to the House since May to let us know what actually was happening. For instance, why having promised us that by August something would be happening, that up to this time nothing was actually happening.   

Mr Speaker, I can see that the minister is assuring the people who live along that road, especially from Jinja through Butembe County, Bunya County and part of Luuka County, and Kigulu County. These people have no kind words for the minister and I think it is also a big problem for colleagues who are representing these people along that road to explain why they should continue breathing in all this dust day after day. Why shouldn’t they be clean because there is no way you can have a shirt worn from the beginning of the day up to the end of the day and wear it again the following day.  There is no way you can have your washing hanging in your compound, by the end of the day you will have that shirt totally dirty because of the immense dust!

And that dust, I have been told, goes on to about 15 kilometres from that road, and although the minister says there are no dangerous chemicals, I think by breathing in all this dust people are going to have chest complications. You cannot simply say that there is no danger because this contractor had put limestone on parts of this road where a lot of dust and some other chemicals are being generated. I am not sure if the minister is sure that these will not affect the people who breath in all this dust day after day for months.

Mr Speaker, I expected that the emergency measures the minister was going to put in place would include the reduction of dust in that particular part of the road. However, when you go along that road, there is nothing like emergency work that has really alleviated the problem of the dust, which is emitted day after day. You remember, Mr Speaker, when we were in Bugembe Cathedral, the kind of comments one of the masters of ceremonies at the funeral of Inhebantu said. He told people, “Look, when you leave church, turn left, you will get to a road; it used to have tarmac. It is now a murram road.  When you reach Iganga, turn left. You will find a murram road from Iganga to Kaliro.” This really showed the disgust many people in this area have about the way government has taken so long to make this road usable. 

In my statement the other day, I mentioned how important this road is to the economic life of Uganda. You are getting accidents of trailers carrying goods to Uganda and I hear even insurance companies are beginning to put a little premium over and above because of the condition of the road from Jinja to Bugiri. Therefore, this is not a light matter. However, I am glad that the process is now on. Contractors are being recruited and I hope that sooner than later we shall have work going on, on this road.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.40
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank the minister for the statement.  He has mentioned dust as the only nuisance on the road. However, anybody who has been on that road lately must have noted another very serious nuisance and that is the fact that because the road is so badly potholed, people drive on all sides of the road. In an attempt to avoid potholes, trailers just crisscross in a very dangerous manner. The dust itself reduces vision on the road. 

It also appears that the government has done nothing to control traffic on the road. Sometimes you find broken down trucks right in the middle of the road, amidst dust, which causes other accidents. In other aspects, we have to cross from one side of the road to the other and there is no guidance whatsoever. Therefore, I would request that the traffic police or whoever else is concerned to be on the road to actually control traffic to reduce the possibility of accidents, which are very common along this road.

11.41
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Several times, we have advised the Ministry of Works to consider licensing a private breakdown company that will take charge of vehicles that break on the road and automatically pull them out of the road at the expense of the owner of the truck, to avoid truck owners from repairing vehicles by the roadside, releasing oils, which in turn shortens the lifespan of the road. We have said this for the last four years and yet this is something that is done in other countries. 

I am surprised that our government sends technical experts to do technical studies. What new improvement and management do these technocrats bring when they go out for these studies?  Why has this taken so long, when in most of these countries in Africa there are licensed private companies? Your vehicle breaks down on the road, they just pull it out of the road at your own expense. This would also help us to reduce accidents on this road. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is the policy you are advocating only for this road or a policy throughout the country?

MR EKANYA: Throughout the country, Mr Speaker. In the same spirit, I have advocated that the Ministry of Works licenses private garages so that these vehicles can be tested. Because of the new method of licensing and revenue collection, some of the vehicles on the road do not go for regular testing. If you license private garages, as it is done in other countries, this will help to reduce the accidents we are facing.

Lastly, honourable minister, H & Young did emergency work between Bugiri and Iganga.  How long was their work supposed to last?  Did you have such a provision in the contract or were they supposed to fill the potholes with murram, sand, put a bit of lime and after three or four trailers running on top of it, the next day we have potholes again? Most of the potholes, as you have accepted in your statement, have really enlarged and most of the places they had filled with murram have really turned out now to be gullies, hardly three months after they left the place. What exactly was the detail of the contract of this emergency work repair, which cost Shs 1.2 billion?  

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t we sufficiently debated this issue? Doesn’t the minister know the concern? Surely, let us give him an opportunity to respond. I think the Committee on Works should also work together with the minister and the stakeholders to ensure that something is done please.

11.44
MRS RUTH NVUMETTA KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, as the minister is on the Floor, I think this is quite important. He could respond to this as well. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it related to Iganga-Bugiri?

MRS KAVUMA: It is related to his transport ministry and it is equally as dangerous. Everybody is reacting to the MV ship Kalangala. At this time, as the Iganga-Bugiri people are worried about the accidents that are happening on that road, this ship is supposed to be ready. This is the time when most people are going home during this season. Therefore, it is very heavy transport time. 

We have seen very many vehicles actually going down to the western region. We have not been given an opportunity to go home for Christmas. The ferry, which is supposed to be working now, is overloaded and very dangerous. Therefore, people are worried about their Christmas holiday and travelling on such a dangerous ferry. 

The ship is ready and I wonder why something cannot be done at the time when we are trying to put the face of Uganda right.  Why should the people who come to see this nice face of Uganda travel on that ferry to go for tourism in Kalangala? I wonder whether we have a ferry to talk about. We, Members of Parliament from that area, are taken as liars. My people are going to be in the lake over Christmas, yet we do not want to go for burials.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.47
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Mwandha was concerned about a contract, which did not materialise the way we had thought and why I did not come back to the House to inform them and yet this road is very important. 

First, my ministry recognises that this road is extremely important.  I do not recall for many years where I have come here myself to give a statement about a road three times in one year. This is the only road where I have been here in this year to give a statement three times on 3 February, 11 May and today. On top of that, making a visit with all the leaders of the area and Members of Parliament and the sessional committee. Therefore, we appreciate that this road is very important. 

I should add that we as a country are constrained. As I said in my statement, the support of this project is our development partners in the European Union and we have to move together.  If I had money from our budget, as soon as we kicked away that contractor on the 5th February, we would have engaged another contractor through our procurement process within about two months and that would have been history. We do not have the $40 million to make the road in our budget. Therefore, we have to discuss and agree on how we schedule. 

When this contractor was terminated, he appealed not to us but to Brussels and in case you want to know, even the country where he comes from sent a delegation to Brussels. He then tried to block our money, which we had paid in advance in Paris and in South Africa. In fact, we want to go to court and resolve that matter. Part of the court case in South Africa is not yet completed. Therefore, part of the money that is not yet recalled and the 10 percent of the advanced mobilisation is still in court.  

Even when we won our case in Paris, he appealed and the judgment on the appeal is not yet complete although we got our money back. Even when we got that money, we put it on the EU account, who are the rightful owners of the money. When we came here with that understanding, which later failed, we then had to communicate with EU and they did not give their answer as you heard in my statement, until the 1st December. I could not come before I got an answer and we had to send a delegation to Brussels on the 22nd November.  

Therefore, when we agreed on this, what we call a second phase or Fast Track, immediately they gave their concurrence on 1st December, the same day we called for contractors. You can see how urgently we treat this project. The day we got the clearance from EU is the very day we called for contractors. We did not wait even for another day. I think government could not work faster than that. 

About the dust, as I said, the lime which we use was in a small section and for the scientists who are here, lime reacts in seven days after you have used it. After the chemical reaction has taken place and it has been mixed with murram, it is no longer lime as you saw it. In any case, we have used lime on all the roads that we have tarmacked in this country. This lime is all over the roads we have tarmacked and there has not been any health danger. Lime is accepted in any case. 

Before we start a project, we do what we call an environmental impact assessment. Unless you get an environmental impact assessment certificate, you cannot do that project. That use of lime there has got an environmental impact assessment certificate. In other words, what we are using is safe to human beings. 

Finally, hon. Kawanga, I appreciate that the dust reduces speed vision and people drive in all parts of the road because of potholes. The potholes as I said in my statement, with this new emergency contracts starting in January, will be sorted out.  However, we shall work together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Police to see that there is more care taken to ensure road safety. 
 
Hon. Ekanya, about licensing private break down company. The whole break down system in this country is by private sector. In fact, I would really commend our Police. I am sure you have noticed that as soon as an accident happens, Police arrives almost immediately. As soon as the Police arrive there, they call for a break-down and that is how the system has been working. 

There is a difference between an accident and a break down. Maybe, if hon. Ekanya was talking about a puncture or a small mechanical fault and motorists park on the side of the road. That will be handled when we have adequate traffic highway police, with adequate mobile communication system.

As you realised, it is only one and a half weeks ago that through the ministry, we gave some equipment to police including motorcycles, communication equipment and alcohol-testing equipment. Therefore, the police are being equipped to handle those emergences. What they have is not yet adequate but the private sector is the one handling the break down.

Concerning the life of emergency work, Members should remember that this is really maintenance. When you do emergency work, there is nothing like what we normally call the liability period or maintenance period. You will repair a pothole but as I said, the road is aged. Potholes develop every other day. Therefore, the maintenance process has to continue. 

You cannot say, “No, because you repaired this small pothole and yet another pothole has developed, you are therefore responsible.” That is not the responsibility of the contractor. His duty is to repair this aged road and that is why we are going to reconstruct it. If the contractor had not stopped, we would have a new road now. 

Finally, hon. Ruth Kavuma is concerned about the ship. I know she recalls when I took all the Members of Parliament from Kalangala and some other leaders to inspect the ship that was ready. It is ready but we cannot accept to put it on the waters before the process of getting insurance and experienced managers and captains has been finalised. I would hate to have a ship to take people for Christmas who will not reach the islands. I explained to them how we are in the process of finalising the process. We are also hiring a professional team to manage the ship so that it is safe. I am sorry if this ship cannot take you for this Christmas. You will have to use the other available means that we have provided, like the wagon ferry. 

I did not know that it only the people from western Uganda who go for Christmas. Everybody goes for Christmas, be it from the north, east, west or even south. I think that was not a fair statement. I know hon. Kavuma has been going for Christmas even before this ship was built. As soon as the ship is safely managed and insured, we shall launch it and I hope it will be a New Year present for the people of Kalangala -(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: No. I just need clarification, Mr Speaker. If the building of the ship took two years, is it very responsible of us not to have trained staff and planned where it is going to land, during the two years? Is that fair and good planning on our side?

MR NASASIRA: What we are doing is part of that planning. The ship was supposed to be completed. We make trial runs, which we are doing. We finalised the landing and we shall hire an adequate management. All this is part of that process. There is nowhere we say that when a ship is completed today, it will go to Kalangala the next day. I explained all this when I took you around the ship. This is part of that plan and we are still moving according to our plan.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister Sekabira is supposed to make a statement today but she tells me that she does not have enough copies for you. It is a brief statement, which she can read. Let us permit her to make it so that we clear it. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Florence Nayiga Sekabira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am responding to a question raised by hon. Mwandha in relation to the National Policy on Disability. His concern was that the policy has taken too long. He wanted to know the reasons why it has delayed.

The policy in question has delayed because of the need for all key stakeholders such as institutions, non-government organisations, persons with disabilities organisations and the public, to be consulted for their input. 

I am happy to reveal to you that this morning, Wednesday being Cabinet day, it was meant to be agenda number one. However, we are all here because of affirmative action that concerns persons with disabilities, among others. Therefore, we have not had the opportunity to discuss it this morning. I am confident that the next Cabinet meeting will discuss it. I am very sure that the Cabinet is supportive. The Prime Minister will confirm this.

The policy on disability will contribute to the improvement of the quality of life of persons with disabilities in this country, through expanding the scope of interventions. The interventions will necessitate persons with disabilities themselves to participate in designing, managing, monitoring and evaluating initiatives so that as we meet such needs, we are able to improve on their well-being. 

The policy will also ensure that the central government, local authorities, community based organisations, parents and care givers involve persons with disabilities. We have also worked on guidelines that will be circulated to all stakeholders and implementers in relation to implementing programmes that are disability friendly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall have a debate when the policy has been discussed.
  
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON THE REPRESENTATION OF SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we concluded a debate on this motion yesterday and we are supposed to take a vote under Parliamentary Elections Act of 2005 Section 8. However, I do not think we should take the vote because if we do, then we may have to rescind the decision because we may fail to get the desired number. I do not know whether we should try in the afternoon or take it next week. [Hon. Members: “Ring the bell”]. No, even when I ring the bell, I do not think I will be able to –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I think the proposal to pronounce ourselves next week is more appropriate in the circumstances.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what I am doing is to appeal to you to come next week. It is a very important decision to make if you have to maintain the special interest groups in this Parliament, especially as the programme for nomination is out. Try to come and make one decision or the other next week.

MR EKANYA: This is a very serious matter and I request your Office tomorrow to do roll call so that the country knows those Members of Parliament who are not serious in handling issues of interest groups.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have counted those of you who are here; you are 84. So, even if I ring the bell, there is no way I can get 100 Members because of the bell.

MR MWANDHA: Further more, Mr Speaker, I know very well that hon. Nasasira was very good at mobilizing us whenever we had crucial decisions concerning the Constitution. Can we call upon him to do his level best and mobilize people maybe tomorrow? If we wait until next week, some people may travel long distances for Christmas and they may not be able to be back in time and we may have the same problem. Really, can we call upon hon. Nasasira to use his good skills so that we can do it?

THE SPEAKER: Well, some people have come. (Interjections) Order please!

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we try and finish this week. Next week, when people leave here and they go for Christmas, it will be a little bit of a problem getting back here. I would like to request that either we try as much as possible to ask our friends who are outside to come in and see what numbers we have now and if we fail, I would rather we did it this afternoon.  I would like to request you, Sir, if you would be kind enough to accept that. Thank you very much.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This resolution has to pass by 196 Members. I have tried the whole of this week and I would like to inform the House that even if we put it this afternoon, we would not marshal 196 people. On that basis, I would like to support your suggestion that we take a vote on this matter after Christmas. I thank you. 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I know this motion has got the support of this House, especially the women, people with disabilities, the youth, the workers and of course the Army. So, it will be appropriate to give us time, since hon. Mwandha recognizes our mobilization capacities, I appeal that this capacity is given some days and we organize ourselves. This country needs these special groups to move on with our democracy and it will be unfortunate if we tried and we said we did not have numbers, that we do not want the contribution of persons with disabilities, the youth, the workers, our gallant soldiers and of course the women. 

I also want to appeal that we are given time; people are going for Christmas but the House is going to be here next week to do business, and I think when people have come from their Christmas break, they will be in a better position to deliberate on the matter. In any case, there will be other business to deal with next week that relates to all Members of Parliament, which might be of their interest. I also appeal for next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report I have now indicates we are 116. So, we cannot vote because if we do, we evoke a rule to rescind and then go through that exercise, which I would not like. And, therefore, you are put on notice that we shall vote on this motion on Tuesday afternoon next week –(Interruption)- Okay, you are put on notice that we shall vote on this on Wednesday at 10.00 a.m.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to make one appeal that this motion we are going to vote on is a very serious matter, and there are some sections of the people especially in this Parliament who are going to benefit from that motion. When you look at the number of women we have today, they are very few and this one is going to benefit the women. When I look at the Army representatives here, I only see four. Therefore, I appeal to those interest groups to try their level best to mobilize their fellow women, fellow soldiers, people with disabilities so that next week we do not go back to the same scenario like today.

THE SPEAKER: Whereas the Members representing these interest groups are affected, it is also in our national interest rather than personalizing the decision. Therefore, I think if we give you sufficient notice, when you make a decision that day or if it fails, you will know that these groups will not be in the next Parliament. You must be serious about it. Please come in big numbers and we make the decision. I think that is fine.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am just seeking your interpretation of that notice. When you say we have been put on notice on such and such a day to resolve on this matter, does it mean that that day’s failure means that is it or what?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, because if there is a motion you have to conclude it by taking a vote. If it is a negative vote, the consequences are known and if it is a positive one, also the consequences are known. That is why I am giving you sufficient time to seriously think about the importance of the matter so that you are here.

MR AWORI: Which means, Mr Speaker, that day, come what, you will put a question?

THE SPEAKER: I will put a question.
 
MR SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But I am worried about Tuesday. On Tuesday and Wednesday, we have nominations for LC3s.

THE SPEAKER: I have said Wednesday.

MR SSENGO: Even on Wednesday nominations continue.

THE SPEAKER: It does not matter. Wednesday is when a decision will be taken. (Interjections) Order!

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS CODE OF CONDUCT REGULATIONS 2005 UNDER SECTIONS 19 AND 27 OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS ACT 2005 ACT NO.18 OF 2005

12.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament moved under Sections 19 and 27 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act, Article No.18 of 2005 to approve the Political Parties and Organizations Code of Conduct of Regulations 2005:  

WHEREAS Clause (2) of Article 71 of the Constitution requires Parliament to prescribe a code of conduct for political parties and organisations;

AND WHEREAS Sections 19 and 27 of the Parties Act require the minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in consultation with the Electoral Commission under the Political Parties and Organizations Act with the approval of Parliament, to prescribe a regulation and code of conduct for political parties and organizations and to provide that the minister may for that purpose provide for any other matter necessary for giving effect to the code; 

AND WHEREAS the minister consulted the Electoral Commission and the political parties and organizations and has caused to be prepared the Political Parties and Organizations Code of Conduct Regulations;

AND WHEREAS the minister has caused the code of conduct, regulations to be laid before Parliament;
  
NOW, THEREFORE, I appeal to this Parliament to resolve as follows:

That in accordance with Section 19 and Section 27 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act (No.18) 2005, Parliament approves that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs makes the Political Parties and Organizations Code of Conduct, Regulations now before this House. 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Honourable members, you have heard the motion and I hope you have received copies of –[Hon. Members: “Not yet”]- Not yet? If you got the copies today, you have to study them first for you to make a contribution. So, I suggest that maybe you get your copies, you study them over the Christmas holiday and then when we come back on Tuesday, you will be able to debate and deal with this motion. So, we shall handle the motion on Tuesday. 

REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MOTION SEEKING TO CREATE NEW DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason why we are skipping number 7 is that we can only handle it if we have passed the motion under Article 78. If we assume that we would have passed 78 and deal with this one - but since we have not, I think it will come after we have done that. You have not got copies of the report. What do we do? Do we give ourselves a break and then maybe you get copies in the afternoon?  

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I suppose that the clerk who has been handling this issue has copies and as I talk, they are here. So, can I request that the chairman goes ahead to present the report?

THE SPEAKER: The chairman can summarize the report and then we debate in the afternoon. Summarize it and give us your recommendations.

12.16
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Ignatius Besisira): Mr Speaker, honourable members, the copies are available and they are being distributed. 

As you may recall, government decided to create 22 new districts. However, this decision was to be completed through an approval process by Parliament, which was never the case in respect of the new districts of Budaka and Tororo.  Therefore, Parliament on the 28 July 2005, assigned the Committee on Public Service and Local Government the responsibility of inquiring into the controversies surrounding the creation of the new Tororo District and Budaka District and to make appropriate recommendations. The committee was also requested to study all other controversies pertaining to the newly created districts. The committee handled the task and wishes to report the findings. 

Mr Speaker, as you said, we would like to thank those who helped us - we had a few problems in our work because of the time and the other issues, which we had to handle here on the Floor of the House. 

The work method we used is that we met a number of stakeholders: Members of Parliament, civic leaders and made field studies to these districts. The committee received many memoranda, which we shall also be pleased to hand over to the House. 

Mr Speaker, prior to this report, the chairperson of the committee presented to the House an interim report at the end of August. Actually, at the beginning of September, among other issues raised by that report, was that the committee had received requests from stakeholders seeking to create other new districts and these requests were from Otuke, Moroto, Bukedeya, Lamwo, Kabula, Namayingo, Kalungu, Kagadi, Kibada, Toroko and Mengo. The proponents were requested to liase with the Minister of Local Government to see how far their requests could be handled. 

Mr Speaker, I want to go to the findings on Budaka District. The resolution on 28 July included a request to establish Budaka District with its first date set for July 2005. In the same resolution, it was proposed that the boundaries of the new district would include the two sub-counties from Butebo County, that is, the sub-counties of Kakoro and Kabwangasi and two sub-counties from Kibuku County that is the sub-counties of Kirika and Kadama. 

During the debate that ensued, the principle of creating Budaka District was agreed but the transfer of especially Kakoro and Kabwangasi sub-counties from Butebo County was opposed by mainly hon. Dr Steven Mallinga, the MP for Butebo and hon. Louis Opange, the MP for Pallisa. They further questioned the rationale of government changing the resolution of 6 July 2005, which was supported by the technical report of the Ministry of Local Government.

The technical staff of the ministry had recommended the creation of Budaka District consisting of Kibuku and Budaka with the headquarters at Budaka.  On the other hand, hon. Rainer Kafire, hon. Nicholas Gole and hon. Jenipher Namuyangu observed that the position of 20 July 2005 which sought to grant Budaka a district status –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: I do not know whether some of us will have the opportunity to get copies of this report?  Because from here and upwards and I suspect some people on the other side have not got copies and yet we have very serious interests, this is part of my constituency.

THE SPEAKER: Let everything be done to ensure all Members get copies of the report.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the other hand, I was saying hon. Rainer Kafire and hon. Nicholas Gole and hon. Jenipher Namuyangu observed that the position of 20 July 2005 which sought to grant Budaka a district status and alter its boundaries to include the four aforementioned sub counties, was the position agreed upon in Mbale by all the area MPs and His Excellency, the President, which assertion was denied and rejected by hon. Dr Steven Mallinga and hon. Louis Opange. It was over that point that the House in its wisdom referred the matter to the sessional committee.

The major concern of both parties was the controversy over the boundaries and this is where the biggest problem was.  

Those opposed to the motion, Mr Speaker, moved on 20 July 2005 and therefore in preference to the first text in the Cabinet paper of 06/07/2005 advanced the following reasons - Mr Speaker, if I go through all these reasons we shall spend the whole of today.

THE SPEAKER: You do not have to, just mention the recommendations.

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, what were the committee’s observations? I am on page 8 of the report. The state of affairs in the district is very fragile, volatile and causing a lot of tension. Threats of death especially towards the sub county officials were common. The killing and maiming of cattle belonging to the LC III chairperson of Kakoro sub county is a clear indication that his life and that of other councillors is in danger. This has prompted the sub county officials to spend their nights at unknown places for fear of losing their lives. This was when we visited the place. I do not know if it is still the case today.

Both sides manipulated the sub county councils by giving them financial rewards. Some councillors revealed they had received money. They testified before us that some leaders had given them money so that they accept certain positions.

The councillors of Kakoro sub county council rescinded another decision after an upraising of the people of Kakoro.  

The security organs both at the district and at the region have been stretched to their limits in spite of their limited resources. Special thanks go to the RDC, Ms Sendabaguzi and the Regional Police Commander, Mbale region, Mr Bob Ngobi, for doing everything possible to maintain peace and order in the area. Special thanks also go to the District Police Commander, the DISO, RISO and OC special branch in that area.

The political leadership including area MPs, councillors and opinion leaders were fuelling conflicts amongst each other and are using the people to cause anarchy.  

The tribal element cannot be ruled out as evidenced by the existence of two-community service organisation championing interests based along tribes. The Executive should study this further – we are talking about government.  

No clear reason was advanced by the Minister of Local Government to alter his first proposal contained in the proposed motion of 6 July 2005.  The only reason he advanced was that Kibuku did not opt to join Budaka save for two of its sub counties of Kirika and Kadama. 

Any measure of subdividing Pallisa District along counties of Budaka-Kibuku and Pallisa-Butebo would retain the old status quo along the boundaries of the original two counties, that is Pallisa and Budaka-Bugwere. 

The sub counties of Kirika and Kadama have not raised any objection to the proposed arrangement while some people from Kabwangasi and Kakoro wish to remain under Butebo County and others want to go to Budaka.  

The allegation of marginalization, that service delivery is skewed and lopsided in favour of Kibuku and Budaka counties, could not be proved as the committee for lack of funds and time, never verified this through a fact finding mission of the project sites.  

Above all, the proposal to transfer the sub counties was being hurriedly done, was unconstitutional and without due regard to provisions of Section 8(7) of the Local Government Act 1997 in respect to boundaries. Article 179 makes a provision to alter district boundaries, create new districts and mandates Parliament to enact law empowering district councils to alter boundaries of local government units. 

The provision is operationalised in Section 8 and in particular sub section 7, which gives the mandate of altering boundaries of a county to a district or city council within its area of jurisdiction with the approval of Parliament after consultations have been concluded with the relevant county council or upon their request. What we are saying, we were now altering the boundaries of Butebo and Kibuku but we did not have a resolution of those relevant county councils to alter these boundaries.

The sub county resolutions were, therefore, redundant and hanging, ineffective and of no consequence and the minister erred in sustaining these illegalities, which were beyond the powers of the sub county councils and therefore the district.  

The process would require the Budaka District first to be created and then allow the sub counties supported by the county councils in the resolution to voluntarily join Budaka District after which Parliament would endorse their decisions. The other option would be to hold referendum within six months.

The action of the minister in bringing the resolution to alter boundaries without due regard for constituency boundaries was wrong. In the view of the committee, it is the preserve of the Electoral Commission in accordance with Article 63(2) of the Constitution.  In addition, no single constituency can fall within two districts or counties. Furthermore, the Electoral Commission is also unable to demarcate constituencies at this point in time.  

There is no precedent to rely on to sustain the minister’s resolution of 20 July 2005 as no district has ever been created by curving out parts of another district or county. The creation of districts has always been based on country boundaries and not sub-counties. To put it clearly, there has never been a division of a county in creating any new districts.

The principle of establishing Budaka is acceptable to all parties save for its composition. 

The following options were suggested in the sub division of Pallisa District to create the new district. However, the committee outright rejected the first four options stating the reasons for doing so: That the current Pallisa remains intact: This was rejected since all parties agreed on the sub division principle.  

The current Pallisa District is sub divided into three districts of Kibuku, Budaka and Butebo Pallisa. It was rejected since creating a third district would be in conflict with Article 93 of the Constitution. A third district would also be impractical in the short run. In addition, it is only the government, which can move the proposal to create a new district.  

The third option was that Budaka District consisting of Budaka County and the four counties listed in the resolutions of 20/07/05 commences operations. This was rejected for reasons already advanced.

The Budaka District comprising of Budaka County and the two sub counties of Kibuku, which have not raised objections commences operations. The committee for reasons already stated also rejected this. That the current Pallisa District be sub-divided into two based on the old county boundaries, Budaka-Kibuku and Pallisa-Butebo. This would be in line with the first proposal of the minister of 6 July 2005.  

And the last option was that the district of Budaka should commence operations and comprise of the Budaka County alone.

The committee recommends as follows: The current Pallisa District should be sub divided into two, thereby creating Budaka District consisting of Budaka County with its headquarters at Budaka.

The new district should commence its operations with immediate effect.  

No arbitrary transfer of sub counties to Budaka counties should occur in seeking to create Budaka District. Any transfer should be in accordance with the law and the constitution.

After the elections, the people in the relevant sub counties in Pallisa District should be free to pass resolutions to join Budaka based on existing laws, or seek to join Budaka District through a referendum.

A consequential amendment of the resolution by the minister is accordingly amended. We also went to Tororo District whose background is similar to that one of Pallisa. 

We made the following observations: 
The principle of separation was arrived at with His Excellency, the President. Both sides are also in favour of the separation.  

The phraseology of the motion in respect of Tororo County was incompetent. The government is elevating Tororo County to a district status with the name Tororo and at the same time retaining the previous name of old Tororo district.  

Some leaders on either side have been instrumental in promoting confusion and therefore violence. The people are expressing this on their behalf. The district security committee and the Regional Police Commander have tried to diffuse the situation.  

The state of affairs in the district is very fragile and volatile.  The people of Tororo County have on many occasions staged strikes some of which have turned violent. Prospect for continued anarchy exists if the situation is not amicably solved.  

Until 1995, the representation of Tororo County in Parliament included the municipality. The fact that the Member of Parliament now represents Tororo Municipality is because all municipalities in Uganda were made constituencies. Municipalities are now separate units with an assumed status of counties.

The Minister of Local Government conceded to the fact that Tororo Municipality is geographically within Tororo County. The Commissioner of Lands in the Ministry of Lands also attests to this fact.  

There has never been any measure undertaken to alter the boundary to exclude the municipality from Tororo County. This principle is likely to yield into agitation or more districts based on constituency boundaries as opposed to county boundaries, and if this is the intention of government it has to come out clearly in a policy on creation of new districts, which policy has never been developed. The motion as presented by the minister was clearly seeking to create a district based on a constituency boundary and not the existing county boundaries.  

Two scenarios were discussed in respect of the sub division of the remaining Tororo District. These were: 
a) That the current Tororo District remains intact. 
b) 	The current Tororo District be sub divided into two based on county boundaries.

The committee recommends as follows:  
In view of the current tensions and conflicts in Tororo district - 
a)	In the short-run the current Tororo District should remain intact. The consequential amendment with a resolution is therefore needed.

b) 	Government should come up with a competent motion restructuring Tororo District into two new districts bearing in mind that each county will assume a district status. 

Each of the new districts should commence operations as soon as the restructuring is effected. 

In restructuring Tororo District into two new districts, the government must come out clearly on the following:  
a) 	The status of Tororo Municipality inside Tororo County inside Tororo District.  
b) 	The names of the new districts to be created vis-à-vis the existing district. 

After the completion of the restructuring exercise, the assets and liabilities of the old Tororo District as financial year 2004/05, which currently amounts to about Shs 2.9 billion, should be shared equally amongst all the three new districts that will have been created out of the old Tororo District.

We also went to Manafa and had interaction with the people in Bubulo County and Manjiya County. These were the observations we made:  

The resolution brought by the minister on 20/7/2005 was rushed hence the incompleteness in the procedures for creating the new district as per Local Government Act, 1997 and the Constitution. 

The district assumed the name Manafa because of the river between Bubulo and Manjiya counties. They needed this unifying name to harmonize their request for a district status.  

The request by Manjiya to revert back to Mbale in the event that Bududa is not named the district headquarter cannot be sustained, as Bubulo is between Mbale and Manjiya county. For the time being they must govern themselves in their new district alongside the people of Bubulo.  

The district operations are headquartered at Bubulo and are in progress. All is set to expand the operations further. Actually when we were there, we found everybody was in full gear, the district was in place in Bubulo and work was going on well. There was a chairman, there was a council, there was everything. 

Bubulo as opposed to Bududa has a lot of land for expansion purposes. They have 200 acres compared to 30 acres in Bududa. 

The location of the headquarters at Bubulo is central for the three constituencies in the new district whereas the topography of land in Manjiya is mountainous making it difficult to access services equitably. We also propose that it would be good if the township of Bududa is upgraded to a town status.

Recommendations:

The new district should be Bubulo District consisting of Bubulo County and Manjiya County in the present Mbale District, with its headquarters at Bubulo. It should be deemed to have commenced operations in July this year. 

In view of the difficult terrain in Manjiya County, coupled with the poor road network and difficulties in service delivery, the Government should immediately study the possibility of granting Manjiya County a district status also. As it should be for all new districts, government should give a clear indication of where district headquarters should be before a resolution is brought to Parliament. The resolution likewise is accordingly amended.

We had a general observation that in view of the problems caused in the creation of districts, government should urgently come up with a policy on creating new districts to operationalise the provisions of Article 179 of the Constitution and sections of the Local Government Act, 1997. In accordance with the policy to be developed, government should assess the viability of the proposed new districts on page 3 of this report.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, subject to the two minority reports appended to this, I beg to move that the House adopt this report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of this committee for the work you have done. They are now working on the extra copies for you. Maybe we will take it in the afternoon. So with this we suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m. this afternoon.

(The proceedings were suspended at 12.40 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.53 p.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the chairperson already presented the report. In particular, he presented the recommendations on the three districts that had a problem. They recommend that in Pallisa they create Budaka for Budaka Country and that Tororo remains as a district, maybe in future they will find a way out; and that Manafwa will become Bubulo, but that in future government should consider Manjiya for district status. That it is not possible for Manjiya to return to Mbale because Bubulo is between Manjiya and Mbale. I think those were the recommendations.   

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, it is on our recommendations on Tororo - we are deleting all the others and leaving just one recommendation that in view of the current tensions and conflicts in Tororo, the district should remain intact and a consequential amendment to the resolution is therefore needed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR EKANYA: Honourable Speaker, this is the report of the committee, signed by all members of the committee. I do not think that the procedure is proper for the chairman to amend the report alone after presenting it; it is out of parliamentary procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you consider the report and decide what to do with it.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I am a member of the committee and I have a minority report regarding the creation of Budaka.  

THE SPEAKER: A minority report! Since you are an interested party in Pallisa, why do you not leave it to the judgement -(Interruptions)

DR MALLINGA: Sir, there is a little difference in the creation of Budaka. We want Budaka to be created consisting of Budaka County and Kibuku County as they have always been.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us not waste too much time on this. There is a view that Kibuku should be part of Budaka; that is all. As to what we decide, it is really this Parliament that will decide on the report. This was our committee that made these recommendations. It is for us to adopt the recommendations as they are or to adjust them. That should not cause you much of a problem.  

DR MALLINGA: These are my reasons, Sir –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the reason must be in the report. Did you attach it? 

DR MALLINGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, if it is there then we shall see the reasons, after all they are in writing. We shall definitely take that report into account.

DR MALLINGA: If only I was allowed to present it!

THE SPEAKER: You want to present it?

DR MALLINGA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, present it.

2.58
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the committee for at last coming out with this report. The committee was asked on the 20th of July this year, and was expected to come back in a month’s time with a report. It is now about five months since then.

We all received a Cabinet paper on the 6th of July of this year and in the report it is attached as annex 1 and it was suggesting the creation of districts. Budaka was one of the districts to be created out of Pallisa District. At that time the recommendation was that Budaka District would be made up of Kibuku and Budaka Counties, with the headquarters at Budaka. 

This was acceptable to all parties and it is what satisfies the conditions historically. Kakungulu created Pallisa County in 1902, Budaka County was also created at the same time and along the way we have developed our peculiarities over the 100 years we have been in existence.  

Pallisa County was divided to produce the present Pallisa County and Butebo, Budaka-Bugwere was divided to create the present Kibuku, and Budaka counties naturally should go together to create a district. There is not the slightest reason why one of them would like to remain in Pallisa. If there is a reason, I would be glad to get it. On February –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member do you mean that you do not want Kibuku to be part of Pallisa?

DR MALLINGA: I do not want. The reason we gave for the creation of a district was because we did not want to be with Kibuku and Budaka. 

On February 28th of this year, the President visited Pallisa and met Pallisa County and Butebo County at Kibaale sub-county. The people of Butebo and Pallisa counties requested the President to divide the district of Pallisa with Butebo and Pallisa going together to form Pallisa County. After that visit to Pallisa and Butebo, the President proceeded to Budaka to address the people of Kibuku and Budaka. I think the honorable members should note that.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been restraining myself but I thought I should rise on a point of order. I have interacted with my colleague and actually he clearly accepts the main report. Is it therefore in order for the honorable member to continue taking our time trying to present a minority report when he clearly favours the minority report because he has been here and he has agreed? So, why should he take us into this whole exercise of time trying to give a minority report when actually he is in agreement with the main report?  

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, what I see are domestic quarrels coming here in Parliament. The best I can say is that leave those who may be objective to decide on this matter because it seems it is a local matter, which is now being transplanted here, brought here for us? Please, give us time; we shall definitely be objective.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, he says I accept the major report; I did not sign the major report, I signed the minority report. So how can he say that?

THE SPEAKER: But since we have this copy, do you not think that we should now concentrate on the merits and demerits of the matter?  

DR MALLINGA: As I go on my reasons will become clearer and the honorable members will be better off and make a better judgment. 

I was saying that on the 28th of February when the President visited Pallisa District, he addressed Pallisa and Butebo at Kibale; Kibuku and Budaka counties were addressed at Budaka. This has always been the practice whenever two stops are made when visiting Pallisa District. One of the arguments advanced by certain members of this House is that they did not ask for a district. But when Kibuku and Budaka were being addressed at Budaka, hon. Kafiire was there, hon. Namuyangu and Kirya Gole read a request for the division of the district. So they have actually asked for the division of the district.  

Mr Speaker, at Kibale the people presented a memorandum and they highlighted that Kibuku and Budaka were oppressing Pallisa and Butebo Counties.  They pointed out for example that while there are 480 boreholes in Kibuku and Budaka, there are only 180 in Butebo and Pallisa. The roads in Kibuku and Budaka are paved murram roads – I am talking about the tarmac road, which goes through - while the roads in our area are almost impassable in Pallisa and Butebo. 

The classrooms built in Kibuku and Budaka are excessive, in fact some of them are used as storage, whereas if you come to my constituency I still have two mango-tree schools and the other schools are overcrowded. Some of them have 200 children in one classroom; you cannot find that in Budaka and Kibuku.  

Mr Speaker, when they asked after this meeting, the Chairperson of the District Council sent reports or a request to all the sub-counties to submit whether they want the division of the district or not. All sub-counties submitted, including Kibuku, which denies that they have never asked for a district.  So Kibuku has actually asked the division of the district.

After this recommendation from the district was submitted to the Ministry of Local Government, the suggestion from the district was rejected because it was asking for the transfer of two sub-counties, namely, Kakoro and Kabwangasi to Budaka, which has never happened anywhere, as the chairman has mentioned. I do not want to dwell on that. So, it was rejected and a special team was sent to Pallisa from the Ministry of Local Government to see how best to divide the district. 

The recommendation of the technical team after traversing the whole district was that Kibuku and Budaka should go together and that Pallisa and Butebo should go together as they have always been. That was in the attachment, which was submitted to this Parliament on the 6th of July this year and it is the attachment here; attachment No. 1; I think it is on page 3(ix); it is division of Pallisa District, creating Budaka consisting of Kibuku and Budaka. That is the recommendation of the technical report, after that report then political lobbying started.  

Eventually we went and saw the President in Mbale, we went as Pallisa County and Butebo County I lead the delegation. Kibuku County and Budaka County were lead by hon. Namuyangu - that is a sign that we were already divided - Kibuku and Budaka have had a deputy RDC looking after those two counties for over seven years now. The first one was Kakonge; he was deputy RDC responsible for those –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, could you tell us briefly what you want, because when we were considering the main report, it was in summary form. Could you summarise and then make a recommendation? 

DR MALLINGA: Okay, let me summarise this way. Kibuku should not say that they did not ask for a district. Hon. Namuyangu is from Kibuku, the LC V Chairman from Kibuku asked for it when we went to see the President. Hon. Kafiire was there and there is a constant alliance between Kibuku and Budaka against Pallisa and Butebo. 

We have just had elections; hon. Namuyangu stood from Kibuku; almost all the voters from Budaka and Kibuku voted for her. The LC V Chairman Wasugirya got all the votes from Kibuku and Budaka. So, we are already divided –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, spare us your domestic quarrels. My understanding, hon. Dr Mallinga –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: I conclude by telling the honourable members –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, we have understood, what you do not want is for Kibuku to join Pallisa and Butebo. Now can we start the debate on the –(Interruption)

3.12
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I also wrote a minority report, which is attached. I will take your guidance and be very brief because this is within our rules. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The minority report is annexed to the main report after Pallisa. It is the minority report on the resolution to create a new district from Tororo. I implore this honourable House to adopt the position presented in this minority report. 

The recommendations I put forward are based on facts, some of which the committee has established, in particular the fact that Tororo Municipality was part and parcel of Tororo County. In addition, before municipalities were represented in Parliament, the Member of Parliament would always represent the entire county. I also put forward the following cases: 

The Kiyonga Report recommended for restructuring and agreed that all the three counties be made a district; this was Bunyole, Tororo County and West Budama.

Tororo District Council passed a resolution, which in part effected the restructuring and went ahead to vote in favour of retaining the county boundary of 1947 in creation of the district.

In the past, Tororo County lost parts of its land to West Budama as seen on various maps attached on the report. The people of Tororo County do not, therefore, support any relocation of their land to another county.

All the 24 districts created by this Parliament are based on county boundaries. 

The request of the people of Tororo County was to have all the three counties granted a district status. The Minister of Local Government considered the fact that Tororo Municipality is geographically within Tororo County. 

Section 8 of the Local Government Act is very clear in determination of the existing boundaries. The law must not be selectively applied and the ministry must come out clearly to indicate whether its guidelines supersede matters of law.  

Mr Speaker, section 8(1) states that boundaries of local government that existed before the coming into force of this Act shall remain and we are talking of the Local Government Act, 1997. Therefore, the boundaries, which included Tororo Municipality in Tororo County, still have to exist. This is what the law is all about.

Finally, based on the above arguments raised, I conclude by requesting the House to adopt the committee’s report but delete its recommendation and substitute it as follows: 

In view of the current tension and conflict in Tororo District, the following is recommended:  

A new district consisting of west Budama County is created out of Tororo District having its headquarter in Kisoko. 

Tororo is created having its headquarters in Tororo town.

I beg to move. Thank you.

3.15
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having been elaborate enough to conclude the issues regarding the controversial districts. 

My concern zeroes in on page 3, with regard to the proposed districts, which include Mengo. I would like to express this concern before the committee in that the proposed districts from Otuke seem to have been generalised. The issue related to Mengo is specific and it is associated to the regional tier. So, we cannot postpone a matter regarding the regional tier because the regional tier contents are about to be implemented. 

I, therefore, would like to propose that while I am not negative about the other districts, the issue surrounding Mengo should be clarified. Mr Speaker, you did rule sometime back that as a result of the creation of Kampala City as the capital city of Uganda, places like Lubaga Division and some portions of central division will remain redundant and therefore a new home should be found. The home proposed should not be postponed indefinitely because we have already agreed that the regional tier will be implemented effective July next year.  

So, I am seeking clarification as to why the committee left the issue of Mengo so redundant yet its impact on the regional tier will be implemented soon.

3.18
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing to support the committee’s report and I want to begin by thanking the chairman of the committee and all the members. I am also commending the Minister of Local Government who facilitated the members to visit the districts that were affected. 

I want to appeal to colleagues, especially those from Pallisa that it is we the leaders who should guide our people and it is we who should begin the reconciliation. Now that we have interest, I would like to observe that since the committee went with an independent mind, the committee report is a comprehensive report. So we should be sympathetic with the people of Budaka who have been waiting anxiously to receive their district and support the committee report. 

I also want to put it on record that I was born in Kasodo sub-county, married in Apopong sub-county and both are in Pallisa County, not Kibuku. So, I want to appeal to honourable colleagues that we support the committee report. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.19
MRS JULIET RAINER (Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the report and thank the committee for the work well done. But before I go any further I would like to say that the people of Kibuku, whom I represent here, never asked for a district. We are already in a district. You cannot ask for a district when you already have one. There was no call for us to move from the district where we are happily staying and doing development and go elsewhere. Actually the argument of one of the members is uncalled for. 

I was born in Butebo County; my parents are in Butebo, why is he denying the people he represents in this House a right to choose what they want? Just because I am just a stone throw away from my home and I am in Kibuku, he should not think that I am no longer a member of Butebo County.

Secondly, I feel that hon. Mallinga has stretched too far. He has been fighting wars. Some of us are out of those wars. In fact, I am not among those he argues with. In fact I am even around. So, I am above his quarrels.

Then lastly, I do agree with the recommendation of the committee on page 12. One, the current Pallisa District should be sub-divided into two thereby creating Budaka District consisting of Budaka County with its headquarters at Budaka. I am happy with this and if the honourable members can support it, the Budaka people will be happy to receive your support. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for including all the problems we indicated in Pallisa in their report, and I urge the members of this House to go through the report very well and get acquainted with the issues we raised during the time we interacted with the committee.

The issue of creating a new district in Pallisa did not start yesterday. We have worked on this problem since the district was born. When you look at the reason why the people of Pallisa are asking for the creation of a new district, you find there is a problem in Pallisa, which the Kakungulu administrative guru knew before and solved by creating two counties in the district. 

When we came from Tororo, we had Pallisa County and Budaka/Bugwere County. There was a peaceful understanding in the district and there were no probleMs Pallisa County was composed of Butebo and Pallisa. Budaka/Bugwere was composed of Budaka and Kibuku. But if you may ask yourself, why are these people running away from the issue of creating a new district basing on the old counties? Let me be frank to this honourable House. The people of Budaka and Kibuku have an agenda of dominating the two districts. That is very clear and honourable members should know that it would remain a problem even if it were made Budaka District today. 

So, for us in Pallisa, we urge the honourable members in this House to go through the problems that the district is facing. They even talk openly: “We shall rule them until Jesus comes back.” We presented this to the committee, the committee analysed it in the report and I am happy that they have indicated all the problems we raised and the strength of our argument to form Butebo/Pallisa District. Unfortunately, they deferred in their recommendations, which are very political. 

Mr Speaker, I am aware that the people of Pallisa are staying together. The people of Butebo and Pallisa, you cannot tell who is a Muteso and who is a Mugwere because they have inter-married, they are living together and are doing things together. Their voting pattern is the same, and that applies even to Kibuku and Budaka.

When the President visited Kibaale, the people of Butebo and Pallisa passed a resolution to the President indicating their wish to have a district created out of Butebo and Pallisa basing on the old counties. This report was sent to the Ministry of Local Government. The technical staff analysed the report and raised technical issues and recommended it to the Cabinet to let Butebo and Pallisa be a district. That report was brought here and later on they withdrew it from here, which I personally as Opange did not get the reason why it was withdrawn. Later on I discovered that there was some political manoeuvring, which took place in between there.

So, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the people of Pallisa County are basing on your vote today to get them out of this dominance system. We are also people; we need to be leaders too. Even His Excellency said that he knew that some of the people of Pallisa were neither nearer the fire nor smoke. We are just there, but we need also to get near the fire. We need to be leaders and to see developments equitably distributed in the district.

As I have just said, the technical staff from the Ministry of Local Government accepted the wish of the people of Pallisa after a thorough technical analysis. I am aware that even the Minister of Local Government once said, “I wish Parliament could solve the problems in Pallisa District”. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, we could have created districts here basing on the old counties but when we come to Pallisa people run away from the truth. We are going to enter the history of Uganda if we really make a decision here contrary to what is in the Kakungulu report. Somebody wrote an intelligence report in Pallisa that by trying to solve a problem you will be creating another problem. That is why Kakungulu had to make a technical report and created Pallisa County and Budaka-Bugwere County.  

Mr Speaker, let me be a voice of the people in Pallisa. In Pallisa District it is just politicians who are fighting the already known problem because of personal needs. We should divide this district basing on the technical analysis that the Ministry of Local Government can give us, but not on a political analysis. Because if we go on to divide Pallisa basing on politics and basing on survival for politicians, then we may not come out of the problem. Immediately Budaka becomes a district they will be the technical people to advise Kibuku on what to do in Pallisa.  

I have already said that for Pallisa, their intention is to have two LC Vs and two Woman Members of Parliament. Surely if we are also within that heterogeneous system, what do you think people will say? For us the people of Pallisa we say that Pallisa should become a district basing on the old counties. The boundaries are already there, the structures are already there and we just need the key and the districts start operating.  

We are also aware that the issue of the committee saying they need a referendum after this question, this one I completely oppose it. There is no need for a referendum because the members of the committee went to Kakoro, they went to Kabwangasi and they saw what people were saying and, therefore, to put in this resolution that there should be a referendum it will open another wound.

Mr Speaker, allow Pallisa settle, we are unproductive. Now for almost three years people are talking about the creation of the district. Let this Parliament today put this thing in a situation where people go back to production. Let there be Pallisa-Butebo district; let there be Budaka-Kibuku district; we shall see a prosperous Pallisa. I urge hon. Members of Parliament to save Pallisa District from burning everyday by making independent judgment today. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MS OLIVER WONEKA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I speak specifically on Manafwa District, I plead with hon. Members in the House that as we go through this debate concerning the districts in question now, we should keep in mind that we are talking about people out there; we are talking about persons and we are not talking about boundaries that do not affect people. And if people do not want to be together in a district why must this Parliament force them to be together? (Applause) I think we must keep in mind that the people must live together and work together for development. That is my appeal.

I would like to thank the committee too for their time and for a report that they have presented to us. Looking at the issues of Manafwa, the report on page 21, in considering the set of affairs in Manjiya and Bubulo counties that constitute Manafwa District, have reported on the two county councils one for Manjiya and one for Bubulo, which councils actually caucused, worked together and influenced the decision in Mbale council to request for another district known as Manafwa. They did agree at that time but when it came to where the headquarters of the district would be positioned, they did not agree, they referred the issue to their Members of Parliament and the report tells us that the meeting between the Members of Parliament did not take place.  

There was an attempt, Mr Speaker, of a meeting of the Members of Parliament that were affected and the Members of Parliament failed to even talk about the issue. Instead there was just animosity straight away.  

When we go to observations of the committee, their first observation is that the resolution that was brought by the minister on 20 July 2005 was rushed and hence the incompleteness in the procedures for creating new districts as per the Local Government Act, 1997 and the Constitution.  

Mr Speaker, here it is nicely written but what this meant today is that for the people in Manafwa District there was anxiety, mistrust, and suspicion of the process. Because you have two counties of Bubulo and Manjiya whose counsellors actually agreed that they should have a district, but they did expect that government would help them through the process. This is the report of the committee and I do hope that the ministry does accept that they did not go through the process that should have given integrity to the process and, therefore, confidence of the affected persons.

When it comes to the name of the district, the committee proposes Bubulo District. The people who caucused and asked for the district they preferred the name of Manafwa, and as the committee report says: “The district assumes the name Manafwa because of the river between Bubulo and Manjiya County.” They needed this unifying name to harmonize their request for a district status. 

Today the report is recommending that the district should be called Bubulo. The people who wanted the district were mindful of the name. How do you now decide that Manjiya County and Bubulo should be called Bubulo? Are the people’s concerns taken into account?

As we speak, Mr Speaker, what is on the ground is not so pleasant. The people of Manjiya and the people of Bubulo are not sitting together to enjoy the benefits that were meant by getting a new district. The people of Manjiya have cocooned themselves in the mountains. Because on the proclamation here by Parliament that let there be Manafwa district, what happened was that some leaders initially from Bubulo County went on radio - the tapes can be obtained - and made very provocative statements. Of course in the end we got also responses from Manjiya. So, they were insults being hurled at each other over the radios wherever they would meet, which did not really augur well for the two peoples to work together.  

As we speak now, Mr Speaker, the councillors of Manjiya County have been prevailed upon by the people they represent not to go to the district headquarters and deliberate with the counsellors of Bubulo. Of course this does not come out in this report.  That is what is happening now because the fears of the people of Manjiya – well it has been mentioned somewhere in the report that the population of Manjiya is about a half the population of the people of Bubulo. 

So if due process had been given to the announcement of the headquarters and all that, it would have been taken into account. The people of Manjiya feel that because their population is half the population of people of Bubulo they will therefore be marginalized.

THE SPEAKER: Now what is your solution?

MS WONEKA: My issue, Mr Speaker, is about going to the recommendations of the committee that the name of the district should not be Bubulo District, because of the fears that have been raised. I plead with this Parliament to look at recommendation No.2, which says that: “In view of the difficulty of rain in Manjiya County coupled with the poor road network and the difficulties in service delivery, Government should immediately grant Manjiya County a district status for the good of the people there”. Because the idea of the districts is not to have people fight each other, hate each other and abuse each other. 

I know that the primaries of the NRM just concluded are not particularly a matter for this Parliament, but there were an event in this county, which event impacts on what happens here. I stood in Manafwa for Woman Member of Parliament but because I happened to be born in Manjiya my fellow colleagues from this Parliament - I refer to hon. Namuyangu when she said, “It should be us the leaders to lead the way.” My honourable colleague actually made sure that the people were reminded that I come from Manjiya and, therefore, a woman from Manjiya should not be given a vote and they did sponsor somebody from Bubulo. 

So, the fears of Manjiya people are that they would never share position, never share power and they will not therefore share resources in an equitable manner. That means Manjiya people can never hope to have a chairman because of the numbers, they cannot have a Woman Member of Parliament.  

So, Mr Speaker, I am pleading with the House because these are realities, there are what is on the ground. We cannot deliberate oblivious to what is happening outside there. Therefore, hon. Members, please consider Manjiya as a district to be granted now. Thank you.

3.42
MR HENRY OBBO (West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you. This morning before we rose for this afternoon session the Chairman of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government made his report, which we are now considering. At that time I did not have my copy but I now managed to get a copy and I have gone through the part that relates to Tororo District.  

This afternoon also the chairman came out and made an amendment to the recommendation that appears on page 19, which in summary reads: “In view of the current tension and conflicts in Tororo district, the district should remain intact.” My understanding is that the committee is not recommending at all that the present Tororo District be divided. In view of that I accept the recommendation and I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for the work they have done.  

Let me give Parliament one other information. In West Budama where I come from and where a number of Members of Parliament in this House come from also, I have never at any one time requested neither Government nor Parliament for Tororo District to be divided. We have been happy the way we have been living in the district together. People of West Budama have had no problems in the past with other constituents parts of the former Tororo District nor with the current constituent parts of the same district and that is why I welcome the report as amended by the chairman this afternoon that the present Tororo district to remain intact, remain undivided and therefore Parliament should resolve so.  

Mr Speaker, there could have been some issues in the past that might have caused the idea of the division of the district into two parts or three but we are all human beings and we can talk and we should find out what those issues were. If the issues can be talked over and a rapport reached, I think there is time for that.  

I am concerned about the integrity of this country; I am concerned about cohesion of Uganda as a nation. I am concerned about the interdependence of the citizens of this country. We are all inter-dependent, one community with another, there is no community that can stand alone in this nation without co-operation with another community, without reaching a rapport, without reaching an understanding, without the principle of give and take one way or another. 

I, therefore, I would like to appeal to my colleague, hon. Ekanya, that although he has submitted a minority report let that minority report now be subsumed in this report. The people of my area, and in fact may I say that the majority of the people of Tororo district, do not want that division. I thought I should make these preliminary remarks that should debate continue on this subject, I will come back here and make further contributions. I thank you for accepting the position I have just espoused.

3.47
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA (Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank hon. Besisira and the committee for a good in-depth examination of the matter in the districts that we are examining. But I would like to say from the onset that the matter we are discussing is not just a technical matter as one colleague has just said, but it is a matter of technical people from Ministry of Local Government going to see what should be done and we should follow it.  

Underlying what we see in Manjiya and Bubulo, what we see in Tororo and also in Pallisa, are very strong political forces, and it is very important that we handle these situations very carefully. There are very strong tensions in these areas on the ground and what we say if it is not carefully communicated could exacerbate violence on the ground. And unfortunately for us, we are discussing this matter during a very important national exercise of general elections, during a time when the country is in transition to multi-party. Therefore, depending on what we say, we could have political movements on the ground.

Although normally when we have a discussion like this, we do not issue press releases. As part of my recommendation, as I conclude, later on I would suggest that a very well drafted press release should be issued when we finish this discussion. Because what has happened in the past is that either a report is written or a discussion is held with the ministers and different people go and give different reports on the ground, and almost without exception we have had very strong reactions from the population.

I am constrained to say I support or I do not support the report because the Government has also been following up this matter, as some colleagues have mentioned, and I hope that the Government would be given opportunity to also look at the examination by the committee before we could make a final pronouncement on this matter.

So my import is that the value of my contribution here will be to give some information, which I think is critical so that we appreciate the difficulties on the ground.

I would like, Mr Speaker, to start with Tororo and by way of illustrating my point I will just read a paragraph in the report that we wrote. 

The President directed me to head a committee to go to Tororo, and I am going to read a paragraph from our report just to show you hopefully the type of difficulty that is on the ground. The paragraph goes as follows: “There has existed a struggle by the Iteso for identity as against the Japadhoola with a counter struggle by the Japadhoola to protect what they see as their land from the Iteso.  From the time of their arrival in present day Tororo during the 19th century, the Iteso were assimilated into the Japadhoola nation but over time they began asserting their Iteso identity, which included a claim over the present day Tororo County.  In 1947, as result of pressure from the Iteso, the colonial administration changed the name of the county from East Budama to its present name.”

As you know, as the hon. Obbo Henry has just said, there is a County in Tororo called West Budama. One would have assumed that you have East Budama, but East Budama does not exist because the people in the then East Budama resisted that name. That was as far back as 1947.  

On their part the Japadhoola have since the 19th Century sought to prevent the Iteso from taking over the land. They refer to the Iteso as immigrants or refugees who were allowed to settle on Japadhoola land. This tension exists despite extensive inter-marriages between the two groups and you cannot fail, once you go to this area, to see that tension.

In our recommendation, because of the very difficult situation which we saw on the ground, our recommendation to the President was as follows: “The Government has one of two options to leave with Tororo District in order to ensure that the ethnic tensions are resolved: one, maintain one district but ensuring through legal provision which will also apply to other districts that one, cultural diversity is visibly respected and provided for. Two, the power and resource sharing take account of ethnic diversity in the district.”  That was one option.

The second option we recommended was that there should be a creation of three districts out of present day Tororo and we did name what those three districts should be. But when we came to the question of municipality and in present day debate whether to create a district based on Tororo County and one on West Budama, the problem is where you placed the municipality and it is not easy to decide one way or the other. For us we said in this option of creating the districts, the critical and balancing decision would be the location of Tororo Municipality.  

The least controversial decision will be to leave the municipality with West Budama. This was our judgment as at that time. But as I have said, we used the term “the least controversial,” in other words admitting that even when you take that decision you are not home and dry, you still have tensions to manage on the ground.  

Mr Speaker, even after we returned and His Excellency read the report and after he visited, he still found difficulty on which way to go. He, therefore, appointed a formal commission of inquiry headed by Prof. Byarugaba from Makerere University and in their conclusion they state as follows: “The Commission makes the following recommendations: 
(a) The relationship between the Iteso and the Japadhoola has been strained by the demand for a district by Tororo County. The demand for a district status by Tororo County be given due consideration largely in the interest of national unity and stability. 

(b) 	If new districts are created out of Tororo and West Budama counties, Tororo Municipality should be located in West Budama.” 

So, at least on that point our committee and that of the commission of inquiry concurred.

When we come to Bubulo, I am glad that the committee of hon. Besisira has pointed out that given the pressure under which we were working as the Government through the Ministry of Local Government certain steps were skipped, for example, the process of deciding where the headquarters should be. Because of the different attitudes of leaders, including some of our colleagues in the House, the situation on the ground got worse when it could have been controlled. I have visited Bubulo, I have visited Manjiya and the situation we found there is definitely very difficult. The elections we have just gone through particularly as NRM have not helped the situation.

Therefore, my recommendation would be that one; this is an important Parliamentary report. The Government should be given time to use this report in conjunction with whatever information they have so that a coolheaded recommendation can be brought back to the House.

Secondly, as I said before, after we conclude this debate a very well drafted press release must be made with authority of Parliament so that the people of Bubulo and the people of Manjiya hear for themselves what the discussion we came out with. Otherwise, we stand the risk of being misrepresented on the ground and getting a violent reaction out of these places.

In regard to Pallisa, I have not had the opportunity to go in myself but the divisions that you see here amongst the Members of Parliament from that area is reflective of the tensions on the ground and these are bound to grow unless we handle this situation carefully. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.00
MR NICHOLAS GOLE (Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I do agree with the report because I was one of those who submitted their memoranda. But I have one problem with the minority report presented by Dr Mallinga. Hon. Mallinga has misguided the House on the following: 

One, when it comes to resource allocation you are much aware that we have work plans, which originate from the sub-county. So there is no way my colleague can come here and say they marginalized them when it comes to resource allocations.

Two, the school he has talked about, we went and visited these schools. They are not government-aided and you are aware the Government can only aid schools, which are already government-aided and gazetted.  

Thirdly, the issue of tribalism does not arise; I myself married into his County and I married an Itesot. So this issue of saying Bagwere Vs Iteso does not arise.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think we should not take this matter simply. The people of Pallisa and Butebo have been suppressed and marginalized for a long time. We had graduates before these people had them. Is he in order to say that there has not been marginalization when I have clearly pointed out he was part of the problem; he was a district engineer and took all the works to Budaka and Kibuku?  

Let us go and see the roads - if the honourable chairman had the time - we took him round Pallisa and he compared it with Kibuku and Budaka then he realized they did not have time. But marginalization is a fact. Pallisa and Butebo, as one of the speakers pointed out, are multi-tribal. We have about six tribes and we have always been this way. These people are 98 percent Bagwere and when they came they introduced tribalism. We have never had a chairman outside Budaka or Kibuku; they have always come from there. Is he in order to try to mislead the House that there is no tribalism when he is actually in fact one of suspects of tribalism?

THE SPEAKER: I need to investigate those stated facts.

MR GOLE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. He has reminded me. When I was working at the district I did construct a bridge worth Shs 400 million near his home, which he used to cross to visit his grandparents in Kumi. 

And lastly, they have a saying in their language that “Emesse Kulya” which means they are the ones fuelling all this tribalism we are talking about. I thank you.

4.04
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I have to thank the committee for the report. My colleague has covered most of the items, which I would have covered but I will point out a few mistakes in the report for the purposes of record.  

I will contribute mainly on Manafwa District. The committee appears to have down played the problem in Manafwa District and they have zeroed in on location of headquarters. This is not correct.  

In the memo, which people of Manjiya handed over to hon. Besisira and his committee, many points are there. If there was much time I would have gone through them but they go beyond just location of the headquarters. They are about five major issues, which are found in the report we handed to the committee, and if you allow me I will lay this report on the Table. However, the main thing obviously is marginalization and malpractices, which occurred immediately there was an intention here to pass a resolution and the district fuelled the separation.

Section 4 on page 22 of this report is misreporting what is really on the ground. I would like to put it straight that the people of Manjiya have never seen the technical report from the Ministry of Local Government although the committee appears to be quoting it. And I am requesting, Mr Speaker, that the committee lays a copy of this technical report on the Table. It might help us if both parties, which were involved, had a chance to look at it.  

The People of Manjiya are not really requesting to go back to Mbale District, but they are saying temporarily they prefer being looked after pending the solution to the problem. As outlined in the five points I had wanted to enumerate, but they are in the memo, which we handed to the committee.  

Bubulo is not really central in Manafwa District. Many people here who know Manjiya and Bubulo, Bubulo is one kilometre from the Mbale border, and you cannot say that is the centre of Manafwa District. This is wrong reporting by the committee and is better for this honourable House to get an accurate report so that you take decisions basing on the truth and not what people seem to - obviously the two counties are together, but on the ground as my earlier colleagues have said, they are not together at all. 

From what is being reported - I have already talked about the report - it appears this report went to one side and did not go to the other side. This was very unfair to us, even in the report here the report says, “Manjiya cannot house this because they have only 30 hectares of land as compared to 200 hectares of land in Bubulo.”  

Mr Speaker, Bududa Hospital alone sits on over 30 hectares of land, the agricultural demonstration farms for Bugisu were in Manjiya and on the whole the Government land is 1,200 hectares; anybody is free to look at it. The committee hammered only 20 to 30 minutes in Manjiya, they did not go around to see this and that is why it is creating a problem.  The idea here was to solve the problem not to fuel the problem. 

The committee reported that when they went to Bubulo they found people in the council, people working, obviously did the committee try to find out who the people were? Mr Speaker, when elections were held at the beginning when this Manafwa District was announced here, people calculated and went to Manjiya and got somebody who has never even passed senior II and made him a chairman. The people of Manjiya were outraged. The current chairman in Manafwa does not even have an O’ Level certificate and the qualifications of this chairman are well known. We saw this as hoodwinking, trying to say, “Well, when they come here, they will say Manafwa people are the chairmen; Manafwa people are heading this and that.” 

What value do people of Manjiya get in this alliance? They say Manjiya cannot join Mbale because Bubulo is in between. If the committee had bothered to find out, there are two roads from Mbale to Manjiya: one via Bubulo and another via Busano, they should have known that Manjiya is joined to Mbale without necessarily passing through Bubulo.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Wakikona. Honourable Wakikona has raised very serious legal issues that this House will not leave them to pass. An LC V chairperson is supposed to have qualifications equivalent to those of a Member of Parliament, and if the current chairperson of the district to be does not have the necessary qualifications, I think the Minister of Local Government should ensure that he vacates office immediately.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker is the honourable member in order to assign me the responsibility of establishing the qualifications of a candidate or a chairman of a district as if I am either the Electoral Commission or the National Council for Higher Education, which is supposed to determine the equivalent? Is he in order to drag me into the mud for being somebody handling matters, which do not fall anywhere in the ambit of my responsibility? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was simply suggesting that you are in charge of the sector; trying to assist in this regard.

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I was just emphasising the point on Manjiya being near Mbale. Even here you cannot say Entebbe is not in Wakiso because you pass through Kampala. Even then, that is apart because I have already told you that Mbale and Manjiya are joined by a full sub-county and there is a road in between, but even then you can go to Mbale either via Tirinyi or Tororo and you will reach Mbale; these are just two alternatives.

Lastly, I would like to join my colleague Oliver Woneka –(Interruptions)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my colleague but I think the allegation, which he has made about the chairman, for which hon. Ekanya tried to make a follow up, is a very serious matter and I would wish that he substantiates that matter so that this House is not looked at as a House, which is just letting go of the serious allegation of that magnitude.

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, the election of interim new chairpersons in these new districts was a mandate of the Electoral Commission, which was carried out following the law. Unless someone has got proof that this particular chairman in question does not have the qualifications, he should have petitioned the relevant authority that carried out the elections and had him elected, and declared the interim chairperson of Tororo. I do not think it is the mandate of Manafwa. So it is the Electoral Commission, they carried out the elections, he was elected, if he does not qualify, the Electoral Commission is there and it can be petitioned. It is not for Parliament.  

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I was just concluding.  Those are matters of petitions, they are tedious.  Anyway the information was necessary for the House.  

Lastly, I join my sister Wonekha who had proposed an amendment to recommendation No.2. The committee very clearly identifies the problems of Manjiya and makes a recommendation, so I find studying the possibility a bit irrelevant since the committee now appears to have known the problem. In view of the difficult terrain in Manjiya County coupled with the poor road network and difficulties in service delivery, government should immediately grant Manjiya County a district status. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, as you know I am closely associated to the four Bukedi districts, I lived there for a year as a chief magistrate and I used to commute in that area. I know a bit of what goes on there, but I am shocked by what I hear now when an attempt is being made to create districts in that area. It appears that the leaders themselves had not agreed on how the districts should be set up or run and even how the boundaries in those particular areas should be set up. And from what the National Political Commissar is saying, it means even government thinks this whole matter requires further study in order to be able to take an intelligent and acceptable decision on this matter.  

Districts have been created out of former Bukedi District and Mbale District, but it appears the new districts are causing more conflicts, which conflict is on the Floor of this House. On that basis, how can you be able to think you can proceed in an orderly fashion? So, in spite of what the report says, it appears to me that government should re-study this matter before the final decision in the matter can be taken.  

While the report is very good, I think it should continue to be part of the various studies that have been mentioned by hon. Kiyonga here, and see whether we can then be able to take a final decision in this matter. Otherwise, when we still have Members of Parliament bickering as it were on the issue of districts, I cannot see how this Parliament can resolve this matter finally and be happy about the decision that we are taking. So, on this one I request that we ask the Government to give us its own position in light of all these conflicting reports and give us guidance on the matter. Otherwise, I find difficulty in taking a decision personally in light of what I have seen and heard here, and from a paper, which I have just received from hon. Ekanya now.  

Unless government thinks we can finally decide on this matter, I would request that we ask Government to restudy this matter further and come up with a final decision as to how we should create these districts, have their boundaries, their headquarters and resolve all the conflicts that exist within those areas. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any comment on the report, because we are concluding the debate?

4.16
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to make comments on this report and give the position of government on the issues involved. 

On page 8, under paragraph 3.4 on observations - and I would read these two paragraphs for emphasis and for the record: “The state of affairs in the districts is very fragile, volatile and causing a lot of tension. Threats of death, especially towards the sub-county officials were common, the killing and maiming of cattle belonging to the LC III Chairperson of Kakoro sub-county is a clear indication that his life and that of other councillors is in danger. This has prompted the sub-county officials to spend their nights at unknown places for fear of losing their lives.  

Both sides manipulated the sub-county councillors by giving them financial rewards. Some Councillors revealed they had received money. The councillors of Kakoro sub-county council rescinded an earlier decision after an uprising of the people of Kakoro…” and so on and so forth. The committee of the House recommends the security organs for maintaining order.  

I have shared very intimate discussions with colleagues and even in my own professional analysis as a sociologist, it is easy to have genocide - it is easy to create conditions for people killing each other en mass, and this more often than not is led by leaders. 

This is the worry, which I have tried to share with colleagues, to say: “Please, the world is not coming to an end.”  I said this on the Floor of this House when people were moving motions proposing new districts and so on and so forth, I said Uganda is not about to come to an end, there will be a tomorrow. And still as we talk now and as the report points out, some people have not yet realised that we can create conditions for destruction of this country by not weighing our own actions. It is with that background that I am going to make remarks.

The issue of Pallisa is not as reported here: adhoc or something that came up without due consideration. The highest authority of this country, the President, held several meetings with leaders from Pallisa not once, not twice. I have met the leaders, I was one of those who were saying that the district is small, and it should not be divided. The agitation was: “There must be a division.”  When we agreed that there should be a division, then the issue was how to divide it. 

The final meeting was held in Mbale where both sides were represented. One side came with about 70 people and another with about 160 people. We all sat there; that is how some sub-counties were being moved to join other counties. It was not a spontaneous action on my part; it was a discussion, which involved these leaders whose names are on the record even today in this House. 

We agreed, we worked out and I prepared the final resolution, which I tabled here; and the very people who had been in the meeting shot down that resolution. Hence, Parliament in its wisdom decided that we should have this sessional committee go further to investigate this matter.

In the three areas where the committee went, it was not because they had not been prior meetings and sharing of views. But Parliament found it necessary and in order to send its own committee to establish what was on the ground; and on the ground there are things now that we share that this committee has and confirms some of our own positions. 

Therefore, the position on Pallisa is as follows: I would like on behalf of the Government to accept the recommendation by the committee that Budaka becomes a district, for the time being the rest remains as Pallisa with the provision, however, that Budaka cannot be operational in this financial year because as we all know, we passed a budget only covering 13 districts and –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Is the hon. Minister in order to mislead the House? First of all, when it was passed, Budaka was supposed to be operationalised on 1 July 2005.  Already there is money in the bank in Pallisa for the district of Budaka. Is he, therefore, in order to try and suggest that Budaka should be operationalised next year, when there is already money waiting in the bank and every month, money is being submitted for the district of Budaka? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Is the case as it is stated by hon. Mallinga that already money has already been set aside? Honourable minister, the position is that money is already set aside for – I am not ruling, I am just stating the facts stated by hon. Mallinga.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I have a copy of the resolution of the establishment of 13 districts, and these are as follows: Ibanda, Isingiro, Kiruhura, Kaboong, Kaliro, Koboko, Butaleja, Nakaseke, Amuria, Mityana, Manafwa, Amorotal and Bukwa. If there is any money that is being sent for Budaka, hon. Mallinga can tell this House how it is going there. It is certainly not going from the budget that was passed by this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: What other information is there, the minister has told you it is only for those 13 districts –(Interjection)- a chief administrative officer (CAO)? There cannot be a CAO for a non-existent district. Well, I think this winds up – oh, you are still continuing?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The money that may be going there could be for the town council because we passed Budaka as a town council. I am not insane, I am standing on my two feet and I am saying the truth and nothing else but the truth. So, that is the position. I would want to put aside the case of Pallisa. 

Budaka becomes a district following on the resolution that we are now amending and that will take effect from the next financial year when the necessary presentation will be made. I hope the Hansard is capturing the remarks that are being made. If that be the case - if you can go as a leader and tell people that there is money when there is no money being sent, it means you are misguiding the society and that is utterly irresponsible. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we get your comments on the other issues?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Sir. In the case of Tororo as the NPC pointed out the subject was so controversial and several meetings again were held, including one I attended in Rwakitura and many others. The President went there and you remember there was even the scene where people acted in a manner that you would call unbecoming, to express their views. 

So to me the case of Butaleja was sorted out, Butaleja is an ongoing district. What remains of Tororo - the recommendation is that Tororo remains as it is and we have more time to study the problem, complex as it is and government will do that. I, therefore, strongly accept the recommendations given by the committee.  

Finally, on the case of Bubulo, the recommendation is that Bubulo is the headquarters and that the name of the district is Bubulo. This coincides with what our technical team in the Ministry of Local Government had come up with. But I would like to tell this House that I have established since then, sharing with hon. Kiyonga and many others, that the name Bubulo seems to connote negatively for part of this new district. 

The people of Bubulo in a council sat and said: “Look, we recognise this, now let us change the name Bubulo and call the district Manafwa, and even the town is called Manafwa so that the name does not connote anything.” To me this compromise would be a good one after all, the name Manafwa came from the people of Mbale. They are the ones who sent a resolution pleading with the Government for creation of a district called Manafwa. 

The Members of Parliament who are here know that I talked to them and said: “Manafwa is a name of a river how are we going to locate this district?” The pressure was very high from the district of Mbale to a point where they were saying: “If we do not get a new district, certain things will not happen,” including some members of this House! 

The district was granted, then deplorisation became canyon like - it was like a canyon between people.  We pleaded and pleaded –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister –(Interjection)- you are concluding I agree, but I want to draw your attention. From the contributions made on the Floor have you detected that the people of Manjiya think they are marginalised by a bigger area, namely Bubulo people on the western side of the river or northern side of the river? Wouldn’t you consider trying to find a solution because their insistence was on the home of the capital of the district? Wouldn’t you think if you take it, say to Bududa, to become the capital, they would at least feel comfortable and then surrender their grievances?  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: It is the chicken and the egg, Sir, because I think Bududa is in Manjiya and then Bubulo who are the majority will say: “No,” and you will have a problem. I think the temporary solution is as follows: 

That the name of the new district, since it was even in their resolution, is Manafwa. The headquarters is called Manafwa, then this proposal that Manjiya should be considered for a separate status is looked into by the Government to see whether subsequently this could be considered.  But in the meantime we have a district, which is operational as the NPC has said: “Let us get together, the terrain is not going to change overnight, the roads cannot be built between now and tomorrow so that we have a working system and government should be trusted.” After all, the majority of the people in the district support this government and the Government cannot let them down anyway. 

In any case, we stand for the right; we cannot be on the side of the wrong. So, the issue of a possibility of a district is considered in due course and having said this on the Floor of this House it is a condition that we can look into and the House is the one, which creates the districts. 

MS WONEKA: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. It sounds good to say the district of Manafwa is operational. Indeed you have people in the offices there but in my contribution, Mr Speaker, I did tell the honourable House that councilors are not going to deliberate with their colleagues in Bubulo. Those in Manjiya are held up there because the population there - their voters are saying: “Do not go because of the abuses, because of the disagreements.”  

You just have this one interim chairman who happens to be a councilor from Manjiya, he is the only one there and he cannot be deliberating for all Manjiyans. So, you can say that indeed money goes and it is allocated, but you cannot say that it is operational in terms of people in Manjiya and Bubulo working together and sharing the resources. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I am not saying that when we say the body is sick and then at the same time say it is working normally. There are abnormalities and that is why we are here. Things have not been working right and that is why the sessional committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently covered the Pallisa matter, this is his stand on the report and we are ourselves are going to decide on the report on Wednesday because voting on this matter, which will tantamount to creating a district, is constitutional. Members are going to think about what you have said and what is in the report, then voting will be on Wednesday.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Just to conclude Sir, the leaders are enjoined to carry a message of peace. The world is not about to end. Surely, the world is going to be there without us and, therefore, I appeal to colleagues who are going back home over Christmas to take a message of good will rather than encouraging hatred and violence. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. This ends the debate on this matter, because as I have said voting on it is tantamount to creating a district and the Constitution requires us the number, we shall vote on the report, whether it should be adopted or not, on Wednesday.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 3 of this report there are positions we are requested to raise with the Minister of Local Government. I wanted to know about the list of these districts how far the minister has gone.

THE SPEAKER: On page what?

MR KAKOOZA: On page 3.

THE SPEAKER: You want the position on what?

MR KAKOOZA: The position because the chairman of the committee was saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: They did not make any recommendation for creating other districts. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: There was an interim report.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we are talking about the final report. So, the question of other new districts does not arise in this report where we are only dealing with three areas.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker there is an attachment to this report on page 2, Budaka District is already created. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean we passed a resolution –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Yes, we passed a resolution creating Budaka District.

THE SPEAKER: Creating Budaka District when it had a controversy? We did not.

DR MALLINGA: It was on the list of the districts, which were created.

THE SPEAKER: It is a mistake.

DR MALLINGA: And then it was referred just for the clarification of the boundaries. Can we please vote on it?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if you produce the Hansard where we did that, then we shall be bound by the decision. So, next Wednesday you check with the Hansard and then we shall buy it.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me chance. On matters to do with this page 3, Lamwo County, which is No. 3, is supposed to become a district. The President wrote a letter directing the Minister of Local Government in view of the confusion in Tororo to replace – Lamwo to take the place of Tororo for this financial year as a district. Because of many considerations, security is one, the location itself is another, and the problems facing us there are unique and require the Government’s close scrutiny. But the minister decided to ignore it. I do not know whether he is going to react to that and whether the committee can consider Lamwo as an urgent district. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in the same vein, I am saddened to note that the minister has not answered the query I put. It is briefly as follows: the making of Kampala a capital city of Uganda renders some areas, including Mengo and Lubaga Division, homeless and therefore there is need to ensure that the areas rendered homeless get a new home. What is the minister saying about that?

THE SPEAKER: No, let us work it out this way. Have they demarcated Kampala the capital city? Has the exercise been finalised? If it has not yet been finalised, then you cannot talk about non-existence. When it is finalised, the boundaries of the capital city of Kampala in Buganda, that is what you said, and then the other part, then your question will arise, but not yet.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member was asking about Lamwo. There was a little misunderstanding, which was to this effect that in case Tororo had been one of the districts approved by Parliament to be effective this financial year and now has difficulties, could Lamwo be considered to take its place? But it turned out that Tororo was even being considered for the next financial year. So, Lamwo still remains to be considered in the next financial year as well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was an indication earlier that there would be a Cabinet meeting tomorrow, but I have been advised by the Leader of Government Business that you will not have it, so we shall continue handling the issue of the political parties code, which has been started today and then we see how we proceed. We shall reconvene tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. The house is adjourned until then.

(The House rose at 4.41 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 22 December 2004 at 10.00 a.m.)



