Friday, 19 December 2014

Parliament met at 10.13 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, this House should have been sent on recess yesterday but because of the urgent business we were not able to complete, we have extended this sitting to today to allow us handle this very urgent and important business. We will be altering the Order Paper to start with item No.6 - I am told it runs concurrent with the subject - so that we can deal with this subject and then we go according to the Order Paper. 

I do not see the chairperson. Honourable member for West Budama County North, did you say you had an urgent matter to raise?

10.15
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of West Budama have asked me to raise a matter of urgent public importance. 

For a very long time now, our infrastructure has been in a very bad state. This has been worsened by the rainy season that is just ending. The road from Tororo to Busolwe via Nagongera is very critical infrastructure that traverses from West Budama North into Bunyole County. The President has on many occasions promised that this road would be tarmacked but nothing has been done in that regard. 

May I request the Leader of Government Business to indicate to the people of West Budama when this particular road will be tarmacked? It is apparent that we cannot continue maintaining it as a murram road and it is the position of Government that it should be tarmacked, anyway.

Mr Speaker, we also experienced hailstorms in the sub-counties of Petta, Paya, Kirewa, Nagongera Town Council and Kisoko. Moving forward, we may have food shortage. We, therefore, want to put Government to notice that they should start planning for some remedial food supplies for the people of West Budama. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.17
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of the people of Budama that have been elaborated through their honourable MP. I promise to take up the matter with the responsible ministries. 
We shall also bring this to the attention of the office which deals with pledges that the President makes throughout the country, so that they can look into the matter of West Budama. Thank you.

10.17
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For quite some time the people of Burahya and Kabarole generally have had a problem with national parks and game reserves. The animals stray from the national parks, particularly from Kibaale-Semliki and Semliki Game Reserve, and they destroy people’s gardens and at times they have even killed people. Some time back, Mr Speaker, we went with the Committee on Tourism and we visited those areas - Nyabubale, Patiko, Kijura, Igogonya, Kabaswiswi - and people there were are really in a bad shape. 

Coupled with this, we had issues with the boundaries of the game reserves, particularly Semliki. We also went there with the committee but since that time, we have never solved that problem. So, it is double tragedy; people do not have what to eat and at the same time, they have been evicted from their places. 

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that Government gives attention to the border issues and to the stray animals that destroy people’s crops. Even the relationship with these game rangers is not good because they are brutal. Recently, they killed two people from Kicwamba and at times these are not poachers. 

When you are neighbours, you cannot constrain yourself from going into one another’s territory. So, at one time people followed their animals into the game reserve and they were killed from there. Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that Government addresses this issue of the border and the stray animals that destroy people’s crops. I beg to submit.

10.20
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, once again this is the relationship between animals and people living near the parks. The Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife is always trying to solve these problems. 

First of all, it is the Lord who created everybody, including animals and the land where everybody is living according to him. However, as human beings, God made us in charge of the world and everything on it. So, as the in-charge, we have to change our mind-sets; we must co-exist. Since we are in charge, we must allow the animals also to live with us, but many of us think the parks should not be even created because animals are nothing. 

Nevertheless, I will raise this matter with the minister responsible. I will urge the minister to look into this matter very seriously so that we create a relationship between the people and animals and also the border problems should be solved. I promise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we go to the Order Paper?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$ 175 MILLION (SDR 113.7 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE SECOND KAMPALA INSTITUTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (KIIDP II)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter was brought and taken to the committee. The minister and the committee are now ready to move that motion. 

10.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is a motion for a proposal to borrow US$ 175 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project-KIIDP II. 

Mr Speaker, we all know that Government is very committed to improving infrastructure especially in our cities. Kampala being at the centre, with a radius of 20 kilometres, has approximately 1,200 kilometres of road and only 30 per cent of those roads are paved. About 80 per cent of the bitumen roads and 90 per cent of the unpaved roads are in a fair to poor condition.

This loan, therefore, is meant to address those gaps. The overall goal of this project is consistent with the National Development Plan. It will boost the physical infrastructure of the city. It is also aligned to the Kampala Urban Transport Improvement Plan (KUTIP), which provides a framework for addressing issues in a coherent and coordinated manner. 

The project is the second part of the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project, which started in 2007. It continued with the objective of enhancing the infrastructure and institutional capacity of KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, the project has two components. One of the components is to provide all citywide road infrastructure and associated investments, and this component will consume US$ 173.75 million. Component two is for institutional and systems development support, which will take US$ 10 million over a five-year period. That means from this financial year, 2014, to 2019. 

Component one will enhance the quality of roads, infrastructure and associated investments in Kampala for improved city mobility. It will include a number of interventions like upgrading a number of roads, and these roads are well laid out in the committee report. We interfaced with the committee and they asked questions and visited the project areas. This component will be done in two phases. We think that especially after the second phase, which is the design, construction and supervision of additional works, we should be able to achieve the motives. 

The second component, Mr Speaker, is for institutional and systems development support. This is intended to strengthen the capacity of KCCA as an autonomous corporate body to deliver on its statutory mandates. 

As I already said, the total project funding for this project is US$ 183.75 million over a five-year period, financed through the IDA. It will be financed through a credit of US$ 175 million dollars and Government of Uganda and KCCA will provide counter funding of US$ 8.75 million equivalent.

The terms and conditions of this credit: The loan amount, as I have said, is US$ 175 million; the loan period is 40 years; repayment period is 30 years and we have a grace period of 10 years before the repayment can begin. The service charge is 0.75 per cent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balance of credit. The commitment fee is 0.5 per cent per annum on the outstanding balance of undisbursed credit. 

Mr Speaker, the conditions for this loan are the usual ones. This borrowing is concessional. We think that once we get this money, we shall conclude a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Finance and the project implementing entity, which is KCCA, to channel the proceeds of the credit to KCCA for implementation of this project. 

This project and the loan have been scrutinised by the Committee on National Economy and the report of the chairperson will confirm what I have just said. I pray, Mr Speaker, that this House approves this loan because it is very urgent. We need this infrastructure in Kampala and in the country in order to achieve our infrastructure gaps in the country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is your motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring, Minister of State for Energy and the member for Ndorwa. Is it also seconded by the Leader of the Opposition? (Laughter) 

Members, you recall that this particular request was sent to the Committee on National Economy; can I ask the chairperson to report on this.

10.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 175 million, equivalent to SDR 113.7 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project(KIIDP II). Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the original report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would also like to lay on the Table the committee’s minutes related to the same loan request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: I would like to lay on the Table the project appraisal document related to the same loan request, the brief to Parliament with the resolutions attached, the draft financing agreement and the abridged minutes of negotiations. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow US$ 175 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructural Development Project in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 

This request was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 July 2014 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Speaker, we considered and scrutinised the request and now we beg to report. Mr Speaker, with your indulgence and that of honourable colleagues, I beg to go to page 2, the background. 

Background

Uganda continues to experience high population growth and rapid urbanisation. Uganda’s population has increased rapidly from 24.2 million in 2002 to around 35 million in 2013. This high population growth rate, averaging 3.3 per cent per year in the last two decades, makes Uganda one of the fastest growing countries in Africa. 

The urban population growth rate is also high at 5.1 per cent per annum. It is projected that by 2035, out of a total population of 58 million, 30 per cent or 20 million people will be in urban areas. This is compared to 16 per cent in urban areas today, the majority of whom are concentrated around Kampala, the capital city. 

Kampala is the largest city in Uganda with a population of 1.53 million, growing at an annual rate of 5 per cent. The greater Kampala metropolitan area is estimated to have around 3.15 million people. Kampala is the economic, political and administrative capital city of Uganda. It is estimated that 80 per cent of the country’s industrial sector is located within Kampala and the city generates about 50 per cent of the national gross domestic product. The growth of Uganda’s economy is intrinsically linked to how efficiently Kampala is managed and how well it is connected to the rest of the country.

Once oil production begins, Kampala is expected to take on an even more important role, to provide core business and financial services. Meeting these growing demands is a challenge since the current pace of investment support, institutional development and policy reform in the city and wider metropolis is not keeping pace with growth. Urban areas are the economic hubs of Uganda, and in the report we state the main features of efficient urbanisation.

This project is the second phase of the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (IDA credit US$ 3.6 million). The project development objective of KIIDP 1 was to improve the institutional efficiency of Kampala Capital City through implementation of a strategic framework for reform, to upgrade selected city roads to bitumen standard, improve drainage, garbage collection and for institutional development activities. It closed on 31 December 2013 as shown in the annexure.

Mr Speaker, KIIDP 2 is linked to the country’s strategic plans. With your indulgence, I beg to go to page 4.

Project Objective 
The project development objective is to enhance infrastructure and institutional capacity of KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala. 

Project Beneficiaries

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, millions of people living in Kampala will benefit from improved roads and associated infrastructure through faster commute times, easier access to markets and better road safety, improved urban mobility and reduced congestion. These include, but are not limited to, KCCA staff that will benefit from improved operational and managerial capacity, commuters within the greater Kampala metropolitan areas, the public and investors.

Project Components

Mr Speaker, the project comprises of the following two components:

Component 1 - city wide road infrastructure and associated investments, which will take US$ 173.75 million; IDA will provide US$ 165 million and KCCA will provide the balance of US$ 8.75 million.

The component will finance civil works and consultancies with IDA funding and the resettlement action plan and associated costs from KCCA counterpart funding. This component will enhance the quality of road infrastructure and associated investments in Kampala City for improved mobility. 

The component will focus mainly on reconstruction and rehabilitation of the existing road network and associated infrastructure. This will include drainage, street lights, walkways, street furniture, just to mention a few, in the five divisions of Kampala. The privatisation of roads and selection of the sub-projects will be based mainly on connectivity and ability to distribute traffic within the city, with the potential to reduce congestion and improve mobility, including non-motorised transport, within the Central Business District (CBD).

Component 1 will have two phases. Under phase 1, we shall have the upgrading of Makerere Hill Road; Bakuli-Nakulabye-Kasubi-Northern Bypass Road; and Kira Road. We shall also have the reconstruction of Mambule Road, which connects Kalerwe to Bwaise, and signalisation of Bwaise and Fairway junctions. Table 1 shows other related activities that will be considered under phase 1. 

Phase 2 under component 1 will include design, construction and supervision of additional works consisting of signalisation of priority junctions; construction of a traffic control centre at City Hall linking all signalised intersections; upgrading of priority roads to dual carriageway standard; reconstruction of already existing roads; and upgrading of priority gravel roads. The proposed list of potential sub-projects for roads in phase two is in table 2 on page 7 and page 8. 

Mr Speaker, component 2 will focus on institutional and systems development support. This will take US$ 10 million. This component is intended to strengthen the capacity of KCCA as an autonomous corporate body to deliver on its statutory mandate. This will be achieved by strengthening the capacity of KCCA for investment planning and prioritisation, design, supervision, coordination, implementation plus operation and maintenance of existing and new infrastructure. 

It will also be supported by improvements in revenue collection capacity to support future investments and to ensure maintenance of infrastructure and services. The intended results are: 

    • improved KCCA capacity to implement sub projects on time and within the budget. 
    • at least 15 per cent annual increase in Own Source Revenue (OSR) using 2012/2013 as a base year.
    • adequate budget and timely maintenance of existing infrastructure so as to prolong asset life time; and 
    • introduction of information and communication technology through the use of SMS mobile phone platform for payment of bills and clients’ feedback. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this component will focus mainly on three core directorates: engineering and technical services, which will take US$4 million; physical planning, which will take US$ 2.8 million; and revenue, which will take US$ 3.2 million. These directorates are integral to the implementation of component 1 of this project and their output is directly linked to the achievement of the project development objective.

Project Cost and Financing Arrangements

The total project financing, as I have already said, will be US$ 183.75 million over a five-year period. The project will be financed through an investment project financing of US$ 175 million, which will be credit from IDA, and Government of Uganda counterpart funding of US$8.75 million, as I have already highlighted. The investment plan financing instrument was selected in view of the suitability for financing a broad range of activities including investments, technical assistance and capacity building. 

Table 3 summarises the project cost and financing. Briefly, it shows that the total project cost for component 1, which is citywide road infrastructure and associated investments, will be US$ 175.75, of which US$ 165 will be from IDA and US$ 8.75 million will be from the Government of Uganda. Component 2, which is institutional assistance development, will be solely financed by IDA.

Loan Terms and Conditions

The IDA financing has the following terms: The loan amount, as has already been said, is US$ 175 million. The loan period is 40 years, of which 30 years will be the repayment period and 10 years will be the grace period. The service charge is 0.75 per cent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balance of credit. The commitment fee is 0.5 per cent per annum on outstanding balance of undisbursed credit. The lifespan of the roads is proposed to be 17 years under continuous repair.

Conditions 

The financing has the following conditions attached to it:

    i. Issuance of the legal opinion by the Attorney-General stating that the terms and conditions of the agreement constitute enforceable binding obligations upon the Republic of Uganda. 

    ii. Conclusion of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the project implementing entity, which is KCCA, for channelling the proceeds of the credit to KCCA for implementation of the project in accordance with its terms. 

    iii. The Government has, through the project implementing entity, recruited a highway engineering specialist, a transport planning and traffic engineering specialist, a geographic information systems specialist, an environmental management specialist, a social management specialist and a revenue management specialist, all in accordance with the provisions of IDA procurement guidelines.

    iv. The Government, through the project implementing entity, which is KCCA, has deposited Shs 2.98 billion, which is equivalent to US$ 1.19 million, into the project escrow account for resettlement action plan compensation costs. Counterpart funds have been set aside for this purpose.

    v. Government is to ensure that financial and progress reports are submitted to IDA as required under the financing arrangements. 


Mr Speaker, table 4 overleaf indicates that the interest costs of 0.75 per cent per annum on the loan outstanding and disbursed are lower than the standard discount rate used of 4 per cent recommended by the IMF and the World Bank. This implies that the present value of the loan is US$ 76.168 million, which is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted, which is US$ 175 million. This implies that the country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in present terms. Mr Speaker, that information is summarised in table 4.

Project Institutional Implementation Arrangements

The project will be implemented over a five-year period, that is, from financial year 2014/2015 to 2019/2020, starting from the date of contract effectiveness. Kampala City Council Authority will be responsible for the execution of all project activities.

Observations and Recommendations

Delays in Implementation of Infrastructure Sub-Projects

The committee observed that implementation of infrastructure subprojects in urban areas in Uganda generally, and Kampala City specifically, is prone to delays caused by challenges associated with identification and relocation of underground utility lines like water and telephone. These utility lines were laid many years back and there are no proper records or maps showing where they are located. Therefore, considerable time is lost in identifying where these lines are and how best they should be relocated. 

The committee therefore recommends that KCCA should make all possible efforts to coordinate with all relevant ministries, departments and agencies in the implementation of this project in order to plan for these activities in a timely manner. This will help avoid delays and wastage of resources. 

Rigorous KCCA Due Diligence

The committee observed that during the implementation of KIIDP I, some contracts were awarded to responsive lowest cost bidders without the necessary due diligence to assess whether the firms had what it takes to complete the assignments within the specific time at the set cost. This led to lost time in renegotiating and rebidding contracts for incomplete work packages. 

The committee therefore recommends that KCCA should ensure that during implementation of this project, the best evaluated bidders are selected for contract award by carrying out rigorous due diligence to avoid awarding contracts to firms which do not have the requisite technical staff, equipment and financial resources to deliver.

Capacity Assessment of KCCA Technical Staff

The committee observed that though the procurement processing in KCCA is in general compliant with PPDA procedures and requisite structures of a Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU) and contracts committee are in place, the overall risk of KCCA procurement management for the proposed KIIDP 2 is high. This is due to PDU having a heavy workload, creating a need for additional staff to handle the proposed project workload in addition to the existing workload.

Also, the directorate that will implement KIIDP, as I had already highlighted, has inadequate staff to handle the proposed project tasks in addition to the existing workload. This poses a substantial risk to project implementation and impedes the capacity of the technical department to carry out their role in the procurement cycle in a timely and efficient manner.

The committee recommends that KCCA should fast-track the timely recruitment of the identified critical personnel for this project in order to mitigate the above mentioned risks.

Contract Packaging

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that component 1 of this project will involve the implementation of a number of small subprojects, mainly involving civil works. Although the practice of having small contract packaging in order to attract local firms is good, some of their shortcomings lead to the quality of works being compromised.

The committee therefore recommends that KCCA should ensure that civil works’ contracts under this project are packaged in such a way that they are large enough to attract competent firms with the capacity and resources to deliver the assignment on time. The use of small contract packaging should be minimised.

Supervision and Contract Management
The committee observed that there were a number of weak areas identified under KIIDP 1’s execution. These included the failure to meet contractual obligations such as the timely handover of sites, delayed response to contractor communication and inadequate monitoring of contract expiry dates. During implementation of KIIDP 2, supervising consultants for a number of civil works projects will be used. 

The committee recommends that for effective contract management, KCCA should not only rely on the supervising consultants but also to have internal capacity to check the performance of both the contractors and supervising consultants. This is important especially to mitigate the risk of any possible collusion between the supervising consultants and the contractors.

Kampala City Council Authority should put in place a well laid out monitoring and evaluation plan as an overall strategy to oversee the KIIDP 2 project.

Implementing the Resettlement Action Plans

The committee observed that implementation of this project will involve planning and carrying out of a number of resettlement activities for the project affected persons in the city. Some of these will include compensation of the project affected persons who will lose assets or livelihoods when the projects are implemented.

The committee therefore recommends that KCCA should ensure that there are adequate arrangements to prepare quality resettlement action plans, setting aside funding for each resettlement action plan and completing compensation in a timely manner. These will be critical factors in the success of this project.

Culture of Transparency and Accountability in the Administration of the City

The committee observed that KCCA management has taken steps towards enhancing the culture of transparency and due process in the administration and governance of the city. However, KCCA is still facing challenges of establishing a robust accountable framework for all its stakeholders.

The committee recommends that KCCA should integrate regular communication and consultation with political leaders throughout the project implementation period to ensure ownership and commitment to the project. Measures to enhance information communication and education and citizen engagement which promote transparency and accountability should be strengthened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, just give me a moment; I see the children leaving. In the gallery this morning we have pupils of Holy Foundation, Uganda from Luweero District, Katikamu North Constituency. They are represented by hon. Abraham Byandala and hon. Brenda Nabukenya. They are here to observe the proceedings but I see them now going. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, stakeholder and community response to the project: the committee observed that this project has significant social implications for stakeholder and community response. These implications will require KCCA to consult the people to be affected by the sub-projects so that they are informed about civil works impacts including acknowledging the need for involuntary land takings in order for the project to be implemented.

The committee recommends that KCCA should undertake relevant steps to ensure that the project designs consider the social implications of the stakeholder consultation and input on issues including gender analysis, community and stakeholder participation, land takes and civil works implementation for HIV/AIDS in a complex urban setting.

Environmental and Social Impact of the Project

The committee observed that implementation of this project will impact on planned and unplanned development along the existing road reserves. It will also affect commercial developments like Kasubi market and related options for resettlement for such communities as well as linear land takes along the roads. This will result into the possible relocation of people, disruptions of livelihoods, noise, traffic disruption, sewerage disposal in case sewerage line damage, public health and safety concerns, especially with regard to HIV/AIDS and sanitation, dust, excavation and also impact on vulnerable and socially disadvantaged people like the elderly, women and children.

The committee recommends that KCCA should undertake continuous consultations during preparations and implementation of this project. This will create awareness and offer correct and appropriate information as well as maintain dialogue with the communities.

Kampala City Council Authority should further ensure that a social and environment management action plan, a waste management plan and a traffic management plan for all relevant subprojects are prepared for the contractors.

Non-motorised Transport Strategy

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that a non-motorised transport strategy is not outlined in the project implementation document. The committee recommends that the KIIDP 2 project should include a non-motorised transport strategy, which should indicate the length of the footpaths, walkways and footbridges to be constructed.

Sanitation Facilities along Project Roads

The committee noted that the costing of KIIDP 2 had not included the construction of sanitation facilities in the project area. This is not in line with the recommendation by Parliament that all new roads should provide for such facilities and resting areas.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that this provision be catered for and the facilities be maintained by KCCA once they have been set up. 

The committee therefore recommends a reallocation of funds in the provisions of component 2 as follows: All these are also in the old proposal apart from sanitary facilities, which we propose should be given US$ 1 million. This will cater for those facilities that we have talked about.

Decongestion of the Zana-Kibuye Roundabout

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that despite the fact that the Zana-Kibuye roundabout is not covered by the KIIDP 2 project, it is characterised by high traffic congestion which impacts on traffic flow in other areas. 

We recommend that KCCA identifies funds alongside the implementation of KIIDP 2 to carry out road works from Namasuba to Ndejje in order to decongest the traffic between Kibuye and the Zana roundabout.

Road Maintenance

The committee notes that the delay in routine maintenance of roads under KIIDP 1 is bound to ruin the comprehensive work carried out under the project. We therefore recommend that KCCA should make a provision for road maintenance for both KIIDP 1 and KIIDP 2 roads outside the project funds, to ensure sustainability.  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee notes that KIIDP 1 was carried out successfully and therefore recommends that subject to the above recommendations, the request by Government to borrow US$ 175 million, an equivalent of SDR 113.7 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the second Kampala Institutional and infrastructural Development Project be approved. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion which I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$ 175 million (SDR 113.7 million equivalent) from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructural Development Project. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. Can we agree on a time of three minutes?

11.03
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the report but I am not convinced somewhere and I want to raise some questions.

The chairman said that KIIDP 1 was carried out successfully; I want to know whether you have accountability to support your statement. The money which was budgeted for KIIDP 1 was US$ 33.6 million and it was closed on 31 December 2013. So, as members, we need you to tell us whether you have documents to support the accountability so that we know that actually, these activities were carried out.

We still have issues with leadership problems in the KCCA. When we were discussing the budget - Mr Speaker, I am happy you are in the chair - you directed that these problems should be solved. Up to now, we are still waiting for the report. They have never brought this report and now the chairman here wants us again to pass this motion. To me, it is a big problem. 

On page 12, the committee refers to the management executive committee, which is a technical body. This technical body is responsible for providing overall implementation guidance. Who are the members on this committee? Within 30 minutes, we are going to commit all Ugandans with this amount of money and you are not telling us who is on this committee. Of course, we should be having the political wing in KCCA. Do you want only these technical members to commit Ugandans using all this money without the political wing? 

I think, Mr Speaker, this is an issue. Let the chairman tell us who is on this executive committee. I think we shall be convinced after that. Mr Speaker, I want to ask my -(Member timed out.) 

11.06
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion that this loan request be approved. 

First of all, I think this is even overdue. This loan request has been here with us for a long time, to the extent that we were almost becoming time-barred in the processing and yet we really need the infrastructure of Kampala to be improved. So, my position is that without undue delay, we should pass this loan request. 

I have about two issues to raise just for improvement. I have seen several roads that have been earmarked for support but I would suggest that while implementation is being done, the technical leadership should try as much as possible to be proactive in handling certain things. One of the reasons why there is congestion in the city is that even if you work on a main road, there are small bypasses that are not worked on and they have a lot of potholes and vehicles cannot use them. 

Among the roads being proposed, there are several that have many bypasses. In the Ntinda area, for example, you are working on the road from Nakawa to Ntinda trading centre but then there is another one from the Wandegeya side through Kisasi and then through Bukoto. There are a lot of roads around there that could be worked on, small roads that can be worked on in the process of implementation so that they can support the many vehicles and decrease on jam. I know it is possible to do this during this period of implementation. 

The second point is on the issue of coordination and harmonisation. The other time a lot of money was used on working on this road from Nakawa into town. There was a lot of beautification done and then later on, those flowers were removed. Also, the other day, on the road from Bukoto Police Station towards Ntinda, some beautification works were done; I have seen some gardens there. Now, it is going to be made a dual carriageway; that means that those plants are going to be destroyed. This leads to a lot of wastage. 

If a road is being planned, why should we use money to do certain things and then we come and destroy them? I think we should be able to coordinate and harmonise. I know that there are a lot of proposals for flyovers, which one time the KCCA leadership showed us somewhere when we were at a retreat. I do not see them here but I suspect they will come in future. Now, that means when you are doing this project, think about that programme also because we might do this road and then you have to destroy -(Member timed out.)

11.10
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I support the motion that this loan request be approved by Parliament. 

The face of a country is its capital city. So, no one should have any reason to delay or frustrate the efforts to improve our capital city. Quite a number of members in this House have been criticising Government and making reference to Kigali, Rwanda, saying that Kigali is much more organised and very neat. -(Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have the greatest of respect for my honourable colleague. However, by stating that nobody should have a reason – (Interjection)- I thought, Mr Speaker, the decorum of this House requires that members listen to me first and then ask for your permission to access the microphone. By a member blackmailing us that we must not have a reason to express ourselves whichever way, whether in support or objection, is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is just giving an opinion, that in her opinion nobody should have an objection to this matter. (Laughter)

MS LOWILA OKATAYOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. Many of my colleagues will agree with me that we lose a lot of time and get frustrated as we move within the city. Quite a number of times I have seen even Members of Parliament abandoning their vehicles and jumping on boda bodas because of the traffic jam. That is why I am saying I would really appeal to colleagues that we should have no reason to delay and frustrate the efforts of improving our city.

Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to Government and the management of KCCA - On page 13, the committee observed that there are delays, especially in the first stages of a project. These delays are caused by identification of underground utility lines because there are no records and maps. I want to appeal to KCCA to ensure that proper records and maps are kept this time round so that we do not experience similar problems while we will be doing future developments.

Mr Speaker, on page 17, the committee recommends consultation and dialogue with the communities around the city. That is very good; it should be done. However, as I was saying, we should also take note that there are some people who are anti-development and they may try to take -(Member timed out.)  

11.14
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I support the motion as a matter of common sense. The reason we borrow is because we do not have sufficient resources of our own to invest. We do not have sufficient savings of our own to invest and the person who borrows for purposes of investing in infrastructure is a wise person. So, there are two things here: it is a wise decision for us as a country to invest in our infrastructure and because we do not have resources of our own, it is also a wise decision to borrow.

Mr Speaker, the minister reported to this House that only 30 per cent of the roads in Kampala are paved. If you have a capital city with only 30 per cent paved roads, you only have an improved village. You have transferred West Budama to the middle of Buganda and improved it and you call that a city. It is therefore incumbent upon all of us to support KCCA to make sure 100 per cent of the roads in our capital city are paved.

Mr Speaker, hon. Lyomoki raised a number of concerns in respect to paving feeder roads. I also have a particular concern. It is my suggestion that KCCA should start planning for the road from Wankulukuku via Kitebi all the way to Kajjansi. I have no particular interest in that particular road -(Laughter)– but some piece of work was done on it–(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, who is the Member for West Budama and a resident of Bunamwaya, is very much aware, as a resident in my constituency, that the road he is talking about is actually a road outside Kampala Capital City Authority and is in Wakiso. You can object but for this, listen to me; I speak for you as your representative. He is very much aware that Kajjansi is not in Kampala. 

I am aware that the Authority establishes the metropolitan physical planning authority, which is supposed to plan for Kampala and those areas surrounding, but it is not in place. The reason is that the minister responsible for Kampala has frustrated its appointment. So, by the member therefore trying to convince this House and bring in a road outside the jurisdiction of the Authority and for which we cannot borrow this money anyway with knowledge of those facts, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that sounds more like information. So, please now you are informed. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Wankulukuku and Kitebi are all under the Kampala Capital City Authority. 

My last point is on the question of developing capacity. If you invest in manpower and institutional building, you are a wise person. One of the components of this loan is for the development of capacity, human resource, and it is a wise decision to borrow for that purpose. I therefore support the motion that we authorise this borrowing. I thank you.

11.18
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with answering concerns about the Lord Mayor. The issue of the Lord Mayor is in court. Neither the Speaker, the chairperson of the committee, the honourable member nor I can resolve that matter. We all have to wait until court pronounces itself on the matters of the Lord Mayor –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the honourable colleague for giving way and especially since the two of us shadow each other. I just want to inform the honourable minister that actually, the latest substantive decision is that hon. Erias Lukwago is the Lord Mayor of Kampala. As to whether you have refused to comply with the orders of reinstatement is a different matter. So, there is nothing in court as to whether or not there is a lawful Lord Mayor in that office.

MR KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: I thank you for the privilege you enjoy speaking in Parliament but I do not envy the ignorance with which you speak. 

Mr Speaker, every epoch has its own challenges and it is timely that resources should be invested in the development of our capital city. I am aware that the capital city has been under the charge of quite a number of people, Government and the Opposition, but this is our capital city. 

Every epoch has a challenge of development and development includes sometimes demolishing. It is not unusual that sometimes in the process of improvement, you have to take hard decisions including demolishing; so, it is not a waste of resources. It is important that we have a presentable city, a city which we can all be proud of and that is easy for doing business. 

When you look at the layout of Kampala, it is colonial and if we have to overcome these colonial structures and inferiorities, we have to do some bit of improvement if we must survive in this city. Otherwise, we would have to take the costly option of changing the capital.

Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate the issue of planning. I have had the occasion to be Minister for Local Government three times, and the Ministry of Local Government was in charge of Kampala City Council. I remember the last planning done was done by us in 1986 when we planned Naguru, Konge and Buziga and I am not aware of any other planning activities going on. At one time, I asked for a plan for the contiguous districts of Kampala for purposes of future expansions. I asked for the one of Mukono, Wakiso and that of Entebbe. As I speak, I do not think there is anything. The one for the metropolitan authority was put in the law.

My colleague, the Shadow Minister, if the matter was put in the law and your colleague the Minister of Local Government –(Interjections)- When I am talking you have to keep quiet because when you talk, I keep quiet; quid pro quo. Now it would be an opposition matter to press the Ministry of Local Government to create that institution. That would be a rational and reasonable Opposition, other than when you start debating as to which Otafiire is bigger than the other. Those are not relevant.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would appeal to the House and everybody who is interested in the welfare of Kampala to support this -(Member timed out.)

11.24
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Mr Speaker, I also rise to join my colleagues to support the motion which has been tabled. 

Most of us live in or around Kampala and Kampala being the capital of this country, it needs improvement. We do appreciate the work that KCCA has done so far but I think much more needs to be done. The resources are not adequate - the domestic resources. Therefore, we should approve this loan request so that we acquire more resources to support infrastructural development. 

The recently released census results estimate the night time population of Kampala at about 1.5 million people. However, the census used methods that counted those who spent a night in Kampala on census night and yet the people who consume the services are the day dwellers or people who are in Kampala during the day, most of whom are from the surrounding districts but also from as far as Kanungu.
 
This huge population in Kampala impacts on the services, Mr Speaker. One of the services is transport and communication. We still have challenges, as members have said, of city transport and the traffic jam. Kampala is one of the most congested cities and there is the issue of the boda bodas criss-crossing the entire city. All these issues must be addressed. I hope that once this project takes off, it will ease the burden of transportation within Kampala.

We also need to know what happened to the project of the Pioneer buses. I think KCCA and the Government must address the issue of city public transport like the use of public buses and other facilities. We see them parked in Namboole; we need an explanation as to what exactly the problem is. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we have passed very many loan requests in this House, but the challenge is the delay in implementation - the utilisation of resources. When you look at reports from the Ministry of Finance and other agencies, there are loan projects we have passed but they have never commenced many years after this Parliament has pronounced itself. I do hope that KCCA and the Government will expedite the process because we need to see the implementation starting faster. 

The good thing is that all of us stay around. So, we shall also be monitoring to see whether the road works have started. Otherwise, I want to appeal to all members to support this project so that KCCA can be enabled to improve city transport. Thank you.

11.27
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would request for an extra two minutes as a representative from the city. Definitely, this loan is time barred. We needed this loan yesterday for the various reasons that I am going to give.

First, of course we have the political question in the city, which is yet to be resolved. This is because if we do not have the technocrats work together with the political wing for the city, we are doing a disservice to the progress of our city. If there is anybody who can intervene for us so that we have that resolved and we move as a team, the better for Uganda and for our city.

Mr Speaker, I must confirm and admit that as a representative of Kawempe North, I was one of the beneficiaries of KIIDP I. You remember, in the Eighth Parliament I, together with members of the Committee on National Economy, traversed the whole of the city, including Kawempe. We saw the state of the roads in our constituencies and definitely, when KCC brought the request, everybody supported it, and indeed I am very proud that in Kawempe those roads are now passable.

However, Mr Speaker, as we move on to KIIDP II, we must convince ourselves about the principle of value for money, and this goes to the Committee of National Economy. This committee is responsible for all these loans but more often than not, we do not get follow-up reports about these loans in regard to what might have been done. I think we must create that culture that before any loan requests come in, Parliament is briefed on really what happened to the previous loans. This will help to update us on the progress of all the loan requests we pass.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of compensation -(Member timed out.)


11.30
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like my honourable colleague, the MP for West Budama North, I oppose this borrowing as a matter of principle and common sense as well as memory. 

Mr Speaker, you sat in that Chair and directed, when we were passing the budget, that the Government resolves the issue of political leadership urgently and reports to Parliament. Parliament is a political organ of Government. We deal with political leadership, not this business of extending our hands to start talking about technical leaders. 

In this report, there is a recommendation, which reads thus: “…to integrate and incorporate and work with the political leadership of the city.” The political leadership at the City Hall, headed by the Lord Mayor, is in disarray. I earlier on informed the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs that the latest decision, which is a decision of the High Court by Justice Lydia Mugambe, was that there was actually no impeachment and there is a Lord Mayor in place. What the government did was to say they wanted ex parte proceedings to keep him out despite the recognition that there is a Lord Mayor. 

Now, there are no meetings of the Authority to sit, evaluate and monitor the performance of these people. Indirectly, they are coming back to you in this House to say that they want to borrow and commit Ugandans to pay this loan, which has no political oversight. 

Mr Speaker, it is very important, especially for some of us who are in the city for 365 days, to have a clean city. However, I think it is of even greater importance that we work on the issue of governance first because it is the safest way we can guarantee accountability for the funds that we are borrowing.
 
For those reasons, Mr Speaker, I stand to vehemently oppose this motion by my colleagues and the report of the committee to the extent that it wants us to borrow money without political oversight.

11.33
COL. SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because matters of infrastructure development are matters of security. 

The status quo in Kampala City as it stands today, especially in motor and pedestrian traffic, is every security officer’s nightmare. I invite the members, since today is a Friday, to visit Kamwokya where there is a weekly market and see what the situation is like.
 
Whereas my colleagues who are from the medical fraternity would be looking at the picture from a medical mind-set, I go through the city with a security mind-set. In this era of terrorism, an urban setting being the new operational theatre for terrorists, there is no greater need for people to be alive than to have a well-planned and developed infrastructure. I am thinking in terms of rescue and evacuation in case need arises.

I also hope and pray that once the House approves this loan request, we shall have ample urban parking, marked roads and plot numbers. I am talking from the background of the security and I speak for my constituency, which has a constitutional mandate to protect and defend Ugandans and their property. 

I pray that this House deems it imperative and incumbent to support and pass this loan request so that we can facilitate the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and all other law enforcement agencies to secure the people of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have had a fair coverage of this debate. I might need to consider closing this debate. I am going to allow some two or three interventions, but in two minutes only. 

11.36
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I have heard a very good debate today. I do not think there is any Member of Parliament worth his salt that can stand here and mount a debate on the Floor of Parliament as to why we do not need a clean city with well-planned infrastructure. Even the UPDF representative is right to say that the question of infrastructure development is a question of security. That is not debatable; we just cannot engage in that debate.

The debate we can sustain is: who is borrowing? We have a Kampala City Council Authority. We have allowed impunity in denying the city the due political leadership it deserves because we nourish the technocrats and build arrogance. When we give them money and a budget, they ignore. The framers of the legislation and good governance created natural checks and it is at these interventions when we call these gentlemen to order.

Therefore, there is no way we can authorise the city to borrow on behalf of Kampala without the political leadership to check and supervise the money we are going to give them. If we sound very resolute, the question of Kampala political leadership will be solved. But every time they come here and we give them a green light, they become arrogant. Therefore, it is at this time that we must send a clear message to solve these problems – (Interruption)

MR MANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has said that there is no involvement of local leadership in the city. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. 
We have been traversing these roads in Kampala and often times we have been moving with local leaders in the city. 

Is the member in order to allege that the local leaders in the city are not involved in the management and oversight function?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are informed. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, what we want the leadership of this country and the city to do is to stop impunity and arrogance and humble themselves and solve the simpler problems of Kampala. 

Every time we give them resources, they simply go out of their way to ignore and abuse those resources. Therefore, by denying them this loan, all that we want to do is to make them know that the people’s representatives are saying, do a better job for -(Member timed out.)

11.40 
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was looking at the documentation the committee reviewed and curiously noticed that they omitted reviewing the ministerial policy statements for 2013/2014 and 2014/2015. The amount we are about to borrow is almost Shs 500 billion. So, are we running a separate budget completely different from what the orthodox budget for the country is? This was presented on 9th July even before we had passed the main budget and it even surpasses the main budget itself. 

Mr Chairman, what was the rationale of this? Is this an alternative way of financing activities? Is this the modus operandi? Is this how -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that in addition to the absence of the metropolitan physical planning authority, the Public Accounts Committee of that authority, again by reason of the frustration by the responsible minister, is not in place. So, there is definitely no mechanism of ensuring transparency and accountability of these funds.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Whereas we all want the city, Mr Speaker, why aren’t we being honest? Why are we using the backdoor to introduce another budget completely?  This is a Shs 500 billion loan, which you are cushioning in US$ 173 million but it is almost a Shs 500 billion budget.

Mr Speaker, from the component that will be financed -(Member timed out.)

11.43
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the motion that Parliament approves the borrowing for KIIDP 2. 

Mr Speaker, in countries like Uganda where we have only one city, its appearance speaks volumes about this country. As a woman who is always in charge of a home, I would call Kampala City the sitting room of Uganda. When you go to any home and find a dirty sitting room, it tells you what the rest of the home looks like. I really support that we approve this.

However, I want to appeal to the people who are going to implement this project to first of all, apart from beautifying our city by planting flowers, also plant a lot of trees. When you visit Lusaka today, it is not a very beautiful city but the numbers of trees which are there make it look very beautiful and admirable. So, I would appeal to the implementers to make sure they provide for the planting of trees along the roads we are constructing.

Mr Speaker, I also want to add that in the report of the committee, it is indicated that we need walkways but they forgot that we also need bicycle lanes. World over, people try to decongest cities by creating bicycle lanes because riding a bicycle is some kind of physical activity. 

One of the problems we have in Uganda today is the burden of non-communicable diseases, which mostly come as a result of inactive living. If we put bicycle lanes, we could even have some of the honourable Members of Parliament here come to Parliament while riding. I was in Denmark and saw the Prime Minister of that country go to his office riding a bicycle because the city planning allows him to do -(Member timed out.)

11.46
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for Government to borrow this money for KIIDP 2. 

Mr Speaker, I live in Kampala and I pass through roads that are in a very terrible state. I really wonder whether these places are part of Kampala - this is Nakawa Division. I believe if we reinforce the capacity of Kampala City Council Authority, some of these roads will be worked on. Also, many of the issues that are raised by Members will be solved.

Mr Speaker, I have been perusing through the reports and I realise that the lifespan of these roads is about 15 years. This means that we shall repay the loan when the lifespan of the road has elapsed. So, when KCCA comes back for another loan, you should be mindful of that.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to correct the record, just for the future for those who will be reading. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi indicated that it is KCCA borrowing; for the record, it is the Government of Uganda borrowing though, of course, KCCA is the beneficiary. It is important for us to put that record straight. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to go into the politics of KCCA but it is interesting how politicians shift the burden elsewhere. The political leadership may be in disarray but does that mean KCCA should stop functioning? Many people -(Member timed out.)

11.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Chairman, thank you very much for the report.

We all want good roads in Kampala and the whole country. The roads in Kampala would be much better if Government did what they have been doing in the last five or so years. Kampala was deliberately sabotaged by the Government and starved of funds because of politics. 

Once you are in power, you stop politicking because you have to attend to developmental issues. The amount of money that KCCA has got since Madam Jennifer Musisi came to office is almost 10 times what they used to get because KCCA was headed by the Opposition. That was all politics! So, we would like the roads to be done and they accept that many roads have been done –(Interjection)- I do not want information but –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on point of order. I have been in Parliament for some time and I think for the honourable Leader of the Opposition, this is his first time. All the times I have been here, KCC then was being managed by opposition politicians. Many times we passed both loan requests and budgets for KCC before it was transformed into an authority. Even for this KIIDP I that we are trying to extend to KIIDP II, when we passed the first loan for the defunct KCC, that place was being managed by opposition politicians. 

Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the Leader of the Opposition to deliberately mislead this House and the country at large, that we are giving KCCA more money than we used to when it is a fact that we have always been passing loan requests and budgets handsomely for KCC? The records speak for themselves, including KIIDP I, which I talked about earlier. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Factually, that statement is not correct, Leader of the Opposition. So, you might want to reflect on the record and correct that impression.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I only said that money has been increased substantially. Even KIIDP 1 was US$ 33 million and this one is about US$ 180 million; that is about six times more. This is what I am saying, once you have more money, you can do more work. We would like to give KCCA more money and they do more work so that we have a clean, well-panned and modern city.

What we are saying is that in this country, we have agreed that there is governance oversight; Parliament has an oversight role and so do the district councils and KCCA. If something is missing - Mr Speaker, we approved a budget from KCCA, which is currently running, and it was brought here without approval by the governance structures but we passed it. No organisation or body comes directly to Parliament without having had their own local governance structure approve budgets. That is what is in our Constitution. So, we appeal to Government to just do that. 

Impunity is a disease in our country. When I spoke here I asked if we could solve this KCCA issue through dialogue. The minister said we can talk. I have tried to see if we can have dialogue to solve this matter and ensure that there is governance in KCCA to take care of taxpayers’ money -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are appealing to Government to sort out governance issues at the KCCA by letting the Lord Mayor go back to his office as it was ruled by a High Court Judge. There is nothing preventing the Lord Mayor from going back to his office apart from politics. If this issue is sorted out, we shall be comfortable with this money being given to the administrators at KCCA. That is what we are asking of you. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to say something about this because the last fight we had here was about KCCA. You remember the budget for the President’s office was passed without debate because we had a fight over KCCA. We shall continue fighting over KCCA. Even in the next budget we shall fight over KCCA unless we sort out this issue of governance. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.54  
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like all of us, in the interest of Uganda and KCCA, which houses this Parliament and all of us, to overwhelmingly give full support to this motion. 

Secondly, on the issue of governance at KCCA, which my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, has been raising, you know very well that all of us want this matter to be properly resolved in accordance with the law. However, there have been a number of issues and there have also been discussions. 

I want to conclude by saying that Government is committed to getting the KCCA issue properly and amicably resolved in accordance with the law, taking into account the realities of the politics of Kampala. You cannot just ignore the politics of Kampala because politics must be in command of what we are doing. 

Mr Speaker, let me just make one point; as far as I know, because we believe in the rule of law, there is an injunction in place. Let us sit and sort it out, but let us do so in accordance with the law and with the wishes of the people of Kampala and the people of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson of the committee, do you have any outstanding matter? 

11.57
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank you very much for your compliments and support. 

Mr Speaker, there are just a few issues that were raised for the committee to respond. One was raised by hon. Roland Mugume; he asked whether actually, the committee established the accountability evidence. I want to state that the committee looked at the unqualified report by the Auditor-General on KIIDP I. We also looked at the unqualified report by the World Bank on the procurement of this project. We also went to the field and established that most of the good roads in Kampala were done under KIIDP I. 

Another issue was raised by hon. Latif Ssebagala, who was actually a member of this committee, except for the last few months. He wondered if the committee looks at the performance of previous loans. We actually do so and for this specific loan, we evaluated KIIDP I and established that the performance was good, as I have already highlighted.

Lastly, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo said the committee did not review the ministerial policy statements for 2014/2015. This is not right. We actually reviewed it and perhaps I would require that you review it more. When you read it further, you will establish that under that ministerial policy statement, there is a provision for this loan but which is under government counterpart funding. 

As you are aware, because you are more senior to me in this House, such loans are normally incorporated in the report on grants and loans. For that matter, considering the formalities that are normally gone through, we expect it to feature in the report on loans and grants that is yet to be tabled in June next year. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that this issue of KCCA has been in this House for a fairly long time. It does not seem to be getting a resolution that has the finality that we need so that we can all be guided on how we can move on with this matter. However, we also know that as a House, we have given KCCA some responsibilities in terms of programmes to implement and a city to run. We have given them money, and this request is to continue facilitating this process. 

I still reiterate, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my earlier directive that this matter should be closed to pave way for a harmonious handling of matters of KCCA. Honourable members, I urge you that this can happen, but we can let the matter before us go, we approve the loan as requested and then we handle this issue of KCCA in a more – 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am not talking about KCCA issues. I have raised several matters here on policy issues to the Minister of Finance in terms of our negotiating with the World Bank and other international financial institutions as regards loans. 

We have our procurement Act, but normally these loans come with tied procurement conditions and closing periods. If you look at the Auditor-General’s reports, the performance of loans has been questioned; the maturity period and closing periods have passed all because of the conditionalities of the financing institutions - the World Bank, ADB and the Islamic Development Bank.

We have always told Government to let the supreme law of the land prevail. The technical people in Government do everything possible but the World Bank, ADB and other financers always have review missions, send back reports and this delays implementation of such programmes. They cause delays and yet there is interest payable on disbursed and undisbursed loans. When the closing period reaches, some of the loans are forfeited.

I want to seek the commitment of the Minister of Finance that they will have a policy position when they come with the next loan request to this House, in which they have an agreement with the financing institutions like the World Bank, ADB, the Exim Bank and others, which conforms to the law of the land. Mr Speaker, I beg you to direct the Minister of Finance to make that commitment to this House.

12.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the honourable members for their support.  

On the issue raised by the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, certainly there have been delays either from the lenders or from us, the Government, because of the long process that we take. I want to commit - We are carrying out consultations with all our lenders and at an opportune time, we are going to inform the House about what agreements we have reached. We are doing this so that we do not delay implementation of projects and incur loss due to interest payments and yet the delay is not partly or solely on our side.

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I want to say that the bank approved this loan six months ago and they have been threatening to channel it elsewhere. If we do not utilise it and show that Parliament has made commitment in another month or so, there is a likelihood and risk that we could lose it. I do seek that we support this loan request by approving it. I thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. When you look at the compensation component, it is almost Shs 3 billion and yet the loan is Shs 500 billion. I do not know whether this is according to the magnitude of the loan, but the compensation element to me seems to be a little bit small. As leaders in Kampala, we may face problems with people who are going to be affected and may need compensation. I beg to seek some clarification on that.

12.05
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank honourable members for the support given towards the approval of this loan. I also thank the committee for giving its support. 

Mr Speaker, a number of issues have been raised by the Members. On the issue raised by hon. Latif Ssebagala about compensation, I want to say this will be catered for adequately. There are some funds set aside for that so far. In the event that the funds are not enough in this financial year, this is an on-going project and funds for compensation will always be provided for as provided by the Constitution and the laws of Uganda. So, there is no way we can implement this kind of project without compensating the people. We must do that as per the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, on the issues of accountability in regard to KIIDP 2, I want to say it is clear; the committee did the monitoring and established that KIIDP 1 was well implemented. 

On the issue of the oversight role, I want to say Parliament will continue to play the oversight role, much as we do the approval of these loans. Parliament will be availed all the necessary avenues to make sure there is – (Interruptions)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to disrupt my former friend, hon. Henry Banyenzaki -(Laughter)- but I want to mention that it is properly provided for under the law that the body which primarily carries out the oversight work over KCCA is the Authority. The composition of the Authority is properly stipulated in the law. 

Is hon. Henry Banyenzaki in order to mislead this House by insinuating that it can turn itself into the Authority for Kampala City and carry out its duties? Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under our laws, this House remains the final repository of all matters of accountability for any public funds. That is what the minister was saying. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Sam Lyomoki raised the issue of coordination and harmonisation, and I thank him for that support. The coordination and harmonisation is being tackled because all these infrastructure plans being done within KCCA are done together with the transport sector working group, which includes the Ministry of Works and other relevant ministries. We are using this kind of approach to ensure coordination and harmonisation. Definitely, the Office of the Prime Minister is there to ensure that the concerned ministries are well coordinated. 

There was the issue of some of these bodies digging up roads. Sometimes a road has been done and the next day it is being dug up by organisations like National Water and Sewerage Corporation so that they can lay pipes, for example. I want to say that this issue has also been sorted. The Deputy Executive Director of KCCA is a board member at the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. This was done to ensure that for whatever decisions are taken on planning for the city, there is an input by KCCA.

As for the delays, Mr Speaker, I agree with members and I thank them for that observation. I also would like to thank all those members who supported this loan request so that Government can invest in this infrastructure.
 
I further wish to thank Parliament for approving other loans to improve KCCA. There is another loan request that was approved by Parliament and all the municipalities of Uganda are going to be improved. So, the borrowing is not only for Kampala but also for these municipalities, including for other infrastructure developments such as markets. Mr Speaker, you are aware about the market improvement projects which are improving the skylines of these cities. 

In the interest of time, I want to say that we have captured the concerns of the Members. On the issue of re-allocation as indicated at page 18, I want to say that this will be looked into because it fits into the budget. It will be considered, afterall the reallocation is minor. 

On the rest of the issues, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister has pronounced himself and on others, you already gave your wise ruling. We thank you very much for the support. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In a very bipartisan manner, there is no reason whatsoever - I would like to further seek your guidance. You had wisely ruled, and this matter came up even when we were in Tanzania, that the moment you delay acceptance of monies from World Bank and IMF, those monies are given to alternative countries that demand. 

Therefore, whereas we have raised concerns, and I agree with those concerns, as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kampala, I would like to see a lot of improvement in terms of infrastructure development and in a very positive manner. Therefore, I highly support -(Applause) – the motion that this loan be passed very quickly, – and I will make this comment clear and stand by it -(Laughter)– aware that this House has the authority to monitor these funds subsequently. 

Whether you want it or not, the macroeconomic concept of Africa today is such that if you do not let these monies come in for infrastructural development, then you hurt your economy. Therefore, other issues can be attended to but if it passes the criteria for entering this country, let us take it. I heavily support that we accept and consent to having this loan request approved immediately by this Parliament without delay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us take a decision on this; we have debated this matter for a long time. 

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, first of all, I must say that I stand to support the motion that this loan be approved. However, I proceed to just inquire or request your guidance on one thing. 

Mr Speaker, you wisely directed that the matter of governance at KCCA should be dealt with. It would appear that the reason we are going in and out, round and round, on this simple matter as to whether this loan should be approved or not is a mix-up of governance and administration. 

I would like to draw this analogy, Mr Speaker: In a house, you could have a problem that can lead to a separation with your wife; should the children be left to suffer because the two of you have disagreed? What I am saying in effect is that the question of survival of Kampala cannot be mixed up with the question of governance. 

The only thing that I would request, Mr Speaker, is that apart from your directive, I think this question of going round and making - The other time I was talking about turning this House into a moot House where the Prime Minister or ministers, for that matter, come and make statements which are non-committal. Can your directive actually have a timeframe, so that it is clear to us when the issue of the Lord Mayor of Kampala will be resolved? I know it is political, but even politics must also be handled in context. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government borrow up to US$ 175 for those purposes - 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, rule 23 of our Rules of Procedure reads, “(1) The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.” That means people who are not elected Members of Parliament will not vote. “(2) The quorum prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question.” 

Before you put this question, Mr Speaker, and before we commit this country, I have looked around and noticed that we do not have the relevant and requisite quorum. Will you guide the House on that procedural question? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter has been raised and the rules require me to order for the ringing of the bell. The bell will be rang and we shall resume in 15 minutes. House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 12.17 p.m.)

(On resumption at 12.49p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for coming back. I would like to hear from the honourable Member for Kampala Central on this issue again.

12.51
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, with due respect, the hon. Medard Sseggona raised a residual point of procedure on the matter, but I stand my ground as I said earlier. As a matter of importance, this country requires an inflow of resources. This city owes its people a duty of care and development and as a government of the people we must make sure that we accept all monies meant for development. 

A point on governance was raised in my absence. If we get adequate commitment from Government as regards the administration at KCCA, why not? We would like to move in a bipartisan manner. We are not anti-development but we are also pro good governance. 

Issues that were raised include, but are not limited to, the payments to the Lord Mayor, whose payments were blocked even with issues that are still sub judice. If we want to run this country and move in a bipartisan manner, let us address this matter in the form of a win-win situation. We wanted these monies in for development as soon as yesterday to construct roads, walkways, channels and others, but also let us not leave one side hurting.

This issue basically falls on the shoulders of the Leader of Government Business. The commitment you give to the people will be taken at heart. Your word has always been taken diplomatically and as an assurance from Government. Honourable members, we do not have to rely on undue technicalities. This side needs the money, but it needs an unfettered commitment on good governance. This side needs the money but it also needs service delivery and infrastructure development for the people in form of services in order to fulfil its manifesto.

Therefore, if service delivery is met at crossroads with good governance then your wise counsel, Mr Speaker, has to come in. Let us have a bipartisan commitment that we shall have good governance in Kampala that the people yearn for, because we need accountability and transparency. In any case, the monies should never be blocked.

I urge all honourable members to utilise this opportunity because if we do not take these monies, they will be taken by other people. However, also to the government side, if you do not give these people of Kampala the assurance and commitment that there will be transparency and equitable governance in the city, you leave our hearts bleeding.

That is my submission, Mr Speaker. I appeal to the two sides to be given a chance so that the Prime Minister gives a lasting commitment to the people of Kampala about how governance issues shall be sorted out and in what period. After that, I am sure there will be no one who will raise a hand to block these monies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I rise in regard to our Rules of Procedure, rule 23 (4), which says, “If on the resumption of proceedings after the expiry of 15 minutes, the number of Members present is still less than the required quorum for voting, the Speaker shall proceed with other business or suspend the sitting or adjourn the House without question put and in case of a Committee, the chairperson…”

Mr Speaker, we have had a case where the issue of quorum became a constitutional matter and this Parliament was embarrassed, and we lost the whole Bill on homosexuality. Our hands are tied. The Rules of Procedure give a command not only to the House but to the Speaker. So, are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not put the question and I am not intending to put the question. We wanted to close all debate on this subject and we see how to proceed.

12.56
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I just want to pick up from where hon. Muhamad Nsereko stopped. 

I think it is important for us to seize this opportunity to approve this loan, so that we can solve the problems of infrastructure in our capital city. At the same time, it is also important that the Government, through the Prime Minister, commits itself to resolving the issues of governance in Kampala. 

This debate on governance has been known for so many months and it is befitting that the people and voters of Kampala find a final solution to this problem. So, I think the spirit of hon. Muhamad Nsereko is a welcome spirit. I think the government, through the Prime Minister, should take this advantage and provide leadership and commit that Government shall for the last time come in and resolve the issues of governance in Kampala. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue of KCCA has posed a difficult situation in this House not only once, but many times and for some reason it happens when I am in the Chair. (Laughter) It is not a good situation to chair when outstanding matters that are easy to solve continue to be a problem and pose a threat to the progress of debate in the House. 

I had earlier made a directive to the government side that this matter of KCCA should be resolved so that when matters come from KCCA we are able to, in a bipartisan manner, handle them expeditiously. Today, I will state again that personally, – and this this is for the record - if these matters of governance in KCCA are not resolved with finality, I will not be prepared to preside over a matter involving KCCA again. (Applause) This is because it is a stressful experience, there are legitimate concerns being raised and these concerns are genuine. We requested that the matters be resolved and they are not. Each time I sit here, I get headaches about these matters. 

So, whether the loan is approved or not, if by the time we resume in February next year, the matter of administration and governance in KCCA is not resolved, no matter should be brought to this House that has anything to do with KCCA and the House  expects that Jacob Oulanyah will be presiding; I will not. (Applause) I will not, because I am only a human being and I cannot preside over the same thing over and over again.

The definition of a mad man is a person who does the same thing over and over again but each time expecting a different result. I do not want to join that category of people. Please, and I am urging the Government that this matter should be resolved so that this House can proceed in a harmonious way because it does not make sense. 

Members, that is my final directive. It is personal but also my personal commitment to this, because it is not good. We have other urgent business - Registration of Persons Bill, Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill and all these other things - but one matter has taken us five hours and it is something that we could have solved very easily.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I urge you that by the time we resume in February next year, if you will not have resolved this matter of governance in KCCA, be put on notice; Jacob Oulanyah will not preside over any matter involving KCCA if these governance issues in KCCA remain outstanding. I would like your commitment that you will adhere to what I have just said.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, this House and this country deeply value your leadership of the House. We would not want to see you, for any reason, not being able to discharge your duties because topic X or Y is in place. That is point number one.

Two, the National Resistance Movement and its government deeply value good governance not only in the whole country but definitely also in our city of Kampala. Government, therefore, takes the Speaker’s directive seriously. The Government will expeditiously deal with these governance issues using every means possible so that we can focus on many other issues after this issue has been resolved.

Mr Speaker, in a nutshell, Government will engage the Opposition and all other critical stakeholders to get this matter of governance of Kampala City resolved. Thank you.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your directive. Mr Prime Minister, thank you very much for your assurance. 

We are also ready to assist you in solving the KCCA matter. It is not a legal question but a political one. Since we now have the political will from our colleagues, we hope and are sure that maybe it is going to be resolved. You have our assurance on that. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, how do we proceed with the business of the House? Hon. Kivumbi, how do we proceed?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we understand the commitment and we take it to heart. We mean well and we want this country to move forward. We are very democratic Ugandans, but inbuilt is our obligation to uphold the rule of law and constitutionalism. I am always the last man to go against that. We have Rules of Procedure; we can agree here but there are other interested people out here. This issue has been contentious; let us not make a mistake. 

We take the commitment at heart and we are going to follow it through to the letter. However, Mr Speaker, none of us went to the Constitutional Court on the case of homosexuality; it was other people. They will go to the Hansard and see how we have twisted our Rules of Procedure. They give us a command and we cannot make this a trend. 

Therefore, our humble opinion is that we will need another day to pass this loan request appropriately. As of now, let us stick to the rule of law and constitutionalism. Those are the standards we set ourselves. I beg to move.

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, we find ourselves in a very tight corner and in a very embarrassing situation as members. 

I have listened to the commitment of the Prime Minister, which is lacking in some material particular, but which is a step forward from the stalemate that we have experienced before. As a way forward, may I suggest, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that considering the commitment from the two sides, my boss the Leader of the Opposition and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you adjourn the proceedings for one hour and we engage. We can skip lunch - I can also offer lunch to the Prime Minister and his side - and we dialogue over this matter. 

I am suggesting a way forward and this is a personal view. Before hon. Aston Kajara, who I am trying to assist, calls it a ransom, we have a meeting and dialogue and report to the House after one hour. I am sure that would take us forward. I so suggest.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that the way to proceed? If that is acceptable, I will suspend the proceedings for an hour. Go have lunch and we will come back here after one hour. House suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.08 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.45 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you had a good lunch. The suspension for lunch was supposed to facilitate some consultation between the two sides. It is my prayer that that has been done and we can hear what the progress is so that we can see how to proceed. This is a matter over which I need to hear from the sides that had gone for a meeting.

2.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This session, the last one in this calendar year, will go down in the history of parliamentary proceedings because I believe that it has added value to the work of this august House. 

We spent some very good time this morning debating the issue of the loan due to boost our capital city, our sitting room as somebody said, to make it presentable as it is the face of our country. A number of political and other issues came up and I just want to state that Government values the contributions of this morning. 

In the course of the discussions, we have had intense consultations with the Leader of the Opposition and his team. We have agreed that in the interest of our country and capital city, we should all look at this together as Ugandans and give support to this loan request. This is because all of us in one way or another will be beneficiaries to an improved and better capital city.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of governance of Kampala City, Government is going to work very closely with our colleagues in the Opposition in a bipartisan and bicameral manner. We shall work with them on issues of Uganda and Kampala City, to ensure that the outstanding governance issues are properly and effectively addressed so that they are no longer an obstacle to issues of development. 

Mr Speaker, it is my great pleasure to commend this loan to my colleagues in Parliament and to ask them to give it overwhelming support. The rest of us will continue, as we have agreed, to specifically address issues of governance that have been raised by members. Government will play its rightful role and we know we will not do it alone. We will be doing so with our colleagues in the Opposition because of the interests of Kampala and Uganda as well as development. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition -

2.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, thank you for the discussions we have had during the one hour. We have discussed as stated by the Prime Minister and agreed on some issues. 

We are happy that the Government is committing itself to make sure that the governance structures in Kampala Capital City Authority are going to begin working. This is also in answer to the Speaker’s directive that before KCCA issues are resolved, he will never chair a meeting which is going to discuss matters of Kampala City Council Authority. So, we have agreed, because another matter of KCCA may come here in the first week of February and if the Speaker is the one chairing, it will not be discussed.  

We hope that we are going to resolve this matter before the House resumes next year. This includes the issue of the Lord Mayor. He is a worker of the city council and we recognise this as it was declared by the High Court. We have also agreed that he is going to be treated as a worker and will live the life of a worker and staff of KCCA and not as somebody who is not a worker. A worker is paid, he goes to his office and he is facilitated to do his work. 

The finer details are going to be worked out, but we have agreed to that. As we said earlier, we are not opposed to the loan. We want the loan and we want good roads. Our concern is: who is going to take care of this money? Our Constitution says the governance structures should always take care of the accountability of this money. This is why we are firmly committed that this must also be done by the Government. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. This is the spirit that should guide our Parliament because we do not do these things here on our behalf; we do them on behalf of the people who do not sit in this House but who have sent us here to do this.

Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion on a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$ 175 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructural Development Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Prime Minister, can we deal with your statement at the end when we are closing? Let us see if we can handle another item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is part of why I was asked by the Speaker to preside today. She briefed me that there was an issue about the certificate of financial implication, which was signed but without a date or something like that. The minister who had signed the instrument was asked to confirm that he had actually signed it but by some error, he did not put a date on it. So this is not a forgery. That is how far it had come. There was a certificate even if it was not dated but it was a formal document that was submitted. 

There seem to be issues with the Bill itself because I see that there is a minority report. There seem to be some issues with the provisions of the Bill. Maybe we could get an opportunity to discuss those ones rather than the preliminary issues that have already been resolved so far.

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the effort to provide what he thinks is clarification on the certificate.

Mr Speaker, a certificate of financial implication is a creature of a statute. Its format must conform. A belated letter confirming that yes, I signed the so called certificate, cannot amend the certificate of financial implication.

The second point is the time when that certificate is presented. It is presented upon presentation of the Bill and that certificate must conform, at the time of presentation, to all the requirements including the date.

I have had the benefit of reading the letter written by the minister. I have also looked at the certificate now provided and backdated to 5th September this year. You cannot have the institution of Parliament operating like that - outrightly falsifying a document. 

It is clear from the Hansard that the minister presented a document, which is not dated, meaning that as of 5 September 2014, there was no dated certificate. Now, if we just let such a thing go, that you can backdate and present on the Floor of this House, to the cream of this country, and you expect us to say, yes, permit me, Mr Speaker, to say no.

The remedy is simple; withdraw the Bill. You have wasted our time and we can forgive you for that. We will go through it again, but without a certificate, you cannot say that you are presenting a Bill to a Parliament of a civilised nation. Thank you.

MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker and members, I thought the point was clear. It is good you have guided that today you were tasked by the Speaker so that the matter of the certificate of financial implication be straightened and we proceed.

Mr Speaker, I had the benefit of looking at the original certificate presented together with the Bill and it was clear that within the MTEF, there was no money to operationalise the Bill. This one, which was presented much later, cannot be equated to the one laid on the Table. Section 10 is clear; the certificate of financial implication is part and parcel of the Bill. That was the wisdom behind the framers of the Budget Act, so that when a Bill is presented it must be accompanied.

What was brought thereafter was an afterthought indeed. It makes a fundamental departure in the sense that it says money to operationalise the Bill shall be generated from the NTR, which is very different. Even the NTR cannot sustain the Bill because at the time of presentation, this was not made clear to this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, with the greatest admiration and respect, I think this Parliament is an embodiment of the conscience of the country. We have the laws, we make the laws and we seem to be the ones running against them; it is very unfortunate. Technically, I would have obliged with your guidance that we proceed to other matters, but that is very fundamental as it touches the crux of the matter. 

Is the Bill competently before the House? I would answer in the negative that it is not because at the time of presentation, it is supposed to be one and the same. The minister later on wrote to the committee chairperson that we shall proceed by way of NTR to cover up what was disowned in the first place. It is a pity that when Bills and the certificates are laid here, the Speaker or the clerk-at-table are not given the opportunity or sufficient time to read through. If that was done, the certificate purportedly presented by the minister was disowning the Bill. Therefore, the committee proceeded on its own and it never had the backing of the law to proceed. 

I would therefore entice my colleagues in this House that in view of that fatal technicality, there is no way the Bill can survive and overcome the provisions of the law. This is because whereas we are making law, we must make the law within the ambit of the law itself and certainly, I do not see us overcoming that snag. I would therefore propose that they be given wise counsel to roll back the Bill and present it. We can waive the requirement of the period within which to have the first reading and second reading by way of motion. 

Let us do things in the proper way. Let us be tidier because there is no way we can have a higher moral ground when we ourselves are failing on the same. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILSON ASUPASA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. There are times when we get caught up in Parliament when we ought not to get caught up. It is a fact that the Bill was presented with a certificate of financial implication which had issues. Before all of us, another certificate was presented here. I was here and I watched very well. Why do we allow ourselves to get unnecessarily bogged down and caught up?

Mr Speaker, it is my humble prayer that you guide us. How do we proceed in this instance? Is it procedurally right to proceed before we have clarity on the financial implications? Was it the first or the second? In my opinion, you should guide us on the way to continue so that we do not get bogged down and have an argument over this. 

The whole world is listening to us. The Parliament is sitting and there is something wrong. Can we really own it?  If we are to withdraw it, let us do that and continue. I beg to submit. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The rules say that a Bill has to be presented with a certificate of financial implication. I do believe that was done because the Speaker was in the chair and the motion was read. He committed the Bill to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. How did this Bill land in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs? It was the Speaker who ruled.

Whether there was money or not, maybe that was not indicated or it was taken for granted. Now it turns out that yes, the certificate was there but maybe there were not enough resources. How do we then resolve this lacuna? 

Mr Speaker, I do believe that if we put our heads together, and we have legal minds around, this impasse can be resolved. I do not think that we have to send or withdraw the Bill when actually it is the Speaker who admitted it and committed it to a committee of this House.

Mr Speaker, it is you to guide us on the way forward regarding this particular issue and I still think that we can correct this issue of the certificate of financial implication.

MR SIMON MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with my sister colleague who has just spoken before me, that the certificate of financial implication –(Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When matters are referred to a committee in this House, it has always been the practice that when the committee reports back, members of that committee, having participated at the committee level to deliberate on those issues - (Interjection)- I am coming to that - do not participate in the debate here. 

The honourable member holding the Floor has his signature on the main report. In that report, one of the matters under contention, a matter raised in the minority report, was about the issue of the certificate. Is the member therefore in order, having discussed this matter at the committee level and he came to a decision that he supported the main report and not the minority report, to come here and participate in the debate about the same matter? Mr Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not substantially debating the report of the committee. There is a preliminary point that has been raised and that is where we are so far. The preliminary point was raised by the honourable Member for Busiro East and that is why we are here. 

I was not here before but I was briefed. That is why I had to brief the House to get the consensus of the House as to whether I would be proceeding correctly given the background I was given before I came to the House. So we are not yet debating the report.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your fair judgement, and to this effect my signature is not appended. 

I was making my contribution to the effect that I agree with the honourable colleague who spoke before me that rule 107 not only provides for the accompaniment of the certificate of implications to the Bill but also spells out the requirements. It spells out the details and features that are supposed to be noted in the certificate of financial implications.

Mr Speaker, on that day, the minister signed the certificate of financial implications here in the full view of the House and tendered it in. The date is known and on that day, the author of the certificate of financial implications himself did endorse it in our presence and it was administered as such. 

For that matter, Mr Speaker, it is only fair that since we witnessed the signing and since the author was present –(Interjection)– as a House we saw this. It is only fair that as a House, having accepted and having had this certificate of financial implications tabled in the House, we take it with authenticity that it is supposed to accompany it. So I propose to my colleagues that other than this technicality, there are many issues we need to delve into, which accompanied the report. Let us move to the next stage, Mr Speaker.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two issues. The first one, I think, has been disposed of; there is general consensus and it is possibly the correct statement of law. It is trite law that Section 10 of the Budget Act, read together with rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure, require that every Bill presented to this House must be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. We all agree on that position of the law across the board and it is a matter that is not debatable. It is a legal command and we should all conform to the position.

The second issue, which is now a subject of debate, is whether the Bill entitled “the Registration of Persons Bill”, was accompanied by a certificate of financial implications when it was read for the first time. This is where the controversy is.

Mr Speaker, there are two issues here; there is the question of fact and the question of law. The question of law is this: was the document that was presented at the time the Bill was read for the first time a certificate of financial implications? I will hasten to add that there is only one person in this House who has the authority and the final call to make that judgement. It is ultimately the Speaker of this House, and that is the point at which we parted yesterday. 

The Speaker should look at her records, look at the certificate of financial implications and guide this House. She should actually make a ruling that in the wisdom of the Speaker, that Bill was accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. Mr Speaker, even if we debate this matter for 10 hours, you ultimately have to make a ruling as to whether the document you saw is a certificate of financial implications and we shall all be bound by it.

Mr Speaker, the question -(Interjection)- can I just complete this then I will attend to you, my brother? The questions as to whether or not the certificate was signed or dated are all questions of fact and this can be ascertained by an examination of the document, which is the property of the House. The person who also makes the decision as to whether this is property of the House, having been legally laid on the Table, is the Speaker of the House.

Mr Speaker, can we request that you make this ruling, guide the House and we move forward but before we get that, my brother has an issue to raise? (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Odoi-Oywelowo, for allowing me to seek clarification. I can see you are trying to put a heavy burden on the Speaker and for no good reason. Whereas what you are saying appears subjective in nature, regarding what we are talking about, we look at the contents of a certificate of financial implications. 

Under rule 107, as cited by my colleague, and for the benefit of members who may not be looking at this, it is not a question of laying the document on the Table. There is potency in a certificate of financial implications and that is the point I am trying to make. We must examine whether that particular certificate covers those concerns or not. 

There could be a certificate in the negative, as it was done, and the minister was saying that within the MTEF, there is no money to operationalise the Bill. In this particular instance, honourable colleagues, rule 107 (1) states, “All Bills shall be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications setting out- 
(a) The specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill;
(b) how those outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of government;
(c) the costs involved and their impact on the budget;
(d) the proposed or existing method of financing the costs related to the Bill and its feasibility.”

When you are talking about the certificate, these are the ingredients and once these ingredients do not exist in the so-called certificate, then it fails. Therefore, it should not be on the shoulders of the Speaker; it should be for all of us to see whether it conforms to these conditions. Once it passes, then that is a potent certificate of financial implications.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I happen to be one of the members who were here yesterday and these issues were discussed. We listened to the minister and the minority report. Certainly, there are issues after this point of certificate of financial implications, but on the issue of certificate of financial implications, it was not left to the Speaker; it was the Speaker who ruled by saying, “let me go and investigate and I will give my ruling on this matter tomorrow.” 

As a point of procedure, we are not putting pressure on the Speaker. Unless the Speaker wants to refer to the Hansard, it was the ruling of the honourable Speaker. May I, therefore, as a point of procedure, request the Speaker to rule on the matter? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my brief was that there was an issue of dating the certificate of financial implications as it had not been dated. The Speaker then sitting had requested the minister responsible for the certificate to issue an apology to the House and to confirm - Honourable members, this was a brief to me and none of you was there. The minister responsible should apologise to the House for not dating the certificate that was presented to the House. It was signed by him but he never dated it.

Honourable members, as if to confirm what the Speaker had given me as part of the instructions, this morning I received a letter from the hon. Fred Jacan Omach, dated today. It is in respect to the certificate of financial implications and the Registration of Persons Bill. I could read it so that members can know where I am coming from: 

“Reference is made to the certificate of financial implications in respect of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014, which was prepared by this ministry. 

Rt hon. Speaker, the certificate referred to above was duly prepared by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in line with the requirements of the Budget Act, 2001. However, I wish to extend my apology for not dating the certificate. 

In addition, as indicated in the letter referenced PAD 53/255/02 dated 15 December 2014 from the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development attached for ease of reference, Government will provide Shs 29 billion to the National Registration and Identification Authority in financial year 2015/2016 to enable the authority kick-start its activities. 

The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to forward to you a duly signed and dated certificate of financial implications in respect of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 for your use.”

These were the instructions that were given to the minister who had signed the certificate but not dated it. I now find myself in a situation where I have to handle this. 

Honourable members, what is the import of a certificate of financial implications? The background is this: most of the times we used to pass laws and those laws were never implemented and the reasons they used to give was that there was no money to implement the Bill. So when the Budget Act was drafted, it was meant to cure this so that the House is abreast from the beginning when the implementation of a particular Bill they are passing would commence.

So the rationale behind that provision was that the House should know, because a certificate of financial implications can be to the effect that there is no money to finance this Bill now but we will make provisions for it in the next financial year. That is a certificate stating what is required. 

It can also say that provisions have been made in this financial year to finance this Bill in this respect; if the authority is created, the money is available to do these things. So, that was the purpose for which this provision was stated. 

Was there a certificate of financial implications on that day when the Bill was presented? The Bill was presented with a certificate of financial implications on that day because the minister who presented the Bill was not the minister who was authorised by law to issue certificates of financial implications. The Minister of Internal Affairs presented the Bill with a certificate of financial implications, which he verily believed, and he had no reasonable doubt to suspect that it was not dated or anything like that. So it was brought to the House and the Speaker referred it to the committee.

The question you should be asking is: the fact that a certificate of financial implications, whose form and content reveals what is required by law, was signed but not dated, would that be fatal? Would it stop it from being a certificate of financial implications? Would it not provide the House with the information it needs to take the decision as to whether to proceed with the Bill or not? Would it fail to provide the House with information as to how the financing of the particular Bill would be done? If all those are in the affirmative, would not dating the certificate make it completely useless for purposes of the House? 

It was referred to the committee and the committee found out that the space that was provided for putting the date was blank. I am basing myself on the documents I have been able to see. The page where the provision was made for dating was blank although the signature was there. That was discovered in the committee meeting. Now the issue is: the date on which it was presented is known to us, the date on which the Bill was read for the first time is known to us. My opinion is, there might be issues with the Bill - The honourable member for Lwemiyaga would like to rule for the Speaker; please, provide the ruling.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am not ruling, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what are you doing?

MR SSEKIKUBO: There is a slight misplacement of the two. The first certificate was dated and received but the author said that they do not have the funds. It is the second one, which was brought in later, which does not have the date. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to clarify on that?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, when I was holding the portfolio of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, my colleague, the Minister for Internal Affairs, approached me and indicated that they had been waiting for a certificate of financial implications to enable the Bill in question be read for the first time. 

Indeed, from this House I called my ministry to make sure that the certificate is prepared and sent for my signature and I signed it from this House. Unfortunately, I did not date it, and for which I apologise. I have already written to you, Mr Speaker. 

The certificate that has been signed has been presented with the Bill for first reading only once, and in that certificate under item (e), under funding of the budgetary implications, we said the funding requirement is not in the budget over the MTEF period; however, the projected non-tax revenue, which shall be generated by the Authority, shall be used as a source of funding for its activities. 

In the conclusion, Mr Speaker, we stated under (g), conditions for clearance, if any: “This certificate is provided in the above context that the Authority will generate non-tax revenue to meet this expenditure”, which is confirming the position under (e) where it is dealing with funding. So when we are issuing a certificate of financial implications, we are supposed to look at where we are going to get the funds from and that is the certificate that we submitted. 

When this certificate was presented to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, they challenged the issue of funding. When this challenge came back to the Minister of Finance, she issued a statement in writing, which I attached to this submission to you this morning, and permit me to read it. It was addressed to the honourable Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, Kampala, and it is dated the 15  December 2014. Signed by Maria Kiwanuka, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and copied to the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury. 

“Financial Opinion on the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 
Reference is made to the above captioned matter. Further reference is made to the meeting, which was held between my ministry and your committee on 9 December 2014. 

In line with the submission made by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development during the above meeting, specifically paragraphs 6 and 7, this is to confirm that Shs 29 billion will be availed to the National Registration and Identification Authority in financial year 2015/2016 to enable the Authority kick-start its activities. 

However, as emphasised in our submission to the committee, this provision has to be justified by the submission of a detailed work plan from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

In addition, this ministry would like to clarify that all funds to the Authority shall be appropriated by Parliament of Uganda. All non-tax revenue collected by the Authority shall be deposited to the Consolidated Fund and only the funds appropriated by Parliament shall be availed to the Authority to run its activities as stipulated in the recently passed Public Finance Management Bill.”  This is the letter, Mr Speaker, that came from the minister. I so submit.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, this Parliament needs to be informed before you make this decision. Before he issued a certificate of financial implications, the Ministry of Internal Affairs applied and the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Muhakanizi, wrote back to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the letter is attached. It is dated 22 August 2014. It raised clear concerns as to what it will mean. 

This was written to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs. This is the letter that will solve all these problems. That is not a certificate. “Certificate of financial implications in respect of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 
Reference is made to the letter dated…in which you requested the ministry to issue the certificate of financial implications in respect to the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 to enable the Bill to be presented to Parliament for the first reading. 

I wish to draw your attention to the following…” - This is the Secretary to the Treasury writing and I want to read it because it will inform this House – “…On 4 June 2014, you requested for the issuance of the certificate of financial implications on the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 -(Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. What we are discussing right now in this House is the issue to do with the validity of the certificate of financial implications that was tabled before this House. Are we proceeding rightly when an honourable colleague brings an administrative letter between two ministries, which was overtaken by events? These were communications, which were made between the two permanent secretaries seeking for clarification on the matter of issuing a certificate of finance implications. 

The letter the honourable colleague is reading was written on 22 August 2014 and the certificate of financial implications was issued much later. I would think, to my best understanding, that these letters were for internal control and cannot in any way inform the decision of this meeting because that was administrative and it is expected to happen before a certificate is issued.

Mr Speaker, are we therefore proceeding rightly when we go into digging documents, which were used administratively between two sectors before the issuance of a certificate of financial implication? Are we proceeding rightly, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a certificate of financial implications is a certificate and not a letter, and it is issued under Section 10 of the Budget Act. It is not a letter. 

The issue that is bringing us to this debate is because the one that was accompanying the Bill was not dated; that is the issue. As to whether it was saying there is no money or the money will come in the next financial year, it is a statement of how the Bill is going to be financed and we cannot challenge it on the basis of that. 

So, you are not proceeding correctly, hon. Muwanga, when you are reading any document other than the certificate. If you are going to proceed with a letter that is not the certificate - The issue is, the certificate was not dated; that is the issue, but what you are raising now is whether there was money or no money or who was financing what.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In your previous guidance, you elaborated the history of how the certificate of financial implications came about. I was privileged to have been part of the team, which approved that law here. We did this because of the inherent weaknesses in Government of making Parliament pass laws and later coming and saying, “we did not have money for funding”.

During that time, Parliament decided that Government must give an assurance to this House that we do not want to waste tax payers’ money to sit and legislate when the effect of legislation is not going to be implemented. That is why that issue was imported in the Budget Act, to give that faith.

Mr Speaker, I fail to understand why we are getting bogged down this far. We all agree that the owner of the certificate of financial implications is the Minister for Finance. If there is a document, which is signed but not dated and would cause doubt in Parliament or the committee, it would be subject to the minister who should have issued it to come and confirm whether that was his or her document or not. If that has been done and confirmed, what then is the problem? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have moved two Private Members’ Bills in this House and the problem has been that the Ministry of Finance thinks it has the responsibility of approving a Bill or not through the process of issuing a certificate of financial implications.

I raised the question here a few months back and you made a ruling. Thankfully, you were in the chair and your ruling was that what the law envisages is that the Ministry of Finance should examine a Bill and tell Parliament the implications. It could be positive or negative but they just say, regarding the way the Bill is, the financial implications will be a, b, c and d. 

The final decision is by this Parliament. Therefore, whether the Ministry of Finance says there is no money, eventually they write a certificate attached to the Bill. The final decision is up to us because the power of appropriation is by Parliament. So the issue that what the ministry had written stating that there was no money does not arise. Whether there is money or not, the responsibility of the ministry is just to examine the Bill and attach a certificate of financial implications. If in the opinion and wisdom of Parliament we think that there is no money to finance that Bill, we can disallow that Bill either in the committee or on this Floor. 

To the question that you put earlier on - was the Bill tabled rightly at first reading? - to me the answer was yes. This is because what we would look at would be: does the absence of a date invalidate the certificate? Now that the minister is here to confirm that he is the author and the one who signed it, I think the certificate was valid and therefore there should be no cause for a lot of argument in this House. I thank you very much.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have attentively listened to submissions by various colleagues and then finally by my friend, whom I always refer to as the tall mutwa; that is between him and I.

Mr Speaker, as of now I am getting convinced by the questions that you put, which you said if the answer to the questions is in the affirmative, we should be able to proceed. However, I have my own reservations. During the days when we were students, if you were told that within a day or two you are going to break for holidays, you would not sleep during those two nights. You would be playing around in the dormitory waiting for that day to go.

You can even see in this Parliament today that out of 375 members, you can count us. This is because people are already in the mood for recess. This is a very important law and it does not only affect those of us who are present but even the future generations. Uganda will not come to an end today or tomorrow if this law is not in place because of the importance attached to this law and how it is closely tied to our hearts, especially the politicians. 

What will be wrong, Mr Speaker, if we threw the whole matter back to the committee and the ministry? (Interjections) Listen, let me finish then you will be able to understand what I want to say.  So that we do not hurry to make decisions on this important law now but we give it time so that probably when we come back- I do not think that even if we started it now, by tomorrow or the next day we will be able to finish with it. 

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that we give this Bill time so that we can be able to analyse it further. I beg to submit. 

MS MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We were moving towards generating a consensus and my colleague is saying we should be given more time. Would giving more time determine whether there was a certificate or not, whether there was a signature or not or date or not? These are facts that are before us. Is it procedurally right - I need your guidance if we should not continue, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue that would have been very serious is if this document had been a forgery. Does the document tell a lie about itself; does it? It does not. It has been owned up by the person who authored and signed it. The omission of not putting a date on it has been acknowledged and an apology has been rendered. Does the fact that it was not dated invalidate the document, especially if you understand the purpose for which that document is written? Would it invalidate the document? 

If we look at the purpose of what this document is supposed to say, the purpose for which it was meant- to accompany a law that was introduced on a particular date. If the date was after the Bill had been introduced to Parliament, that would be a problem. So, does the mere fact that it was not dated invalidate this document? My considered opinion is that it does not, honourable members. There might be issues with the Bill that we want to go into, but certainly not because there was no date on the signed certificate. No! 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. We want so much to debate this motion, but for purposes of the record, it may not stop with this; next time, somebody may think it is a trend and tamper with documents and bring to this House. 

The issue is, when they presented the Bill for first reading, it was accompanied with a certificate, although it did not have a date, which the committee realised and communicated. It was yesterday that the Minister, who read the Bill for the second time and we were supposed to debate, presented a second document or certificate of financial implications. 

Mr Speaker, this was a communication between the committee and the ministry; Parliament was not aware of it. For us, we were aware only of the first certificate. What is the procedure followed when there is a mess? I wish the minister had notified this House yesterday that there was a problem and that was the reason why he was presenting a second document. 

That was the reason as to why this has raised controversy. Otherwise, we are not opposed to dealing with this Bill. The House and also the ministers should be warned that issues of the public and government should not be taken lightly. We would have thrown away this Bill – (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much for giving way. I want to inform the honourable member and members here that when the minister moved the motion, I was one of the seconders. However, what happened later put me and many of us who seconded him in balance. 

Of course, we were very sure that it is not the Minister of Internal Affairs who writes the certificate of financial implications, and we knew certainly that if investigations were done by the Speaker, one of the major witnesses would be the Minister of Finance. Today when the Minister of Finance came and owned up, I felt relieved and ready to proceed and support the Bill.

MS ATIM: Mr Speaker, he gave information on procedure; I do not know –(Interjections) - He says that I accepted the procedure. I think it is okay; he has informed the House. 

As I was saying, our ministers should take matters very seriously because the rules of the House are in place. How do you inform the House of a matter that you know you did negligently? Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for him to have presented that certificate yesterday without even announcing to the House that there was a mistake in the first one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there was any document presented yesterday at the second reading of the Bill, that document, not even by the remotest interpretation, can be a certificate of financial implications. No, it cannot! That is because a certificate of financial implications must accompany the Bill at first reading. So, if there was anything that was brought yesterday, it was something else; it could not be a certificate of financial implications. So, can we proceed with this matter, honourable members?

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Mr Speaker, looking at your legal interpretation on dates, I think the principle is that the issue of technicality should not derail the main subject. Therefore, I buy your interpretation. However, we need to draw ourselves back to set a good record on how Parliament should operate.

The brains behind the certificate of financial implications thought that Parliament should not waste its time legislating in vain and then create an institution and Government says they do not have resources. That is why I am buttressed by the Public Investment Plan and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. For you to introduce a certificate of financial implications, you need a clearance from the Secretary to the Treasury to show that Government has the money. So, you do not just sign anyhow and change the date because it has implications to the economy. 

If you look at all these documents, you will realise there is no reflection, even in the policy statement, of that money which is indicated in that certificate. We want the Government to take this seriously. Forget about the date; it should reflect the money. I have asked for certificates of financial implications here and it is now almost coming to the third year, and so many other MPs have asked. However, Government says, no, we have to look for money and consider the economic growth and projections to see if we are able to raise that money in the next two, three, four or five years. Therefore, what the minister of Finance should have done –(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya, and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking clarification from you, Sir, whether it is procedurally -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not give clarification.

MR MIGEREKO: Okay. The honourable member is debating and deliberating a point over which you have ruled. Is it still prudent to continue debating the same matter when the Speaker has guided all of us on the matter of the certificate of financial implications?

MR EKANYA: Hon. Daudi Migereko, I stood up here firmly and said that I cannot contest the wise ruling of the Speaker on the date. However, I was talking about the principle behind the introduction of certificates of financial implications in our law books. Parliament does not do this. Look at the Medium Term Expenditure Framework; it is not there and that means the certificate is in vain. It should be reflected so that Parliament is not taken for granted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, the certificate itself is saying there is no money in this financial year to do this activity but there will be this much money in the next financial year. That is what it is required to say, honourable members. It cannot reflect a lie. 

What it is saying is that for this year, it will be from the money collected but for next financial year, the money will be there; they will make provision. That is the supplementary letter that was written by the minister when the committee was interrogating this matter, that they can only make provision in the budget in the next financial year. However, for this financial year, it has not said anything anywhere that it is in the Mid-Term Expenditure Framework.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you are absolutely right. That means even if we pass this law this year, implementation starts the other year. That is exactly what we are saying. That is the ruling of the Speaker and I agree with him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not the ruling of the Speaker; it is the content of the certificate.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I agree with you that that is what the certificate says and that means even the date of commencement -(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, hon. Ekanya. Mr Speaker, I think the earlier document clearly states that the provision for financing for this agency is going to be through appropriation in aid, that is, resources generated from this Authority. So I do not think there is a lacuna relating to where money is going to come from. 

The letter that the Speaker is talking about refers to resources coming next financial year. As for this financial year, there is a provision for appropriation in aid; it is there. So, there is no problem.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, you are my good brother and I have very high respect for you. You know the provision regarding appropriation in aid. We have already done the budget for the next twelve months and we took care of appropriation in aid during our process of appropriation here. This is because the sectors had to present their work plans and procurement plans, taking into consideration the revenues they are going to have in appropriation in aid. (Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: I seek guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean procedure?

MR AYENA-ODONG: Yes, procedural guidance. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, it would appear that we are starting to skin the animal from the wrong end. There are some types of animals you start skinning from top backwards and there are some you should start skinning from the other end. 

You made a wise ruling, Mr Speaker, that the issue of financial implications is not for the Minister of Finance to say, “Yes, there is money”. Your wise guidance earlier on was that financial implication is for the minister to say, “By the way, according to your Bill, this is what it would mean to the economy”. You earlier on said this and I do agree with you completely. 

The simple question, and I do not know why we are going in circles, is: when the Bill was presented at the First Reading, was there a certificate? If there was a certificate which was received -(Interjection)- Can I finish my thoughts first? If it was there on the day it ought to have been there and there is evidence that it was received, it means that it must have been given on a date earlier than the day it was received. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, since the author of the document has taken the trouble to come and say, “Yes that document which was received on that day, although I had not signed it, was there earlier than the day it was presented”-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, “I signed it but did not date it.”

MR AYENA-ODONG: Yes, “I signed it but I forgot to date it”, but the fact that it was received on the date when it ought to have been there, it should be presumed to have been there on that day. So, I think in that case, the issue of whether there is money for it or not seems to be irrelevant for the purposes of our discussion here. 

If it is your wise ruling, Mr Speaker, that we adopt and agree that even without the date of that day, the document was valid, we do not need to proceed anymore.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that has been my ruling. I said the absence of the date on that document does not invalidate it. That is my decision. If there are issues with it, they can be resolved later in other places. My ruling is that the mere fact that the certificate did not bear a date on the day it was presented does not invalidate the certificate of financial implications. That is what I have said already and that matter is, in my opinion, closed for now. So, there is no more debate on the validity or lack of validity of the certificate of financial implications.
 
However, honourable members, what I am reading now is not what is being said. What I am reading from the members is that we might not be prepared to proceed. (Applause) So, if we are not prepared to proceed, that is another matter, but it cannot be because the certificate is not valid. (Laughter)

However, honourable members, we need to conclude it at a convenient stage even if we are not going to proceed with it, so that at an appropriate time when we come back, we can take it up from there. Is that okay? 

What had happened is that there was a motion moved for second reading of this Bill on the principles of the Bill. That is what the motion for the second reading is. I do not know whether the committee had reported -(Interjections)- The minority report had not yet been presented? 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We were in the middle of the minority report and this issue came up so we did not conclude. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was because of the issue of dating, then that matter is resolved in my ruling. So if there are other outstanding issues which were in the minority report, you can proceed and conclude them so that we can say that we received the report. 

What I am suggesting, honourable members, is that we need to leave this at a clean point where, for example, we have received both reports - the main report and the minority report – and then we can leave it there. If we cannot proceed after that, we can leave it there but at least we will have received both reports. So, can I now ask the author of the minority report to proceed with the presentation. Hon. Lyomoki, do not go back to the issue of dates now; go to another thing.

4.04
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will now proceed to another issue which is also part of our minority report, and this relates to the establishment of the National Registration and Identification Authority.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in good governance best practices we have, as a House, passed resolutions against the increasing costs of public administration expenditure. These resolutions have been expressed in reports on the MTEF that we have always passed on to the President and also the Cabinet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just hold on. Honourable members, we are expecting a statement from the Prime Minister on the things that will come after here. So, it might be important for us to listen to the Prime Minister after hon. Lyomoki has concluded.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. If we are talking of reducing government expenditure, we should not continue endorsing new authorities in every law. It is now becoming a practice that in every new law, there has to be a new Authority. If we accept to take this path, we are creating discrepancies between civil servants, those in authorities and those not in authorities. This is demoralising other civil servants from doing their work -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, I wish you could just state the principle of your objection, because if you read the whole report it will not be -

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point we are making here is that in our view, even if we needed to amend the law relating to registration, there was no need to create an Authority. This is because we already have a law that provides for a secretariat under the National Citizenship and Immigration Board. Our view was that we need to strengthen that law.

Let me table about four letters to this effect. We have a letter dated 29 March 2011, written by His Excellency the President to the Minister of Public Service directing that the ministry forms a department. Let me lay this letter on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it, honourable member?

DR LYOMOKI: It is dated 29 March 2011. It is to the Minister of Public Service and it is signed by His Excellency the President, Yoweri K. Museveni. He was directing the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish a department regarding this matter.

We have another letter dated 29th June, signed by the Rt Hon. Henry Muganwa Kajura, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service. This was written to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General, Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Local Government. It was referring to the directive from the President to create a department. 

We also have another letter dated 1 August 2011, signed by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs. He was writing to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service about the proposed structure of the department.

The last letter was from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service to the Minister of Finance. It was about the approved structure for the department of citizen’s registration. It is dated 26 August 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the four letters presented by the member.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the point here is that the mind-set of the chief executive of Government, that is, the President, was that a department should be established. I think he was mindful of the fact that there was already a board that was established by the Constitution. Therefore, we do not see any reason whatsoever as to why after this whole process had gone on the issue of the Authority came in again. It was really something that we did not find any reason for. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request my other colleague, who is also part of the colleagues who signed the minority report, to raise the last point.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just state the principle.

DR LYOMOKI: I think he will be able to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the principle of your objection?

DR LYOMOKI: I think let him present this, Mr Speaker.

4.11
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, we have a principal objection to this Bill, especially clause 42 (2) which we want deleted. Our argument is that clause 42 (2), broadly speaking, would be unconstitutional.

The functions of the Electoral Commission were defined and they are a creation of the Constitution. Article 61 of the Constitution defines the functions of the Electoral Commission; clause (1) (e) says, “to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register.” Those were defined by the Constitution.

The Attorney-General gave an opinion to the committee. When he was rejecting our position as regards the Authority, he said in his submission that the functions of the immigration board were a creature of the Parliament and not of the Constitution. Therefore, Parliament could revoke, rescind and revise them if need be. If they had been defined by the Constitution, then the hands of Parliament would be tied. 

When he got to the issue of the Electoral Commission, whose functions are a creature of the Constitution, he changed goalposts. This function - the whole sentence - was transplanted and put into the Electoral Commission Act. The whole sentence is now being transplanted from the Constitution and is being put into the Registration of Person’s Bill. To that extent, we believe that this action alone is unconstitutional. 

Clause 40 of the Bill in its entirety creates the use of information and goes into detail to define the uses such as taxes and so many others. They are well laid out. When they get to sub clause (3) of the same clause, they say that every government ministry, department and agency of Government shall access. The committee in its wisdom has reinforced this and said that they shall not only access but also use it. The Electoral Commission is like any other agency of Government, so there is no need for us to create 40 (2) to do the same thing that can be achieved in (3). 

The reasoning of the Attorney-General was that the word “may” was used, that “may” leaves this at the discretion of the Electoral Commission. However, when an opportunity arises, “may” becomes “shall”, so the Electoral Commission will be at liberty to abuse it. 

We are being very careful because there is data that was collected and which we think the Electoral Commission can use under (3). We are being very sober here. Just like any other agency, over a period of five years an agency like URA would have used the information there a hundredfold compared to the Electoral Commission, because Electoral Commission most likely is a one-off.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your objection is that, they should not make a separate – 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: One that has specific reference; do not have a law that has eyes. Therefore, we are contending that there is no harm or mischief they are trying to cure by creating the other section. We think and believe that this clause should pass with the deletion of (2) because all that you intend to achieve in (2) can be achieved under (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under the general clause?

MR MUWANGA: Our strong opinion is that clause 40(2) should be deleted and we reinforce clause 40(3) as per the recommendation of the committee. That is our strong position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable, would you like to conclude in one minute.

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I conclude with three major recommendations: 

1. The creation of the Authority and the subsequent provisions therein be rejected. We maintain the National Citizenship and Immigration Board as provided for in Article 16 (1), with the functions that Parliament prescribed in the National Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap. 66. 

2. The Bill title should be amended to read, “Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2014”. This will harmonise the laws relating to registration and create a linkage in institutions that collect information, with the ultimate purpose of doing away with the need for multiple registrations. This will work under the National Citizenship and Immigration Board.

3. Clause 40(2) be deleted and we uphold the committee’s recommendation to amend clause 40(3). This is in order to maintain the independence of the Electoral Commission, which must undertake its functions with respect to the Constitution and the Electoral Commission Act, Cap. 140. 

This Bill must not seek to repeal the Constitution and the Electoral Commission Act by inspection. The Electoral Commission should not be subject to directions or control by any person, minister or authority through any memorandum of understanding or through this Bill. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and honourable members who have raised these objections, and honourable members of the committee for the work you have done. As I said earlier, there seems to be some difficulty in us proceeding but at least we know that as we stop on this Bill, we have received both the report from the committee and also the minority report. So when we resume, we will propose the question for debate. I can propose the question for debate on the principles of the Bill and then when we resume, we start the debate on the principles of the Bill. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question for the debate, that the Bill entitled “The Registration of Person’s Bill 2014” be read the second time. That is the motion on which we will stop; debate will open as soon as we resume.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I want to salute you and the honourable members for the resilience and determination to make progress and do a lot of work. I think today a lot has been achieved both in substance and in form, and also in adding value to our work. 

I am going to just make a short statement. At the beginning of our parliamentary year, His Excellency the President outlined the legislative programme and he alerted Parliament that we had 57 Bills to do. I want to report to colleagues, and indeed this matter was reported on by the Speaker last night when we had our dinner here, that out of the 57 Bills, 11 Bills have been passed. 

Mr Speaker, it is very clear, therefore, that we have only 46 Bills to do in the next six months. I am sure we will need to work at today’s speed, or work day and night, to be able to fulfil this requirement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are all those Bills before Parliament?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: That is a fair comment. That is what Government intends to fully submit to Parliament. Some of them are not yet in Parliament, and I salute the Speaker for that timely guidance. 

Apart from that, I also want to comment on electoral and constitutional reforms. Let me reiterate the well-known commitment of Government to keep on top of constitutional and electoral reforms, not only in theory but definitely as practice has demonstrated. 

As you very well know, in 1986 when the Movement captured power, election rigging had characterised our politics. Significant improvements have since been made, although we know there are still some weaknesses. We are determined that together, we will work on these loopholes and ensure that we tightly close them so that elections really mean elections - that elections are credible, transparent - and we reassure the electorate and indeed the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, Government has received many suggestions from many different bodies and Government and a committee of Cabinet have considered many of these proposals. They are ready to submit the matter to Cabinet and subsequently table them in Parliament. 

However, there has been some kind of agreement that because of popular demand by the people and some civil society organisations, we give them some bit of breathing space – (Interjections)- Well, I would be interested to know at an appropriate time if the Speaker would like Government to lock the door in terms of accepting the electoral reforms. I know the Opposition and Government do not want to lock the door; we want the door to remain open but have a timeline so that we are able to move as fast as possible. 

An announcement was put in the media, that those who have last-minute submissions for electoral and constitutional reforms should submit them through the Law Reform Commission. I am happy to say, Mr Speaker, that I had a meeting with the Law Reform Commission about a week ago together with the Attorney-General. We were assured that they have received the additional submissions on constitutional and electoral reforms and that they will be making their final submission for Cabinet consideration as the new year begins. 

The third aspect that I would like to comment on is the method of work of Parliament. I know that we have very clear Rules of Procedure which are known to all of us and which are extensively quoted by colleagues. However, Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that perhaps new and innovative additional methods of work are emerging. 

In my view, today stands as an illustrative day in terms of how Parliament can perfect its work. Mr Speaker, I do not want to go into the details but you know that a number of fairly contentious issues have been overcome during the course of the day. It was also interesting that you ruled that we do not make further progress on the legislation on immigration and registering of persons for a number of reasons. One of the reasons, I suspect - Let me not speculate; I will go to the next item.

Still on methods of work, let us be more communicative. Let us open channels of communication so that issues, big and small, are confronted head-on and we resolve them. We have the capacity to do so. Let us take advantage of our togetherness so that hustles and hurdles are removed and we make constructive progress.

I now want to give a word of thanks. Mr Speaker, I want to salute you and the substantive Speaker of Parliament, the staff of Parliament and definitely the honourable members for having provided very good leadership and constructive and engaging debates. This has made this calendar year, from the legislative point of view, a very productive year. It is true the number of legislations may not have been as many as we would have wanted, but the fact of the matter is that Parliament has made significant and enormous progress, which leaves room for making further progress.

I also want to take this opportunity to specifically thank the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow ministers. I want to thank them for this particular reason: readiness to engage and to engage productively. I must have been impressed on a number of occasions when shadow ministers have taken initiative and approached substantive ministers - I think that is the opposite of shadow – and raised very constructive ideas. (Interjections) I will be ready to be educated at an appropriate time about the opposites and it seems hon. Ekanya will be generous in that respect. 

The point I am making is that we have engaged very productively and solved a number of problems. This has helped the work of Parliament to move faster. I do believe that if this type of engagement is intensified, we can even move faster than we have been moving. I am very happy that we have not had the experiences that were witnessed in the last couple of days in one of the parliaments in the region. It shows maturity, seriousness and readiness of people with contending and different views in this House to resolve them in a very civil way.

Let me also take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to salute the Deputy Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Moses Ali –(Interjection)- Yes, Gen. Moses Ali. I am glad that the Opposition has constructively engaged with me to ensure that the title of the Deputy Leader of Government Business is properly utilised. He has done very good work; he has led Government business very well. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, one of the things I am very proud of and very happy about is that even when I am not in Parliament, I know that my elder, Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali, is in charge and effective, and that effectiveness has propelled Government business. Ndugu, keep it up. Let me also salute the whips on both sides for continuing to whip us and for making it possible that even at this hour, some members on both sides are present. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, on the clear understanding that after the holidays we will come with renewed determination and vigour to do even greater work in legislation, I want to take this unique opportunity and time to wish you and the entire House a merry Christmas and indeed a prosperous and productive new year. I thank you, Sir. (Applause)

4.33
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister’s statement is loaded and full of flesh that cannot just pass without it being noted. On financial aspects, I want to thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for what you are doing for the Government and for the economy. 

As a shadow minister of finance, as the year comes to a close, I want to say that the business community, the consumers and citizens of Uganda would like Government to take urgent action to address the current inflation target. Inflation is rising and the exchange rate is not favourable. The business community is so worried and as the year comes to a close, Government needs to come out strongly to give assurance that the economy is going to remain robust and strong. Therefore, this matter requires assurances from Government before we get to the new year. Thank you.

4.34
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The concluding remarks –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, this is a national Parliament and we must have a certain level of hierarchy. When a statement has been made by the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, it is imprudent for honourable Members of Parliament, one by one, to start debating it. 

My humble opinion is that if need be, it should have been the Leader of the Opposition – Actually, the Leader of the Opposition should have come first so that the Prime Minister crowns it all. This business where the Prime Minister speaks and then ordinary members chip in -(Laughter)- really, are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us leave it at that. Let me have the Leader of the Opposition, please.

4.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the Prime Minister for the good statement and my finance minister for chipping in. 

The Prime Minister raises very important points. We should not be happy and proud of what we have done. We would have been prouder if the Government had done their work. I am responding to -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the Chief Whip of Government. 

Mr Speaker, we have had 57 Bills and few of them are here, and we have passed 11. Those which came, we have passed and most likely, we were going to pass even this one on registration of persons if you had done your work well. 

At the beginning of business, we sit down and agree on a legislative calendar but the Government does not follow it, maybe because they are too busy or they do not consider this work to be very important. Even the Order Paper is agreed upon. The Speaker issues the Order Paper and there are no people from Government to present to us. So, we waste a lot of time here precisely because the Government side does not do its work. 

We are appealing to you, Prime Minister, to please make sure that when we have agreed on the calendar and the Order Paper, everybody is here. In each ministry you have two to three ministers. We should never have a situation whereby all the three are not here to represent their ministry and then we shall finish our work. Otherwise, it is useless for us to pay three or five of you in a ministry and yet you cannot all be here. 

On electoral reforms, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I stood here and asked for time because we were organising ourselves to come with a harmonised position on electoral reforms as Opposition parties. The Opposition parties in this House have agreed with several NGOs and some church leaders and individuals and we have come up with a compact. This came out of a process of about nine months of consultation across the country. 

That compact is of reforms that we need and which we think are very important and urgent for us to bring more credibility to our electoral process. We have handed it to the Speaker and we are going to hand it to Government, including to you, Prime Minister. Today I agreed with the Minister for Justice that we are going to hand over the compact to him on Tuesday. So, basically on our side, we are ready with most of the reforms. 

On the method of work, Mr Speaker, we would like to dialogue; we achieve more when we dialogue. I always use a medical example although I am not a doctor; if you are cutting this hand off and you cut from the joint, it becomes easier to cut even with a razorblade but if you cut it from the bone, you have to struggle. We think we should do that; we should engage and consult with each other to achieve more. We are for dialogue. 

I also wish to thank both the Speakers because they have led us well. We have had occasional friction but overall, we have worked well with the Speakers. They have led very well. We thank you. I also thank all our fellow Members of Parliament because we have worked very well. 

Special thanks go to my shadow Cabinet. We have done some work because we do research. We have some researchers in our office and they help us do research. I think Government should allow us to have a little bit more researchers, not only for the Opposition but also the Government side. We should spend more money to employ researchers for MPs. 

If it was possible, each MP should have a research assistant. This will answer the question raised by the Deputy Speaker on the quality of our debate. One of the reasons why our debates are not very good is because we do not have researchers and also we are never given time by Government to internalise what they are presenting here. Sometimes we come here and they read a document and we begin asking for a copy, which we are reading for the first time and yet somebody is presenting to us. How we can then have qualitative debate, Mr Speaker, if we are not prepared?

I would like to thank Gen. Ali; he is one of the very dedicated people on that bench. We thank you. He is also very neutral in his debate; he does not politicise things. What he says, he says, take it or leave it. (Laughter) We thank you. 

I have just heard that we have a new Speaker in EALA. I do not know if it is true that hon. Kidega is the new Speaker. If it is true, then we send congratulations to him and we appeal to him to build a team in EALA. The way they have behaved has ashamed our country and we need that shame to be washed off by the new leadership of hon. Kidega. 

Finally, I wish you a merry Christmas, honourable members, and a happy new year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have a right to reply to some of the issues if you need to, but if you do not need to then I can proceed to conclude.

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for his remarks. 

I want to agree with him that it is the responsibility of ministers to be present in Parliament. At least ministries should be represented in Parliament so that they are able to effectively respond on issues about their ministries and also Government in general. 

Really, I just want to say that his statement has been a good one and that even his point about ministers is a point that we do accept. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition and honourable members. 

When we do work here, we should always remember that it is not about us; it is about people more than us. Even if they multiplied us ten times or twenty times, we still would not match the number of people that we represent here. So their wishes and aspirations should be in our mouths, in our minds and in our actions. We should move away from words, from rhetoric to actions, to transform the future of this country to the benefit of the people who have been chosen by God to represent in this House. 

I thank you for your candid ways of doing business. One day I will write a book about my experience as Deputy Speaker. One of the very memorable things I always smile about is how Gen. Moses Ali conducts business. (Laughter) I will recall, very fondly, the day that he was speaking and he was called to order and he pointed out and said, “Who are you ordering?” (Laughter) Those are light moments that make this House a great place to be in when Gen. Ali and many of you come out on a light note but are still able to make this debate very interesting.

We have also had difficult moments but as people, we have been able to move to middle ground because, as I said, our interests are so small; the interests of the people we represent are much bigger than our own. So, I thank you, honourable members. On behalf of the Speaker of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish you all a very merry Christmas and may the new year be better than the one we are about to say bye to and all the previous years. Thank you, honourable members. This House is adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 4.58p.m. and adjourned sine die)

