Tuesday, 20 December 2005

Parliament met at 11.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome and thank you for finding time to come to transact business. As you appreciate, this is Christmas time and we should have already gone for Christmas recess. However, because of the urgency of work on our table, we are still working. We shall continue to work most of this week before you go for Christmas. 

I intend to have a very brief Christmas recess, realising that you will be going for nominations in January, and thereafter for your campaigns. There are very urgent matters that we should settle before January or February because when you go for elections, due on the 22nd and 23rd, you will have to come back in March when a lot of work would have accumulated. Therefore, I hope you will bear with me if the recess we get for Christmas is very brief. We shall come back before nominations, do some work before we go and later to come back in January.  

The business listed for today is very urgent. We are dealing with the special interest groups. The Electoral Commission will not have the mandate to conduct elections for these special groups unless we invoke the provisions of the constitutional review.

When the special groups were created, there was an understanding that there would be a review after ten years. Ten years expired on 8th October. Therefore, we must decide one way or the other on these special groups. I appeal to you all to contact our colleagues who are not here to take this matter seriously. I thank you.

11.24
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy you have elaborated on this programme. However, I am extremely worried. When I look at today’s Order Paper, I see that we have so much. Shall we accomplish all that there is on the Order Paper?  Sometimes we call a spade a spade. This problem of quorum is becoming a habit. It is not until our friends from NRM-O order their Members to be here –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. The good thing, for your information, I have realised that we made some constitutional amendments. I take this opportunity to request you Members of Parliament and the public to seriously study the amendments we effected. I have come to realise that many people are discussing matters affecting the amendments of the Constitution, when they have not had the opportunity to study what we did. 

As for quorum, the Rules Committee shall prescribe the details. The Rules Committee has not yet decided on the quorum. The only quorum I know is the quorum required for amending the Constitution. However, as for now, it is within my discretion to see whether it is reasonable to conduct business or not.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact, I was not disputing that particular power of discretion vested in your Office. It is the constitutional one that I am worried about. I am appealing to Members of NRM-O to mobilise, as they have always done in the past whenever we wanted to extend somebody’s term –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is not only Members of NRM-O, but also all Members. Be it of UPC, DP or even independents. Can we proceed with another business?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.27
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, promised the House that government would make a statement on an incident of assault that took place at Najjanankumbi. I wish to make the statement now.

On Monday, 12 December 2005, a one Lt Col Bugingo was involved in an incident with retired Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga. The incident was widely reported in both the print and electronic media. 

Following the incident, Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga reported the matter to Katwe Police Station. The statements were made by police officers who were on duty at the scene of the incident. The statements were handed over to Police Criminal Investigation Department, who are investigating the matter. When the investigations are completed, the officer will be handled in accordance with the law.  

Lt Col Bugingo is a serving military officer. He is therefore subject to military discipline. In view of this, the military has set up a committee chaired by the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence to investigate the discipline aspect of the incident. Disciplinary proceedings will take off after the criminal aspects of the matter have been handled.  

Government does not, in any way, condone acts of indiscipline committed by anybody. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the law will take its course on this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

11.29
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I make my comments on the minister’s statement, I should say that on the Order Paper I see the resolution on the districts far away in the future. I appeal to your Office to consider that the people of Tororo District are really waiting. Maybe tomorrow it should come as a priority.

THE SPEAKER: Try to be punctual tomorrow. Maybe, we may have sufficient time to handle it.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. When we were here in the House last week, we requested the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement on the assault of the High Court by the black mambas. It is surprising that this incident of alleged assault at the FDC office took place after the High Court one. May we know why the minister has delayed to come up with a statement on this incident?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have the specific statement on an issue. This is not a general statement. It is a statement on an incident on Entebbe road, which was prompted by hon. Katuntu. The minister has made a statement, therefore, you should confine yourself to that one. Should you need to have a statement on the other matter, then we shall consider it later. If there are no contributions on the statement, then we move to another matter. (Mr Awori rose_)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I still had the Floor. It was promised here that Government would come out –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is an Order Paper. It is a statement on a specific incident. Let us exhaust this. Should we have time for general matters, we shall deal with that. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. FDC considers the action of Lt Col Bugingo as total violation of the Political Organisations Act. We expected the Minister of Internal Affairs to have come out with a statement detailing what disciplinary actions have taken place. 

Besides Lt Col Bugingo directly slapping retired Maj. Rubaramira, the activity of the military police violated our right to enjoy the facility of FDC headquarters. The deployment blocked supporters of FDC from accessing the facility of the office, disrupted our activities, and scared our supporters. 

We expected the minister to be detailed in his report. First, was the team headed by Lt Col Bugingo directed to besiege FDC office? If they were not directed to besiege the FDC office, why were they specifically deployed at that point and not any other point? 

It is good practice and within the policy of Forum for Democratic Change that when guests are visiting Uganda, like the guest who was in the country by then, who is a good friend to this country, but specifically his country South Africa, which has been the sanctuary to the president of FDC retired Col Dr Kizza Besigye. Therefore, FDC supporters that day intended to line along the roadside waving the flag of Uganda and the flag of FDC just like any other Ugandan. 

Along Entebbe road, other people were standing and waving. People were dressed in UPC and NRM colours, but to our surprise, government military police deployed at our offices and blocked everybody standing by the roadside and waving to the President of South Africa. 

Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, could you be very clear in your statement. Did you specifically intend to deploy this force to besiege our headquarters and to deny us access? If you did not intend to, what disciplinary action have you taken? The deployment was not only composed of military police or other forces who are prescribed within the law but also those the law does not prescribe. There were even those in civilian clothes. 

We would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs whether after this incident FDC supporters are guaranteed security whereby their normal party activities will not be disrupted. Lastly, Mr Speaker  -(Interruption)

DR STEVEN MALLINGA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor. We all know that FDC is a political party and when a number of them are collected together, it then becomes a political activity. What I seek from the honourable member is, was there permission by FDC to hold a political rally or a demonstration on that day? Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Mallinga.  Mr Speaker, if there was a rally as insinuated by hon. Mallinga, the statement of the minister should also be expressly clear. Were there FDC supporters blocking the road? How big was their number? I would like to advise my colleague to read the Political Organisations Act and to quote a clause, which requires seeking permission for any political organisation registered to hold any public meeting or to welcome people. To the best of my knowledge, there is no such clause. What one needs is just to inform police to enable police provide security.  
Thank you very much.

11.34
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for permitting me to seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs.  However, before that, permit me to congratulate my honourable colleague, Gen. Aronda, on ascending to a senior position in the Ministry of Defence as Chief of Defence Forces. I also take this opportunity to congratulate my good friend Brig. Mayombo on being made Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Defence. This is a very unusual position. No permanent secretary sits in this august House but for you –(Laughter)- I wish to congratulate him on this rare situation. Mr Speaker, maybe he has come to resign. 

Mr Speaker, I will now seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs. When an officer or any person commits an offence, generally according to the public service procedure, that person is interdicted while investigations are going on. He does not remain in office while investigations are going on lest he obstructs or interferes with investigations. I am surprised that the Minister of Internal Affairs is very oblivious of this particular aspect of the public service code of conduct.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague in charge of Internal Affairs –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: The regulation, the honourable holding the Floor, is quoting is a little bit different for the military. In the military, if there is an incident, a board of inquiry is instituted. It is upon the recommendation of the board that action is taken.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Lt Colonel retired or deserter for the information or a war -(Laughter)- however, my honourable colleague, in your other capacity, which I recognise as a Member of the august House, as far as I know, anybody in the employment of government is put on hold once he commits an offence. I will give you an example. If a commander of a unit accidentally or deliberately shoots a colleague, he cannot continue to be a commander of that unit. He is immediately recalled. They cannot allow somebody who has committed an offence to continue to be in command when there has been a breach of conduct.  

Therefore, when you say, “No, you have to mount a board of investigation” there is no way I can have a Lt Colonel who has deliberately shot or killed one of his officers continue. That is why we have among other things, a court martial to speed up the process of justice. I do not know which section of the military code you are referring to. However, since we also have senior officers in the august House who are very familiar with the most recent military code of conduct such as the CDF, I can take information from them. I can take information from Brig. Mayombo; I can take information from Brig. Okello; I can take information from Gen. Oguti –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, if you really knew what happened, why didn’t you put your inquiry in form of a question? You have asked, “Is there anything else that has been done to the officer?”  I think that would have been better. You get the information, and then you react. However, it seems you know the answer. What then will be the purpose of answering you?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometimes as you are aware, our colleagues on the front bench are very oblivious of their responsibilities in the august House.  Therefore, from time to time we have to remind them in a very detailed narration to catch up. You are right. Something should have really been done.

Secondly, as I put it, this statement amounts to one sentence.  You should not have wasted the whole page. The only thing you could have come to this House and said is, “Disciplinary proceedings are taking place and thereafter we shall inform you.”  The rest is unnecessary. We do not need to be told this and that happened. 

Thirdly, more than 100,000 Ugandans who have a lot of respect for UPDF saw this particular incident.  It was electronically transmitted in vision. We all saw it. I saw it myself and WBS repeated it several times. That one would have called for immediate disciplinary action.  It was not just purported.

Finally, yet importantly, Mr Speaker, this kind of thing we have been told in the past regarding UPDF and nothing happens is very disappointing. We now, as you are aware, have to pay $60 billion to Congo. In the 6th Parliament I kept reminding the government, “We are trespassing, and we are abroad without Parliament’s approval.” Now who is going to pay the $60 billion? Eventually this same officer might kill another person while you are still investigating.  We need action now. Otherwise, you will be responsible among other things for the $60 billion that you looted from Congo.

11.38
MAJ. STEVEN BASALIZA (Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having given a very brief statement because investigations are still going on. I would also like to thank the police and military intelligence for the investigations they have set up. However, I have two clarifications to seek: 

In the papers, I read that there are some parliamentary candidates and presidential candidates who have their personal PGBs, kanyamas and so forth. One in question is one seya Sebaggala. Sometime back, he blocked a road and his military men or seyas inconvenienced the public.  

The other day in court, one hon. Byanyima slapped a police officer. Therefore, I am calling upon people to restrain from using force. What has the Minister of Internal Affairs done about those people who are taking laws in their hands? The Rubaramira case is already being investigated and we really condemn it in the highest terms possible. Therefore, we want to know what has been done to other people who are also involved in the acts of thuggery. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.40
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to his statement, the minister says disciplinary proceedings will take off after the criminal aspects of the matter have been handled. In the judicial system of Uganda, we know that there has been a lot of backlog with cases that are being investigated. Is there any deliberate effort to make an expeditious investigation so that disciplinary action could be seen to be done where necessary? Alternatively, where the investigation takes about three or five years, will the disciplinary action also be postponed to that effect. I thank you very much.

11.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for making useful contributions to the statement I made. 

Hon. Ekanya wanted to find out whether FDC could be given guarantees. I would propose that for as long as FDC keeps to the law, I guarantee on behalf of government that FDC will do its work without any interruption by the state. The onus is on FDC to ensure that it conducts its affairs in accordance with the laws of this country. It is true that the Police and the security forces did –[Mr Ekanya: ”Clarification”] 

THE SPEAKER: But honestly, if somebody says you have to comply with the law, what other clarification would you like?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I would like to join hon. Aggrey Awori in congratulating the honourable members of this House who have had promotions to positions of great responsibility in the leadership of our security forces. 

I want to salute hon. Mallinga for his intervention and throwing light on how the military handles some of the issues concerning discipline. That was very timely intervention. I do not share the view of hon. Awori who is demanding disciplinary action now. We believe in the rule of law and we are not ready to be pigeonholed by to just use Kangaroo methods. We will stick to the law.  

Hon. Basaliza’s comments are very appropriate. No presidential candidate or anybody is allowed to raise a personal brigade, military force or anything, contrary to the laws of Uganda. If anyone does that, the law again without any doubt will take its course. The point of Winnie Byanyima slapping a policewoman is already being investigated. 

Hon. Dombo should not be worried. This investigation will take a short time and the necessary measures will be taken following the results of the investigation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. James Mwandha had wanted a statement on Bugiri-Tororo road and the Minister in charge, hon. Nasasira, has informed me he is preparing a statement, which he will make this afternoon. We shall also have the one on the disability policy. I think the minister is not here but at least I have her statement, indicating that every Member of Parliament got a copy. She will formally read her statement.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, were you informed as to when the copies were circulated to Members?

THE SPEAKER: No. I received my own copy. It was indicated to all Members of Parliament. She will be here to make a statement.

MR MWANDHA: I am surprised that those of us who are the beneficiaries of this policy have not received copies and yet the Speaker received one.

THE SPEAKER: I think I am entitled to getting the first top copy. She will make a statement. I was just reporting. This is the information I have from hon. Nasasira and hon. Sekabira. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under our rules on matters of urgent importance, I would like to know whether the Prime Minister will come today and inform the country on the ruling by the international criminal court, The Hague. It is shocking! The country is surprised at how we shall pay the 18 trillion. That money can finance this country for over 12 years. Can we get government’s position on that?

THE SPEAKER: If you wanted it as a matter of urgency, you should have informed me. You do not just stand up and say it is a matter of urgency. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON THE REPRESENTATION OF SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER:  The debate should continue.

11.50
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I partly support the motion. There are certain categories of the special interest seats that I suggest be deleted from the Constitution. I also wish to make some amendments regarding certain categories of women representation. 

Starting with women representation, I recall as a Member of the Constituent Assembly, we put in the condition that after ten years the matter would be reconsidered. There was also a minor condition, which unfortunately was never inserted in the Constitution by virtue of the fact that we did not have the commanding numbers. That question is a woman-sitting member who has served two terMs This particular condition of the Constitution was a purpose of affirmative action and not permanent representation. In other words, a woman Member of Parliament who has served two terms should now step down and leave another woman to take up the position.  

I know some of my colleagues who have been with me in this august House for the past ten years or more may not support this particular amendment, but I believe since I am no longer a presidential candidate, I can say it now. In the past I was afraid because of the votes, now I can say it openly. I believe a woman Member of Parliament who has served two consecutive terms should retire and leave another young lady to take up her position.  

The term limits were only relevant to Article 105 and nothing to do with the Article we are talking about. (Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much honourable member, for giving way. I just want to seek clarification. When you propose that a woman member of Parliament who has held office or has been returned consecutively for two terms should vacate office for a young lady, would the affirmative action also talk about age so that there is affirmative action for the young ladies, or would we just vacate for another lady?

MRS KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, I was just wondering whether much as the women were talked about in the Constitution, the honourable member actually feels that it should apply for the men as well because some have been here for 30 years.

MR AWORI: Starting with the last part of the concern of my honourable colleague, it is true, some of us have been here for a long time but fortunately there are no constitutional restrictions as to how long we can stay here. So, really it is up to my honourable colleagues of the other gender to come up and say, there should be no discrimination in the Constitution regarding representation. There should be no discrimination based on gender as far as representation is concerned. 

This is the kind of amendment I expect to come from my honourable colleagues who are enjoying the facilities of affirmative action. If that is the case then we simply say no discrimination whatsoever, if men are going to be here indefinitely, then so be it with the women also and so be it with also men in terms of affirmative action in the event to having been oppressed.  

However, let me qualify my statement. When I said young, actually I did not mean in terms of age. I meant in terms of being in the House because age does not matter really, age is immaterial until you are 75, and I do not think any of my colleagues here are even half way that age group. So, you do not have to worry about age factor. What I am worried about is that you have been here for 10 years and this is affirmative action. We want to see more women coming into the mainstream politics, that is why I am saying give way this is just affirmative action.

I agree with my colleagues when they say there should be in the same Constitution restrictions on the men that there should be two terMs I am ready for that. Let somebody come up with an amendment in the Constitution that no person in this august House shall serve more than two consecutive terMs If you want we are ready for it; we can debate it. But I am just simply saying the first time the matter of affirmative action came up as a constitutional issue in the Constituent Assembly, one of the major considerations was that we do not want certain people to –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Awori, for giving way. I would like you to clarify whether affirmative action fundamentally goes to effective representation or turnover in Parliament.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like also to thank hon. Awori for giving way. I would like hon. Awori to clarify whether affirmative action means changing faces of women here, or it is the issue of representing woman in Parliament?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from my colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori, if his position is the position of UPC, or it is the position of hon. Aggrey Awori as a person. I know some of us have already got the privilege of reading through the manifesto of UPC, and I do not know if what he is saying is not contradicting what the UPC as a party is saying.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The spirit of affirmative action was to provide exposure. It is deemed that after 10 years somebody is sufficiently exposed and can graduate perhaps to the traditional constituencies. But you find people here, our women folk, some of them are professors, there are internationally exposed but they still want to continue at the affirmative action at the district level. This serves to suffocate other people who also want exposure. I think this is the argument of my colleague, hon. Awori, which has not been properly understood. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think it would be neater if we first of all start by deciding whether to retain this and the other, then we put conditions rather than starting with the conditions when we have not decided on what to retain. Don’t you think we can deal with that process after that then we can say let these conditions attach to this and the other? Thank you. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I think I will start with my agreement to the Speaker’s comments. Yes, it is true, but the reason why I came up with the justification is because I want it to be understood. As I said, I have always been supportive of gender factor in terms of representation in the august House, but I am just putting there a small caveat to justify my support for their continued representation in the august House.  

My honourable colleague, hon. Baba Diri said, “I think hon. Awori just wants change of face, a new face every ten years.” No, it is not that; my concern is that one of the points of having women representation in politics especially mainstream politics is to expose as many women as possible in the industry of politics. 

There have been all kinds of inhibitions in the past, some of them legislative, others purely cultural but we wanted to give an opportunity to as many women as possible that is why we started with one person per a district. Otherwise, some of us would have said, no, let us go in terms of population or regions. But we wanted to create an environment where as many people of the other gender can be introduced in mainstream politics. That is why I am saying, please, you have been there you can go another one comes so be it. 

But, Mr Speaker, as a matter of fact, it was beginning to work. Out of the previous 46 or 56, no at that time 42 women Member of Parliament, we have had seven graduating from these special seats to mainstream seats as a result of exposure. I know of actually one who tried a man’s seat and did not make it but those who tried from the women special seats into mainstream succeeded and that is why the Constitution in this aspect is working. 

Likewise, I am saying we should try that practice; opening two gates, one gate 10 years you go, another person comes in, you try the mainstream seats you go and challenge the men. But for the time being allow this gate to bring in as many people as possible regardless of age. 

This question of affirmative action that one is working, but I must say on one side that it is not working in terms of policies at all. Notwithstanding the 70 women Members in this august House or more, very important laws are not moving regarding women. As, an example, the Domestic Relations Bill (DRB) is stuck notwithstanding the fact that there are women who are in the Cabinet.  We are not moving forward. For the last six, seven, eight years we have not been able to push DRB through. Why?  Are we just looking for women to be a –(Interruption)

MR LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. I am seeking clarification from my colleague. Is it the role of the women MPs alone to make sure that the DRB goes through? Is the DRB only to benefit women not men?  

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving way. I would like to provide information that in this House there are more men than women, and also in the leadership of the Executive there are more men than women, and that is why this DRB is dragging and men are not giving way for the DRB not the women. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe before you proceed, we have special guests here from Kamuli Constituency of the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker they have come to see how we transact business. You are most welcome!

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To answer my honourable colleagues regarding DRB and other policies, which are geared towards gender, affirmative action. Yes, it is true we have a certain number of women in this august House who I feel that really they should be the ones to spearhead and you should really include us. If every woman MP –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, this is what I have been saying many times. There are people who take DRB to be a bill for women. DRB is a comprehensive law dealing with domestic relations. This is not one sided, domestic relations includes men and women. This approach I think should be avoided. I see foot dragging on this law simply because it was branded a women’s law against men which is not the case. 

So, as legislators, we represent all the people from our constituencies, men and women and therefore it is our duty if there is a good law to enact not only to leave it to men or to women, but to do what is just and proper for our constituents.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. I thought I would give information to the honourable member holding the Floor. I think the review we are discussing, Mr Speaker, has got specific aspects of that Article to increase, to retain or to abolish.  Those are three objectives of the review of the affirmative action, or women’s representation in this House. But now we are digressing to DRB; we are going left and right. So, I think this House should debate this review on the three points: should we increase the numbers, to which I would say yes, definitely because we need more women here; should we retain it, to which I will say, yes; and should we abolish to which I will say, no.  

But let me also clarify to the Member. He is talking about the terms of office; the Article we are discussing does not cover terms and I do not think it should come in here. When you review it should have been here also, if it was intentioned that we look at the terms of office of these women MPs. But I think the Attorney General should read out the very Article, which we are looking at now, it does not concern terms. 

But then when he comes to say some women get exposed and go - and go where? The process of emancipating the women is not to just turn them in and out as if we are in an education system where you complete primary seven, no! We are saying women emancipation should be a continuous exercise and representation in the House is just one of the phases. But then I think the hon. Speaker would be able to realize that women should be exposed to take on higher responsibilities. So, if 10 years are used for exposure then the next term of office it is expected that woman would take on higher responsibilities but not just to jump out of the House.

So, Mr Speaker, I think the Member is losing the essence of this review and I am calling him to order. Thank you.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving way. I want to give hon. Aggrey Awori further information. For the past 30 years, he has been in politics, he has not given up, he even aspired for the top most office of president and he stooped low to come back to Parliament. So, honourable member, look at that, 30 years you still want to remain! As you do want to remain, that is how women want to remain and sharpen their tools even further.

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Awori, you have gone through baptism and you have converted. Please proceed.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also like to thank my honourable colleagues who have brought a number of items, which I had not taken into consideration before I made my presentation. At the same, Mr Speaker, permit me to correct some of the wrong impressions drawn by my colleagues from what I was trying to say.

Number one, I am not trying to restrict representation in this august House for people of that gender, no. I am simply saying you can move like some of us would like to move from the backbench to the frontbench. But I am not saying you only come here for a period not exceeding 10 years and then you go away, no. I am saying in that category as long as you have that constitutional provision let us qualify it. But you can continue, the development should be vertical not horizontal, always vertical, go higher and higher.  

I do not think I can answer all the concerns because some of them have valid points and they do not need further clarification. But the most important I would like to say, I was not diverting when I talked about DRB. DRB, Mr Speaker, as you rightly put it, is not a responsibility strictly of the women, no. It is a responsibility of the entire House. But in every motion and policy that comes before Parliament usually there has to be a team, a caucus, a co-group to push it.  

It is true, Mr Speaker, as you rightly put it, DRB is not strictly for the women alone. As a matter of fact, some people have said the DRB is a misnomer; it should not be called domestic, it should be called a marriage relation’s bill and marriage consist of male and female. So our interests are equally at risk or being protected.  

So, Mr Speaker, when I say why should we continue to have these categories, can these people help us to push particular agenda, I am just calling upon you because in the past the people who have suffered most in any marriage whenever there is a slight of breakdown it has always been first the women and the children. That is why it is not only a responsibility of the august House but of all of us.

Last but not least, the people of UPDF, men and women of UPDF. I feel that given the new political dispensation we are putting them in a very awkward position. I think they should be excused from partisan politics that we exercise in this august House so that their loyalty to the commander-in-chief is not put to question. When an order has been given by the commander-in-chief, who by any given time is always the Chairman of the Cabinet, the initiator of all the bills in the august House, they should not be put in awkward position of expressing their minds freely by opposing it because it is military discipline you cannot oppose your commander-in-chief. And there is no given time you can say, the President in this particular matter he is not exercising his powers as a commander– in –chief; the two are intertwined and why do you want to expose an officer who is now a member of the august House to make a decision on a matter which would call his loyalty to a commander-in-chief in question? That is why I am saying we excuse them.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank, hon. Awori, for giving way. I have small information, which I would like to give him. When he says that a military officer is not supposed to oppose a commander-in chief, it is not always the case. We have established structures in the UPDF whereby the commander-in chief chairs a meeting or a committee meeting namely, the high command where officers are free to express themselves, to oppose and advise the commander-in-chief who is the chair. That is the right forum and it is that high command that elects these Members of Parliament.  

The Members of Parliament representing the UPDF are nominated by the commander– in- chief and the names are submitted to the high command. The commander-in-chief goes away –there are no campaigns- the army council elects only 10 members. The commander-in-chief can nominate like 15 or 16 names then the army council nominates 10. So, there are opportunities where the army officers oppose the commander-in-chief, the right forum is always there. It is not true that an army officer is not supposed to oppose the commander-in-chief.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I think you read me out of context for the following reasons: Number one, you yourself has qualified it by saying, “the right forum.” That is your forum in the armed forces; it is not legislative. We are here to make policies and laws for the whole country. What you are talking about is subsidiary laws or whatever legislation. We are here to talk about matters of politics. Take, for instance - I do not want to quote this may be it is before the courts of law - the case of Tumukunde among others.  I do not want to bring up too many examples lest I get on slippery grounds and I hurt other peoples’ legal rights and privileges.  

But the most important thing is, in this august House we are going to be under new political dispensation. We are going to be dominated by party politics whereby as somebody challenged me, “Are you speaking on behalf of UPC or on your individual capacity.” Likewise for me at no given time can I divorce myself from the views of UPC. I am genetically committed to UPC so there is no way I can deny it. 

We are going to put our officers in a very awkward position especially when we go on to division. I am sure that rule will apply under new political dispensation. How are they going to go into that corridor where we know very well you go through that corridor when you stand against particular policy? How are you going to pronounce yourself the day we bring an amendment here to the law governing the court martial? Which way is he going to go, that way or this way? Is he going to be identified with a particular political group? (Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But I think you should curtail your contribution.

CAPT. BASALIZA: I know hon. Awori was in the Fourth Parliament, which was a multiparty democracy, and the army representatives were there. I do not know if he has forgotten, I want to find out from him how they behaved during the Fourth Parliament and why the army representatives were there. So, why is it now that you are saying the army should not be in Parliament whereas it was there under the multiparty politics of the Fourth Parliament?

If you are not aware, I will inform you and give you the names of all Members of Parliament who were there. There was Maj. Elf Agwa, Lt Baziraki, Lt Col Maruru, Lt Col Sam Nanyumba, Lt Col Nyero, Maj. Gen. Tito Okello, Lt Col Olara Okello, Brig. Oyite Ojok, Maj. Opo Ukongwa and lastly Lt Namiti. Was that not a multiparty democracy under the Fourth Parliament? Please clarify.

MR AWORI: Very simple. I can tell you my good friend, you have no constitutional right to inherit the wrongs that UPC did -(Laughter)- I do admit at the particular time -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from hon. Awori is, is he admitting really that UPC was doing the wrong things?  

MAJ. GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to congratulate hon. Awori for this historic confession that UPC committed certain wrongs. Thank you.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Awori spoke on the Floor of this House that he prefers young women to come and replace old women in this Parliament. I am seeking clarification from him whether he also advised the presidential candidate in UPC who is a woman and old to give way for young ladies.    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, would you like to close within one minute, please?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Please permit me to answer the concerns of my honourable colleagues. First of all, when it comes to UPC as a government, we are transparent. If we make a mistake we say we have made a mistake. I will give an example. We made a mistake of not pursuing certain rebels in the bush right away and that was a big mistake. If we had pursued that policy of eradicating a political menace, this House would be looking different and some of you would not be here.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, concerning this question of so and so being here, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that I was familiar with those officers whose names he has read. Let me add that they always had serious difficulties and that as a matter of fact, only two of them consistently came to the august House. The rest rarely showed up. 

I am surprised the UPDF has again inherited the same mistake in that they rarely show up here just like the ones in ULA who never came. They are here today for the first time because we were discussing their future, but I am sure immediately we finish this, it will be a long time before we see them again. As for my good friend the permanent secretary here, I do not think he is coming back tomorrow except under different colours.

Mr Speaker, to summarize my point, I support affirmative action and the fact that we should have as many women as possible in this august House. As a matter of fact, at an appropriate time we shall come with an amendment to see how we can actually increase the number of women in the House. Nevertheless, I stand by those issues that I put forward and I am glad that you are thinking about them.  

As regards the UPDF, the only question I have to ask is, are you prepared to accommodate other people in the armed forces such as the prisons and the police? This kind of discrimination may have a historical background but it should not be so. You cannot be tied to history forever as if it was culture, no. If we are going to expand the organs of security in the august House, we should include all those other branches of the state concerned with security like the police, intelligence, prisons and others. If we keep sticking to one category alone, we are creating a special breed of persons.  

Regarding the people who are claiming vigorous representation in this august House that is people with disabilities, if you look at the entire population of Uganda you will realise that people with disabilities are more than the armed forces yet look at their representation in the august House! It is a half of the UPDF. This is despite the fact that the UPDF at any given moment in the last two years has not consisted of more than 60,000 men and women yet the number of people with disabilities increases almost daily and all of us have the potential to belong there. 

You can have an accident and be rendered physically disabled. It could be by accident, deliberate and so forth. This number is consistently increasing but we have not considered increasing their numbers. Therefore, when it comes to increasing numbers, Mr Speaker, the people who really deserve an increase are the people with disabilities.

When it comes to the youth, there is so much waiting for them upstairs. As such there is no need to infuse them right now in the political mainstream, as there is plenty of room. As I speak the person who has been encouraged to challenge me in my constituency is a youth of 26 years. As for me I keep saying, “Keep trying to challenge me during elections. You will learn all the tricks and then may be one day when you have attained sufficient maturity in politics you can take over”.  

In conclusion, I support the women and urge that we keep them in the House but with a caveat. We should increase their numbers but cut down the number of times they can serve. For the people in uniform who are serving our country abroad and locally, please keep out of politics. Leave it to us who have nothing else to do but talk because we cannot fight. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.30
BRIG. NOBLE MAYOMBO (Army Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will begin by clarifying the issue raised by hon. Awori while he was congratulating me as a Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence. Mr Speaker and the august House, on 24th of October His Excellency, the President nominated me to be the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Defence. Article 172 of our Constitution requires such an appointment to be ratified by the Public Service Commission. 

I have since appeared before the Public Service Commission and carried out the necessary interviews but I am yet to receive the instruments of appointment and the office of the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Uganda. When that takes place, Sir, the Army Council will formally inform the Speaker that one seat of the Members of Parliament has fallen vacant and that there may be need for a by-election to be held. Up to that time, I am the due representative of the UPDF in Parliament. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, this may be my last speech in this august House. However, I think it is important that I make this speech to this House because I have found Parliament to be an important learning place for the military in Uganda and in the world. I came to the Constituent Assembly hostile to politicians, thinking that politicians waste public time, thinking that politics is a dirty game and thinking that politicians are people who do not tell the truth. 

But now I am joining the public service more educated as a result of my being in Parliament about the functioning of governments, the importance of an interface between the military and elected representatives of the people and the importance of articulating the views of the military to elected people’s representatives in Parliament. 

I am leaving Parliament after interacting with leaders of political parties, some of whom I put on uniform to fight. I leave understanding the reasons why they joined those parties because we shared coffee and sat to lobby together on how to defend UPDF positions and their own positions. We have very many things in common as Members of Parliament, so I go back more assured that I can custody the rights, interests, proceedings and atmosphere of this very important institution of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, there has been the question of time allocated to Parliament. I used to be a very active member of the Constituent Assembly when I was a lieutenant. I attended all the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly and all the sittings of the Legal and Drafting Committee. I am proud to say that I wrote that Constitution, and I duly informed the UPDF that that was our Constitution. I briefed the UPDF councils that this was our Constitution because I wrote it. 

The UPDF loves this Constitution very dearly because we participated in writing it, and we were happy that we sat alongside the elected people’s representatives to handle it. This experience may be new to western democracies and it may not be found in written law books. Likewise, I am a student of constitutional law and this may not be found in many western schools or in western jurisprudence as far as parliaments are concerned. 

After my short 14 years in elected people’s assemblies, I would like to say that I think it is working. Likewise, after my 21 short years in the military, I think the interface between the people and Parliament, between civil and constitutional bodies and the military is good for the people, for the military, for the country and for young democracies, as it has worked for us. 

We have been living for 20 years under the Movement system. We have sat with Movement Members of Parliament and discussed with them but we have not sat in a multiparty Parliament. We do not know how it works and we would like to do so. Why would we like to know how it works? Because we do not want to fear it but to understand it; we do not want to run away from it. Rather we want to study it and be custodians to it. 

We think that to tell the Army to stay in the barracks or to go and lock up the Army in the barracks is no guarantee that it will never come out of those barracks. It does not in itself insulate the Army from partisan politics or insulate it from breaking the doors of those barracks. The greatest guarantee that the Army will stay out of the barracks and still respect people’s institutions, what they represent and what they are there for is when the Army understand those institutions. 

We would like to understand the multiparty democracy, we would like it to start, participate in building the foundations, participate in mixing the cement and mortar, construct the walls and place the roof together. That is the best guarantee for the democracy of our country. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I know there is a limitation of time but the military is still the most organised pillar of state in the whole world and in democracies like Uganda it may still be the only pillar. Even that pillar itself is not perfect. There are other pillars of state, which need to be organised. We need time to organise the public service and the judiciary and we need time to build democratic institutions. 

This Army, which happens to be the most organised pillar of state may not be perfect as indeed the UPDF is not perfect. You may have seen us voting differently previously in Parliament. That shows you that the Army itself is young and that it may not understand the principles of collective responsibility, or that once you represent interest groups you do not represent your own views but the views of the people who sent you. 

We will work towards ensuring that the next UPDF Members of Parliament only come here to represent the views of the UPDF council after it has sat down and articulated them. That will avoid a situation where Mayombo votes for A and Gutti votes for B. However, those mistakes must not be used to take away a very important achievement for the people of Uganda that is stabilising politics and the military.

I conclude by saying that yesterday I was watching BBC, which featured 15 minutes on Ethiopia. Previously Ethiopia was being called a success story but that is not the case now. The world has not arrived in its search for political and social solutions to its probleMs Likewise, Uganda has not arrived in its search for institutions that can build everlasting democracy. When we try to build democratic institutions and ensure that we guard them, this is one step that I believe can custody our democratic gains. I pray that this Parliament protects this cardinal and important institution by supporting this motion. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

12.40
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the last speaker, hon. Mayombo, on that very profound statement that he has just made. Before I make my own remarks, I would like to congratulate hon. Awori on being saved the second embarrassment of being a presidential candidate because he would have lost even more thoroughly than before -(Laughter)- so I congratulate him on –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I just wanted to inform my honourable colleague that unlike other political organisations such as NRM-O, in UPC we have transparency, room for competition, we accept defeat, we accept going higher and going lower. Also at times when we are in our unguarded moments we even allow other people to usurp our seats. So my honourable colleague, you may be right to congratulate me but the last part was misplaced.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much, hon. Awori. When you use the word “transparent” it means there is some substance but I am wondering whether we are not looking through nothing.

Mr Speaker, I will start off by making remarks on the points made by hon. Awori regarding women representation. I think it is a mistake to think that affirmative action was meant to be personal, and that when a woman represents a district more than once that is the achievement that was meant in affirmative action. 

Affirmative action was meant to introduce in a big way the participation of women, to ensure that society incorporates their contribution more fundamentally than before and to ensure that they participate in all aspects of life. It was not meant to pick a woman from a district, focus on her and after two terms throw her out. 

Hon. Namirembe pointed out very clearly that women are supposed to scale the heights to the very top like men have done. Therefore, to say that because a woman goes through twice or that because she becomes a minister that is an achievement is not what is meant by affirmative action.  

Besides, Mr Speaker, we talk of reference groups when models are built in society. I remember very clearly, hon. Awori, when many of your party members used to part their hair in the way Obote did or even tried to speak like him. I do not want to quote one example, which would be so obvious to us about who continues to speak like Obote even now. 

As regards emulation and model building, we are talking of having women who take up positions and become models for young women that society builds up. Therefore, to say that because a professor like Prof. Mwaka has been exposed so she should not be in the House is to actually mistake the very essence of affirmative action. We want women who excel and even beat men openly. For hon. Awori to talk of the seven women who came through mainstream elections and think this is a big achievement is to be extremely politically naive and socially mistaken. 

For you to talk of the majority of the population and think that because only seven women can come through mainstream elections and to think that that is a token is unacceptable. We want to have a society where all participate within their capacity. There is no evidence in biology to show that women’s brains are less functional than those of men. Therefore, to think that they must remain in certain positions is to mistake God’s creation. 

I would like to point out that affirmative action was meant to be a social metamorphosis not an individual one. A society has to benefit from all the resources it has and if more than 50 percent of the resources are not contributing then that society is lame and is suffering from unfairness.  

I would like to point out again that the decision to have these interest groups including women is not an accident or a mistake. As hon. Mayombo has pointed out, if you are talking of creating a society of tomorrow, we must not simply swallow what has happened elsewhere and think it will be digested in our system. It is a mistake to think that even the military is political. There is nowhere in the world where the military is political or where the military does not know the political objective of its country. 

Name a country anywhere where you hear the likes of Aggrey Awori saying, “Go away we do not want you here”. We had eight years of Amin and just saying, “Go away”, did not make that happen. In Africa we have had many coups and counter coups. You do not simply wish them away. They are like AIDS; you do not just say to AIDS, “Go away” and it walks away. 

There have been problems in our African politics, which we must digest fundamentally. In 1979 when it was decided in the NRC to have representation of the Army, it was a considered opinion to have our military as part of us. If they were to take over the government then at least they would know what to do. We have had failures of coups with coup leaders –[Mr Ekanya, “Point of information”]- just give me a second. We have had failures of coups with coup leaders who did not have an inkling about what it means to be managers of the state and subsequently we have had failures.  

Therefore, to have the presence of the top leadership of the Army in Parliament is not only to demonstrate that they have nyotas and things like that. Rather it is to say, as hon. Mayombo has said, to learn how societies run, what happens in Parliament and how it relates to other organisations of the state.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that the leaders of the coup in 1985 were sitting members of Parliament namely; Maj. Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa, Lt Gen. Bazilio Okello just to mention but a few. Therefore, it is not true all the time that when members of the Army are in Parliament they cannot participate in undermining the elected government. As you submit you should take cognisance of the fact that history seriously challenges the position you are trying to put across. 

MR MUZOORA: I thank you very much, for giving way and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to give more information on the same about the military, which was in Parliament by 1985. It was because of the presence of the military during that period and because of what they saw happening in Parliament and in the rest of the country, that they rescued the people by taking over the state. That is how we survived in 1985.

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague - I do not know where he was at that material time or how much knowledge he had about what was happening in the army or in Parliament. However, for those of us who were in touch with those situations, nothing could be further from the truth. The matter of the 1985 coup had nothing to do with the politics of Parliament. They were different issues all together that lead to that coup and these issues had nothing to do with the regular politics of Parliament. If I had time I would have given you, but that is from my memoirs.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the first point raised by hon. Wandera, surely the two names of the people he mentioned - and may God rest their souls! - do not represent the type of people we have in this Parliament. I think we have a different quality of soldiers with different quality of education and –(Interruption) 

MR WANDERA: Is the honourable colleague in order to say that the quality is totally different when Gen. Tinyefuza the other day attacked a police station in Kabalagala? He was in charge of getting the Army into beating up people during the time when Kizza Besigye was arrested? Can you say there is a total difference? On the contrary, Mr Speaker, there is growing similarity between what is happening now and what was happening in the past.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think we have got to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There was no point of order put.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, I think we have got to use the time we have on earth and in this Parliament very carefully. I am referring to Gen. Tito Okello and Bazilio Okello. In terms of their background and training as compared to the people we now have in Parliament, there is a difference.  And I do not see how hon. Wandera now brings in an incident – it is just like some people have punched each other in the corridors of Parliament and, therefore, you think Members of Parliament are the same all over the world? That one is not fair and it is not fair from a mind that I know of hon. Wandera. 

The second point about coups: You know, it is within the nature of UPC anyway for their leadership to be overthrown in the 1971 and so whether –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I respect the views of my honourable colleague, Prof. Kabwegyere. Academically and intellectually, you enjoy the highest esteem in my opinion. But when you get into areas where your capacity to understand is a bit limited, I begin to wonder. Are you in order to say two incidents make a history, make a culture that UPC has a propensity of losing government through coups? Are you in order? Only two incidents, do they become serial? (Laughter) 
 
THE SPEAKER: Since there is no formula, for now I cannot rule on that.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I better leave the issue of the military. I think the point has been made very clearly that you do not save your country from the intervention of the military by keeping them out. In fact, I would rather deal with enlightened leadership of the military than those who have been cloistered in barracks. Fortunately, our history illustrates a better use of a presence of military representation in Parliament, which hon. Mayombo has ably pointed out.

Mr Speaker, the interest groups we are talking about include representatives of youth, workers and people with disabilities, this is not something that is here in Parliament alone. It has now been adopted as a culture throughout the whole country. That is why these parties - or call them what they are - have difficulties in facing up to the challenge of taking over the amount of leadership in Uganda because we are now involved lower down in the local government. 

People with disabilities who had never been thought of, are there. You know, workers are in there. If you look through, for example, the results of our primaries in NRM, you will see that we have millions of people who have been participating who are now leaders, who have a stake in a system. This is not something to dismiss. It is just like this building here; there are bricks, there is cement, there is all the upholstery, which make this building. 

Uganda has been shaped by recognition of its chemistry. The political leaders have understood the chemistry that you need every participant, everybody to have a share in the system. And this is the only way like the human body shares the blood, the nourishment that is put in to keep it going. To me, anybody who does not understand this has to check his understanding of the working of the society and in particular our type of society.

When you bring everybody in, you have strength. Ten years indeed was considered as a period to review because we were breaking new ground in 1995 - in that competition. There were many people who were sceptical who would say: “Ah, how can you bring youth in Parliament?” You remember it took a long time even to get the youth to be represented. How are you going to get workers, what will they do? Hon. Wandera here is an example of a superb person who has come through.

Through this channel, now the workers have a voice in this Parliament. Why would we now say the women should not because 10 years after – please this society must become stronger and stronger until organisations on their own right can have representation. Because, for example, if you look at the history of the Labour Party in Britain, you find that it represents certain interests. Then when that has happened, you no longer have to identify workers perse, because they will be a union, the society will be so industrial that people will be part and parcel of that culture and therefore nobody will be isolated. (Applause)

Now, if you suddenly say at this stage, no workers or you women or you people with disability, you are misunderstanding the original idea of how this society should be woven together. These developed countries have been woven through their economy. Over centuries their social, political and economic fabric have been interwoven. For us we are consciously thinking politically, doing things politically even where the economics is not yet with us so that we can direct society. So, anybody who thinks that you can now put this – does not know where we are going.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from Prof. Kabwegyere whether his proposal sociologically does not cause stagnation? Because to me I think the principle of affirmative action is to build and to create growth. Just like we have hon. Namuyangu Jenipher, she represented the youth, she has grown, she is now a Member of Parliament representing a district, tomorrow we expect her to grow to go to UN, to go to other bodies.  Just like I was a youth and now I represent a constituency, I should not stay here, I should join other sectors of politics. But if you are saying, one woman should be in a constituency for 20 years, you are causing stagnation because we want to grow, we want other women who are now councillors to come up.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Is it in order for hon. Ekanya to tell lies? For the youth, there is a limitation, there are laws governing it; if there were no laws he could have stayed a youth representative. Mr Speaker, is it in order to tell lies about youth representation as regards to the law?

THE SPEAKER: What is the lie you are talking about?

CAPT. BASALIZA:  There is an age limit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Definitely somebody would be out of order if he tells us a lie, but if it is an assessment that is a different matter. What is the lie?

CAPT. BASALIZA: The lie is about the age. Hon. Ekanya is way above the age of being a Youth Member of Parliament, so he has told us a lie.

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether hon. Ekanya was already here when I said that we are not talking of individual metamorphosis, we are talking of social metamorphosis. It is not hon. Ekanya who comes here as a youth and then matures, and then – that is not what we are talking. We are talking about moving society and not moving individuals. Individuals come and go, it is society, which continues and we are trying to promote the participation of women, the participation of youth. After Ekanya has become an old man, there will still be other youth who should participate in society. 

Therefore, there is no contradiction and I am saying very clearly that we are bringing in everybody particularly at this point in time.  There are people who think that when we go multiparty we are going to abandon the goals of this society. What kind of party is this that does not see that we are building a solitary country?  What is the party for, disintegration? Why would anybody, including the former aspiring candidate for presidency, go rambling around?  

You know I listened to hon. Aggrey Awori and then interventions came in and then – and so on and so forth. Let us focus our direction. We want people to participate. Even when parties exist, there will be people with disabilities indeed, and they may even be in parties. But even if they are in parties, they must be part and parcel of that togetherness.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I would like to inform the professor further as he is developing that subject that the NRM has come out in its constitution to entrench various interest groups as a process of integration and transforming society. Right now as we go multiparty, the NRM has got links, bringing together the elderly, the disabled, the women and the youth. But I think the information is very important because from the arguments on the Floor, we are learning that other parties have no consideration for the participation of these groups and, therefore, this puts the Movement or the NRM above the others in the understanding of social integration. (Applause)

PROF KABWEGYERE: Thank you! I may take occasion to say, hon. Namirembe Bitamazire now qualifies to be a statesperson. Her longevity has helped her to see so many things that she can now talk substance. 

I want to conclude that the difference between NRM as we talk now and any other party with a name is that NRM has a formula for building a solitary society. Inbuilt within the NRM conception, there are safety valves that could have the army within, that can have all these people within. Indeed with a constitution, which says when any government goes contrary to the principles that are for this solitary society, anyone has a right to challenge it. This is the answer for our tomorrow, it is not disbursement, and it is not a lack of knowledge of the chemistry.

We must know the political chemistry; we must know the history of our country, where we have come from and where we are now. In fact, the more and more people get involved, the easier it is going to be for industrialisation. Whereas in the older developments there were a handful of people who dominated the industrial process, for us now we have everybody dominating the political process.  The challenge now is for everybody to dominate the economic process. If we do that, the moment for social transformation will be phenomenal and anybody who does not see that in the mantle of NRM stands to be defeated thoroughly.  

Our society has a chance to stabilise and develop both economically and politically and in this way we must not interfere with these institutions that we have put in place, because they answer to individual challenges of our social development.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. We shall start with hon. Byatike, hon. Mutebi, hon. James Mwandha, hon. Dr Lyomoki and then we shall see how we proceed in that order. And I suggest that we have a break and, is it possible to resume at 2.15 p.m. so that we take an hour for lunch? The House is suspended until then.

(The proceedings were suspended at 1.10 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.45_)

2.46
DR DAVID MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion introduced by the Attorney General. The first excuse any army that has taken over power through a military coup gives is, “The civilians have messed up the country.” So, I think when we are looking at the special groups that are being represented in Parliament, we should not leave out the army. 

I support all the other groups to be retained but I am particularly concentrating on the army for purposes of supporting the whole idea. I think that the army should be there when policies are being advanced and decided on in Parliament so that they get to know exactly what is going on. Looking at it from another angle, I think when there is trouble somewhere, trouble being brewed in Parliament, in the highest forum for civilians, then the army should be there so that they can caution us with words rather than waiting for us to get out and question us with bullets. They should be there and be part of the decision making body so that we really get together and work together.
  
Looking at the calibre of Army representatives who have been here, I think this is really a good situation. These are independent, very intelligent, and responsible people who are also entitled to their own mind. They should have a free mind and that is why they should be retained in Parliament.  

There has been a precedent in this respect, I remember in the Constituent Assembly, we had a situation where two very highly intelligent officers left the rest of us voting one way and they went into the middle of arena and said, “No, we are not voting.” They abstained and I thought that was very good. That was a way of showing that soldiers too can have an independent mind, so I think the army should also be left in Parliament.  It is quite naive to think that it is only when you criticise government that is when you are showing your independence of mind. You can also show your independence of mind by voting for the government decision on the position of whatever it is.

My next point is that, I have got a feeling that the exposure the army have had in Parliament and the cordial relationship they have been having with civilians outside the barracks has contributed greatly to the stability of this country for the past 20 years. This has been quite visible and I think it is quite commendable that there is this kind of interaction, interface with the soldiers not only in Parliament but also outside the barracks. This is something that has contributed greatly to the stability of the country during the past 20 years or so.

Mr Speaker, the presence of the army in Parliament should be retained so that they are given a chance at least to tell us what they are supposed to do directly rather than going through another channel. I think they are democratically elected, they have got their electoral colleges, we cannot say that simply because they were elected through an electoral college then they are not representing anybody. They have got a constituency, and they were properly elected so let them tell us directly what they want so that they are part of the decision making, part of the policies for the well being of this country.  

So, I would encourage them firstly to be more effective when it comes to their own welfare as soldiers and their families. Take the advantage of being in Parliament to be more effective for the welfare of your people: men, women and your family.  

I should encourage them to be more effective when it comes to the security of the borders of the country. They have been doing that excellently and we should really support them rather than getting them out of Parliament then we scratch their backs that they are doing this and the other. Let them be here, they tell us directly that yes, “We are doing something and this is the evidence.” They cannot do that in a better way than being present here and telling us exactly what is going on in the trenches, in the maama ingiya poles all that kind of stuff they could put it here. Encourage your representatives to put such things forward on the Floor here so that you have our support.

Lastly, I would encourage representatives of the army to be more effective towards the stability and fairness in the political arena of this country. They have the opportunity to do it and God forbid, if there is another excuse or coup, they will not say, “We were not there, we do not own that kind of mistake.” They should be with us throughout. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.54
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion moved by the honourable minister and as a very senior member of the special interests group in this Parliament, I would like to record my congratulations to hon. Aronda Nyakairima for having risen to the highest office in the armed forces. He used to sit near me and today when I came, I complained why he had decided not to sit near me because we often share a lot of things, but he said I came late and he was not sure I would be coming so he chose to sit elsewhere.

But, seriously I think we have had a very good relationship with the honourable and other colleagues and I was particularly happy when I read the statement, which he gave giving a very firm statement instructing the armed forces on how they should behave during election time. I thought that was great and I wanted to congratulate him for that statement as well!  

I want also to congratulate other colleagues, hon. Mayombo Noble, he religiously sits near me and we joke about many things. When he said this morning that this would be his last speech in the House, I felt a bit emotional about it. I do not know what we shall be without hon. Mayombo Noble in this House. But since he chose to go into public service, I think he will do the right thing immediately he is approved. It is only honourable that he resigns from the House although I have already told him that he took a wrong decision to accept this post, which is causing him to resign. 

Nevertheless, people have choice and we wish him well wherever he is. I think his departure into public service gives us further opportunities of interacting with people that we know well in the public service. I also congratulate other colleagues of that interest group who got various promotions. I congratulate them most heartily!

Mr Speaker, I think there is one unique aspect of our Constitution and this is the provision of room for people to be represented, those people who have been marginalized from time immemorial for no other reason other than being what they are. Women are marginalized because they are women, there is no other cause that they are marginalized other than being women. They are denied rights to inheritance, rights sometimes to ownership, right of property and various cultures marginalize them differently.  

In the same way, we people with disabilities have been marginalized for a long time not because of anything but because we are disabled. People will judge you by the way they see you; if people see you walking with a limp or travelling in a wheelchair they will not put any value on what you are as a person. They will think that you are not as good as anybody else who may be walking properly on his two legs or anybody who has no visual impairment or anybody who talks well.  

Our cultures and languages go to the extent of actually demeaning disabled people. For instance, people who have hearing and speech impairement are called kasiru in Luganda. That word, “kasiru” means stupid! In other words, people will say that one is kasiru (stupid) because one is deaf! How can you automatically regard a person to be that kind of person –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I belong to the group you are talking about. There is “musiru” and “kasiru”; the two are different. Kasiru is for a person who cannot talk; musiru is the stupid person.  

MR MWANDHA: I am happy about that clarification. I wish more people could have that kind of understanding of the term. But in practical terms, because we live with disability, we know what we are talking about. People on the street regard a person who is deaf in terms of his disability.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda came up with a formula to address the marginalization that those groups of people have suffered over the time, and tried to provide equalization of opportunities for women and equalization of opportunities for disabled persons so that they can also participate in society on equal basis with other citizens. So, I think this principle has got to be kept, it is very important, it should be protected and I am happy that the constitutional makers were able to come up with this kind of arrangement.  

I would like to call upon my colleagues in this House to support the continuation of these interest groups. We know that young people have been despised because they are young and, therefore, the need to provide equalization of opportunities for the youth. In the same way, the workers at the lower level have also been marginalized by society. So, I think it is important that these particular groups should be kept so that society can continue to address those areas of marginalization, which these people suffer.

Mr Speaker, the inclusion of UPDF in the House was a first class idea when we were under the Movement system, but in my view, when we go multiparty, the people who will be representing UPDF will have a lot of difficulties. Unfortunately, whoever has debated this subject and even supported the inclusion of UPDF in Parliament, including my colleague hon. Matovu Byatike, have not gone a step further to explain the best way how people representing UPDF will function in a Parliament which is partisan.  

Obviously we do not have much experience with a multiparty system, but indeed it is a fact that there are practical difficulties that could arise when a Member representing UPDF is sitting in this House. In the first place, it is known and expected that UPDF must support the government of the day at any cost whether it is NRM, whether it is DP or whether UPC. They are supposed to be impartial, they are supposed to be independent, so that they can support whichever government is in power at that particular time.  

Now, when you have UPDF coming to a multiparty parliament and knowing the way they are actually elected, you can have a lot of problems on how these people are going to function because whenever issues come up, they will have to support government all the time. This means that whichever government will be in power will have an advantage of 10 Members of Parliament, which they can always rely upon to support their policies because they cannot do otherwise. They have to support the government of the day and to me this would be unfair to the rest of the parties. The parties will not have had the opportunity to compete for any of the 10 positions of UPDF like they will do with women, the disabled, the workers, and indeed like they will do with the youth.  

We have been told how the UPDF is elected. So, other parties have no access to trying to get these people to come to their side and serve their position and to me, we should not put our UPDF in a difficult situation. I think it is important that we do not get them involved in a Parliament, which is partisan.  

I was discussing this matter with a few colleagues at lunch time, and one colleague said that maybe we better come up with a compromise and let Members representing UPDF come as ex-officio Members so that they can participate in everything that Parliament does; they go to committees, and deliberate in debates, but when it comes to voting, they withhold their votes so that it is not shown that they are voting in support of a particular position or that they are voting against their conscience because all the time they have to vote in favour in of the policy of the government of the day. 

I think that could be a compromise, if we indeed should keep UPDF in the House. Otherwise, to have UPDF in House, which will have to be voting for government all the time, I think will be grossly unfair to the rest of the parties.

But we know, and this I think is important to note that the UPDF officers are very busy men and women and that can be seen about their attendance in this House. It is only on very special occasions that you have seen them here in large numbers, otherwise they are busy; they have so much work out there for Uganda and you cannot expect them to be attending Parliament on the same regular basis as the rest of the Members of Parliament. So, Sir, with these comments, I want to thank you again and I support the motion. Thank you.

3.54
LT GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (Army Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I rise to support the motion. We do not come here to support this motion on selfish grounds because since NRC, Members of NRA then, now UPDF, have come and gone; we do not have a Member of this House who has been here all these years so we support this in principle. 

Mr Speaker, I believe and I know that every country has had a unique history and has a unique way of organising their Parliament. I have been one of those celebrating the achievements of our country at the time when we were threatened with sharp disunity in the country. A unique way of political organization was put in place as movement organization, and I am sure all these achievements that have been in place for all these years were because we had the courage to organise in a way that suited our circumstances at the time, when our country was almost threatened with disintegration to become the type of Somalia. 

In other places in this world, I have followed up events in Turkey where you find that the Turkish Government participates in Parliament and has since then remained the guarantor of the circular state of Turkey and when it comes to the deliberations in Parliament, they have always participated like the way everybody else participates in that Parliament.  

Someone somewhere said that they did not care what type, the colour the cat was as long as it could catch the mice. We likewise do not care no matter the composition of Parliament, as long as they can deliberate on national issues, agree on them and move forward the country like we have moved this far and registered the achievements we have.  

The involvement of the UPDF in politics is historical since all the way in 1981 when the struggle was launched. Today we have had people struggling with the people. All these wars we have been involved in, it has been a joint fight, a joint effort of the UPDF before NRA and now UPDF unity. The working together, and harmony that has been established between the service officers, the service ladies and other soldiers, is so fundamental that it has stood the test of time that is worthy mentioning in this Parliament and elsewhere where it has succeeded.  

In the area of development, the UPDF working together with people, have had quite a role to play. We have been there with the people - (Interruption)
    
MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague and thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Aronda has just described the historical background wherein he tresses the involvement of the army in the politics as a healthy thing from 1981 to date. The clarification I am seeking is as to whether he does not think this was only practical at a time when we had the all inclusive broad-based movement something in place where we all were non-partisan not having special particular political definition. 

I also want to know whether he does not think that the recent trends - actually some of the statements attributed to him as CDF, which have been going on for sometime, including the slapping of opposition politicians by the army speak volumes to the extent that at the end of the day, there is genuine fear that the army’s continued involvement in a multiparty system will be a danger to this country.

LT GEN. ARONDA: Mr Speaker, I will not indulge in that debate, I will talk about the balance sheet. When you have the balance sheet of the achievements of the UPDF in relation to what it has done with the people, against what individuals have done - and mark you, those individuals are not the institution - I will say that largely the UPDF’s participation in the Parliament and in other areas with the people has largely succeeded. There were moments where we have been prosecuted and action has been taken to the individuals.  

Mr Speaker, I once again want to say that the UPDF has historically played a stabilising factor in the national politics up to this time. Now that we have decided to debate and we are now in the transition into a new form of political organization, we have also reached a time to review whether the UPDF should stay or not. On our part as an institution, we say that the UPDF should stay for national interests and as a harmonising element and stay that we may keep working with the people we have been working with for quite some time.

In the legislative role, we have had moments when individuals say, “You come here to keep quiet. You are not even here.” When we were here we debated openly. When it came to voting, we voted according to the interests of the institution. I do not come here to debate or to vote as Aronda, I am representing the UPDF as an institution and that is what I will continue to observe. It is not unique to us alone, it is the same with the people with disabilities, the women, and the youth. When you represent an institution, you vote according to the wishes of that institution not as an individual.

There are fears, about coups and all that. Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, we are far gone from the days when Ugandans would go to sleep and fear some kind of announcement on Radio Uganda that there was a take over. I think the democratisation process that has taken place in this country, the institutions that are in place, the kind of training the UPDF has had and the kind of political education UPDF has had, have sent us far away from the days when one would fear that if these soldiers keep around, they are likely to participate in partisan politics and they are likely to go to the radio (after all there are many radios anyway) and announce a coup.  

We are far gone from such kind of organisation and such kind of soldiers. The armed forces that we now have - by the way we are no longer army because now it is being referred here. We used to have the army under the Army Commander but now we have UPDF under two services, a CDF. So, you are talking about the representation of the armed forces and not the representation of the army, they are all here. The code of conduct given by the constituencies, as the Army Council will always guide you and the High Command will always ensure that the interests of the institution are put across.  

When it comes to those who fear about where to stand and where to sit, I think even when we go to the multiparties, this House is not going to be burnt by such organisations that are going to come in place. Whichever way one will sit, UPDF will ensure that they keep focus on national interest.  The constituency will ensure that its representatives are only focused on national interests and nothing short of that, and this has been our historical mission to ensure that we equip the people we are fighting with so that we can have peace, stability, and development and remain focused on that and nothing other than that.

When it comes to the UPDF as a pillar of the state, the anchor of unity, it has played its part and will continue to play its part to ensure that the national character of the armed forces is maintained so that we continue organizing our politics with the armed forces that fully understand what is going on through interaction with the Members of Parliament, and the people instead of taking them there in the barracks, shut the gates and only get them out when they are going for an operation. 

I think that would be very dangerous and I do not think it is timely that we are now transiting successfully into a multiparty system. I think it would be premature at this point to disengage one of the interest groups that has made our democratisation process richer than it would otherwise be.  

So with that, Mr Speaker, I do support the motion that the UPDF should stay in Parliament. Later on, it might convince itself on how its Members will conduct themselves into the House. I will end by urging Members to support this; it is a national issue, it is not simply a UPDF issue. It is a national stability issue, a national unity issue; it is a matter of peace and development to keep UPDF represented in Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.19
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I start by applauding this Parliament for debating this motion and congratulate ourselves because when we were amending the Constitution, we had some fears from the interest groups that there will be an amendment to delete the whole concept. We are happy that the motion is just to do what the Constitution has provided, to extend or to do something for these interest groups and to make sure that they continue in the way that we think right.

Many countries have taken up this issue of representation of interest groups keenly. We have had individuals coming to talk to us to find out what the magic is. How would we not manage the women, the youths and the workers to be part and parcel of the decision making process in our country? 

Many countries, for instance, Kenya, have been trying to debate to make sure that this concept is introduced in their own country. They have had a lot of resistance. But to give an example of how our interest groups have impacted on policy, I just want to give the case of workers. When we came here, many issues of workers used to be left out of policy. But time and again, we have seen interests of workers being taken up by the law and other pieces of legislation.  

In fact, as I speak now, we have a bill that came as a private members bill from the workers community, which has been taken up by government and it is now being debated by the Social Services Committee; that is the Occupation Health and Safety Bill.

And on 18 April 2000, one legislator in the names of hon. Elly Karuhanga said the following – this was a time when we were debating a private members bill from the workers’ community: “So I thought that I was going to oppose this motion on the basis that we shall make these ministers do some work on this matter. But listening to the mover carefully, I have no alternative but to strongly support this motion for the following reasons:” First, I was a participant in this debate - actually I was the mover of an amendment from the workers community. I even moved that the figure of two be amended to five. I have been waiting patiently to see whether what we have done at that time was going to bear fruit for the workers or not. Today, I must say the representatives of workers have now measured up to my long-term expectations. 

This was in 2000, and clearly showed that by workers being represented, they were able to pursue a matter of legislative nature and to push for a motion that was being supported by the other honourable members of Parliament. And following this debate, on 1st May that same year, the organisation for employers demanded in a Labour Day speech that they too be represented in Parliament and the reason they gave was that many of the laws were being work-friendly because workers were represented. This really showed that the workers being represented in this House was leading to a situation where the interests of workers were being taken on board in other laws. Of course it has its own implication, but it showed that workers were really pushing for their interests and, therefore, they had done very well.  

Mr Speaker, as you may know, the marginalized groups were taken on board because of the reason of history. For us in our sector, before we came to Parliament, we knew that for our issues to be taken on, we had to go into a disharmonious process. 

I remember before I came here I used to participate in a lot of such situations and leaders used to be elected basing on how many strikes one has led. But now the election looks at who can articulate for us in the various decision making processes, who can be able to go and talk and defend our issues and we think that this has changed the approach to labour issues in this country. 

It has really shown that we have now to use brain power and not muscle power in order to push for the interests of the workers in this country. This is because workers have seen that when their issues come to Parliament through petitions, through motions or whatever form, they can find their way through either to the committees or whatever and they can be taken on board and be recognised.

Mr Speaker, one of the fundamental contributions that interest groups have brought to the politics of this nation is to stabilize the politics in terms of debate. When you come to a meeting, for instance, of women, of youth, of workers, the debate is about issues cutting across the whole nation. In a workers meeting you will find someone from Nebbi, someone from Mbale, someone from Kotido, and they are not talking about sectarian issues because their debate is about national interests. This is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to cut you short, but honestly this motion is to retain or disallow.  Justify why we should retain then we move on because we have many people who want to contribute and we have a very long Order Paper.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, that shows that the continuous presence of interest groups in this country will continue to give that contribution of bringing up issues and interests of these groups that cut across the various geographical dispensations, and they can be able to push for their interests.

Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues that we pass this motion, which brings on board all the interest groups because we have been working together as interest groups and we have assisted each other to push for issues. In fact, for us as interest groups, we have interacted with our colleagues, the Army, very well and we would really appeal to you that when we are handling this matter, we should recognize all the interest groups. 

It would be unfair for us at this moment when we are still on a journey – you know we moved from anarchy, we started with the Movement system, we are now trying to bring in the new aspect of the multiparty system, and then along the way before even things stabilize we decide to throw away one group! 

I think it would be better, Mr Speaker, that we move together. After all, the Constitution says after 10 years and thereafter every five years. Let us see the experience for this period of multiparty democracy and then we shall see after five years whether there will be certain situations that will merit certain changes. I think at this stage, we shall do very well as a Parliament to endorse the continuation of all the interest groups. I thank you very much.

3.25
MS OLIVER WONEKA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to retain and increase without abolishing the representation of the interest groups. This has been provided for as affirmative action in our Constitution and at this point in time in our own country, even what has already been spoken, what is known by all of us, it is only in the interest of the development of our people, of our country, that the interest groups are retained.  

Given the history of our country, Mr Speaker, I do not see the problem at this material time why the Army as an interest group should leave Parliament.  The history of our country is clear, it is known to all of us. We are at a time when we are exercising, experiencing, trying to manage a transition. They have played their part up to this point, what is it now that should make them fail to participate in this Parliament with the rest of us to go through the transition? I think it is only fair that they are here as Army representation to be part and parcel of the transition process. 

When it comes to where they will sit, how they will behave, this Parliament makes its own rules. Is it at this time that the Army representation will be unable to conform to the rules of Parliament?  

Speaking for the women, the youth, the people with disabilities, the workers and the Army and all the interest groups, I plead with all Members of Parliament and especially the male Members of Parliament to support these interest groups and especially the emancipation of women. In so doing, we all get a chance to participate, to contribute in the development processes of our country and to also benefit from those processes. If these interest groups are given the opportunity and are supported, there is a lot for the country to benefit. 

At this point in time, we are talking of prosperity for all, we are talking of transformation, we are talking about each one of us, every interest group influencing the processes that enable prosperity for all and transformation. We are talking about supporting each other in capacity development so that we can influence those positive processes. I am asking for support from the male colleagues in this Parliament including the Army that when it comes to representation of the Army, those women are definitely allowed to come. 

We are looking forward to receiving them for then they will increase on our numbers and I am sure they will be able to tell us of those issues that affect them as members of the Army. I stand here as a representative who came on the women’s ticket, but I do not think I am able to speak for those women who are in the Army. Therefore, we look forward to their contribution. 

Mr Speaker, the interest groups have been nurtured by the Movement Government. The capacity and opportunity that had been given to these interest groups have enabled us to now demand from every political organisation that is asking for our vote, for our support, that we get to know the agenda for the interest groups in those particular organisations or political parties. The capacity is there now for us to demand that if you are a political organization and you need my support what is the agenda for the women, what is the agenda for the youth, what is your agenda for the workers and for the people with disabilities.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have we not sufficiently received the materials that will help us to decide one or the other? Is it not time to ask the minister to make concluding remarks and see how we proceed?

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their comments and contributions on the motion. I have just three points by way of conclusion that it is the prayer of the government that all the special interest groups mentioned in the motion be maintained in this Parliament because in our assessment, all the special interest groups have performed their effective roles without exception, including the Army. 

From a technical point of view, there is no contradiction between the existence of the multiparty system and the manner in which the Army will be elected to Parliament. Under the parties law, Members of the Army are non-partisan; they did not go through party primaries for them to come to Parliament. The regulations that the Ministry of Justice is going to make for election of Members of the Army will be drafted in such a way that the Army as an institution will elect its representatives without participating in party primaries.  

Mr Speaker, some colleagues have proposed increment of the numbers of the respective special groups. The position of government is that resources at the moment can afford the numbers that we have proposed in the resolution. It will not be consistent with the provisions of Article 93 for colleagues to move additional amendments which will have the –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the minister saying they are not increasing the number of the interest groups. If you were fair, women were 56 and today we are talking of 69 and tomorrow they are going to be is it 70 or 79 -(Interjections)- You are disorganising me. The women Members of Parliament are getting money, is it true that government cannot get money for only three more Members of Parliament for persons with disabilities? Which part of the Constitution are we obligating? I think this is very unfair for people with disabilities and it is wrong to say we are infringing on Treasury and the money is not there. Please, give us the only three more seats for people with disabilities. We are over 2,700 people with disabilities represented by five Members. Please, revise your decision. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for giving way. I stand to disagree with the minister because he realises that people with disabilities in this country have been emancipated by this same government, which the minister serves. If you consider the ratio of people with disability who are sitting in this Parliament, it comes to about 1.5 percent. 

Honourable minister, what is difficult to you about the budget to increase by three more Members of Parliament to represent the interest of above 2.5 million people who are disadvantaged in many aspects. We are politically recognized but we are yet to have social and economic emancipation. Honourable minister, I appeal to you that you give another thought concerning persons with disability, the budget not withstanding. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think it is sufficiently covered because he was winding up and the case has been made.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, there is a fundamental issue which I want to raise with the minister. You see this Parliament is mandated to reduce, to increase, to abolish, to maintain these interest groups. I think the Constitution makers were aware that there is this other Article on which the minister is quoting to defeat what the Constitution provided for. I think the minister is not realising that actually this Parliament is empowered to increase on the number of interest groups. So, he cannot turn round and say, “You see, because of Article 93, you cannot do this” as if the aspect of increasing is the mandate of the Executive only.

THE SPEAKER: No, the minister is aware of it because it is clear that you can do it. What I think he is telling you is that the government thinks it cannot afford to increase. That is his case. And you are making an appeal to him to reconsider, but what he is saying is that as of now he cannot advise increasing and you are saying, “please, please.” I think he is aware.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I do understand the concerns of my colleagues, representatives of persons with disabilities. I wish I could accommodate them but unfortunately, the resource envelope cannot afford to accommodate additional Members of Parliament including the youth category for instance, the workers and persons with disabilities. I understand their concerns, but there is no way for the time being we can increase the number of those Members of Parliament. 

This is not going to be the last review. After this review, we will have another review five years from now. Perhaps then we could look into the possibility of reviewing with the view to increase if resources allow. I would like to rest my case and to request colleagues to adopt this resolution. I thank you. 

(Mrs Baba Diri thereupon withdrew from the Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, the debate on this motion has ended, but I am conscious of the provisions of Parliamentary Elections Act 2005 and, therefore, I intend to conduct the vote on this motion tomorrow. As I said earlier in the day, it is important that we make a decision on this matter otherwise, the Electoral Commission will not have the mandate to conduct elections for any of the special groups. So, I appeal to every one of you to be here tomorrow at 11.00 am. We shall start early but the vote on this motion will be tomorrow at 11.00 am. 

People should not be annoyed to walk away because it is in their interest at least that we vote for retention of what we have. But if you walk away in protest, even what you have you will lose. (Laughter) I think they should be advised that way. Saying that you walk away to frustrate the voting is frustrating yourself. This is something, which was cast on us in 1995 when we made the Constitution. It is a command of the Constitution in the best interest of the special groups so let us all be here and deal with the motion by the minister. 

It is my appeal to you honourable members and I think you should explain to those others, even those who have walked away in protest. Please, tell them the consequences of their walking away in the manner they have done.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works is not here and I do not think he has delegated this to any other minister. We shall start with it tomorrow. Tomorrow we have very important business to handle apart from what I have been handling. I appeal to you to be punctual so that we can clear as much as we can so that maybe on Thursday, I release you for Christmas recess. It will be a brief one because you will have to come back maybe the second week of January before you go for nomination to transact more business. As you see on the Order paper, we have the tertiary institutions law, we have URA amendment bill and so many others. Please bear with us and let us do our work because after that we shall have to come back early March. 

I do not see us coming back after you have started your campaigns for election. There are matters that remain pending including Tororo District and Budaka District. Even the committee led by hon. Besisira has finalised a report on which we have to make a decision. I understand that there are problems especially in Pallisa, so we should come to their rescue so that we solve this matter for them to move peacefully.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I request that your Office comes out with a very clear timetable on how we are going to do business to the period we shall adjourn to enable us, who are committed to being here, to plan how we shall interface with our voters very clearly. If you could do that tomorrow so that we can draw our timetable, you would have helped us to be here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What I have said is very clear. I require you to sacrifice the second week of January, come here and transact business. After that one, you will go for your nomination. (Interjections) Yes, you do not start the campaigns before nomination. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also got a bit disturbed when you said you will need us in March. I am finding a very funny situation because in March we will have a new Parliament elected. 

THE SPEAKER: There will be no new Parliament until 12 May 2006.

MR SSENGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Even those who will not stand for election will continue to transact business as Members of Parliament up to 12 May 2006 because we only shortened your period by one and a half months. Your mandate could have expired on 3 July 2006 but we wanted to coincide it with the starting of a term of a president, which will be on 12 May 2006. That is when our mandate will end and then the new Parliament sworn in. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 am.

(The House rose at 3.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 December 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)













