

Wednesday, 13 December 2017

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, Leader of the Opposition and honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to apologise for the late start; I was dealing with several Members who wanted assistance in different areas. However, I hope we shall be able to move quickly.

Secondly, I hope that the Minister of Local Government is here today. There is a team from Pallisa and they have stayed here since yesterday. They have come to listen to the debate about their status. They are up there. I really hope that the minister will be here today and we deal with that issue so that they can go back to their villages. If he is not here, please, send for him so that we can handle that issue.

Thirdly, on Friday I officiated at the award ceremony for the best farmers in Uganda and they made a request to the Government to treat them as investors and not tax them as soon as they start making money. They said that when they are given a gift of say Shs 50 million, the following day Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) is calling them to declare their taxes. They say they are investors in this country and that even though they are investing in agriculture, they should be treated the way we treat other investors. (Applause) I said I would pass on the issue to the Government so that we support them to generate work in this country. 

There are one or two Members who had some issues to raise. Let us start with hon. Lyandro Komakech.

3.06
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a matter of national importance regarding the unequal enforcement and application of the legal provisions of the Excise Duty Act, 2014 and its amended version of 2017 in the beer sector. There has been unequal application of the law as far as the exemption on commercialised beer is concerned, and I refer you to Chibuku as one of the beer brands. Chibuku is produced by a beer company but since February this year, we have witnessed an illegal process where the beer company has not been remitting taxes in terms of excise duty in regard to this brand. 

Of course, this illegal exclusion is now producing a very big loss in terms of revenue to the Government. Uganda Breweries even intends to come to the market with a new brand of beer that is equivalent to Chibuku and they would want to produce it without paying taxes because they believe that the illegal exemption is okay.

I would like to refer you to what we are witnessing now in terms of the trends in the analysis of the research that we carried out. The excise trend analysis on beer indicates a continuous loss of tax revenues, with the current loss to Government, since February, to the tune of Shs 7.9 billion. Further to this, it is now indicated that if Uganda Breweries also joins in the market with a similar brand without being taxed, we are going to witness up to Shs 120 billion from excise duty. 

I think this is a very grave matter. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here crying that we do not have revenue to pay teachers, doctors and others and yet these are the loopholes we have found in the brewing sector. That is why we feel it is very important that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes note of this and, if possible, I recommend that we institute an investigation to find out why they are excluding this brand from being taxed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am sure that is music to your ears, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He says he has found money, which you need.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is not necessarily news to our ears; we have been looking at those issues. However, we have taken note and we are going to look into it. Probably, when we come here with the tax measures in April next year, if there is any room for this we can look at them. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I do not know what Chibuku looks like. The issue at hand is different from the tax measures that the minister intends to bring to Parliament. What has been raised by the Member is a matter of either tax evasion or avoidance with the sanction of the tax collector. 

From the Member’s explanation to the House, it is an illegal trade exemption. Ordinarily, what one would expect of the minister is to separate it from the ordinary tax measures he is talking about and he reports to Parliament on the measures taken and the findings of their investigations, if they need to investigate. 

Would it not be procedurally correct, Madam Speaker, for the House to request the minister instead to report on this particular matter. The matter is coming from Parliament; it is not those ordinary matters that they are handling. If there is an illegality complained about and if there is loss of revenue on the part of Government, why would he bring it with those other ordinary tax aspects that they are handling?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister and colleagues, hon. Lyandro’s issue is actually that there is an unequal enforcement of the Excise Duty Act; it is being applied selectively to some industries and not others. Maybe we should ask our Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to delve into it and give us a report quickly. We cannot wait for April. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take it up urgently and report immediately after Christmas.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, for purposes of proceedings and also to facilitate the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I beg to lay the report on the Table so that the committee can use it. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The document is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle expeditiously and report back. 

3.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise two matters of national importance.   

In July when we passed the Finance Bill, 2016 here, we exempted the energy companies from corporation tax and the minister promised that prices would go down. However, to date it has only reduced by Shs 3 and yet the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised to reduce it from Shs 13 to Shs 5 or Shs 6.

I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Executive to explain why the reduction on electricity bills is by Shs 3. Honourable minister, you promised and we supported the exemption. 

Secondly, last week, I received a call from Kasilo that the solar batteries of Apapai Health Centre IV had disappeared. Somehow, we managed to locate where they had been taken and we found that the batteries were taken by the medical officer in charge of the health centre. We directed the police in those areas to act and we recovered the three solar batteries. The health centre actually did not have power. 

Many people made statements to the police including the security guard at the health centre and witnesses, including those found in possession of the batteries in their video halls, where they kept the batteries. What is disturbing is that although everyone made a statement, the medical officer in charge of the health centre refused to do so until I contacted the Regional Police Commander (RPC). 

However, the information we gathered was that the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Serere District told him not to report to the police. Therefore, I would like to request the Minister for the Presidency to take action on the RDC of Serere District for blocking the investigations and apprehension of the medical officer in charge of Apapai Health Centre IV.

This is not the first time this kind of thing is happening. There are a number of incidences including theft of drugs, misuse of vehicles and fuel, among others. Recently, on 16th of November, he withdrew fuel worth Shs 823,500 yet the vehicle was in the garage in Kumi. I wonder whether a vehicle that is in a garage can consume fuel.

As a district, we could have dealt with the medical officer. However, he has a “godfather” who is the RDC of Kumi. That is why I am pleading with the Government to take action on the RDC of Serere if our people are to benefit from medical services in that health facility.

I would like to thank the Office of the President for sending a team to Serere District that arrested people who were selling drugs in Ocaapa Market. Thank you for that. I would like to also urge that they should go back and deal with the issue of abuse of medical facilities. I am happy the Minister of Health is here. This is the reason we have continued to have problems in the health centres. Therefore, I beg that the Government treats this seriously in order to help the people of Kasilo and Serere District. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that Members were reluctant to give that exemption, which hon. Okupa talked about. However, on the strength of the undertaking that it will help save electricity and reduce the price, Members agreed. Therefore, I think we need a report from the minister about how far she has gone on this and how we have benefited. 

The undertaking made here was that if you agree to the exemption, there will be more power for Ugandans at a lesser cost. We shall need some answers. In addition to the above, I would like to request the Minister for the Presidency to examine the issues raised by hon. Okupa. 

3.17
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Monday, Kamuli-Jinja Highway was closed by the Namayira community simply because the Government has failed to listen to the people of Kamuli and has refused to put humps on the road. If the Speaker was in Kamuli that day, she would have been blocked by these people. That road has killed a number of people including the former Chairperson LCV, hon. Baligeya (RIP). 

I raised this issue regarding the road to the Prime Minister and Minister of Works and Transport a number of times but nothing has been done. There are inspections –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank my honourable sister for giving way and accepting to receive information. I would like to inform the honourable member that it is true this Government does not listen. 

I pleaded for humps along Masaka Road at Budo, which is a bad junction. That road takes the President when he wants to rest a bit as he travels to Gomba, Rwakitura and it is the same junction through which I come to Parliament on a daily basis.

Madam Speaker, I pleaded with Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and gave them the statistics of people that have had accidents and those that died in the corners between Nabbingo and Budo. The only information that I received from UNRA was that there is a Government directive that no more humps can be placed on highways. They did not even provide any statistics that would have been the basis on which they banned humps on highways.

Therefore, the information I would like to give to my sister is that this Government does not listen.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that Government listens –(Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues to change their statements to say that this Government sometimes listens. (Laughter) I say sometimes Government listens because when it comes to electing representatives to East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), Government listens. It is because Government has the capacity to elect the EALA representatives. Therefore, Government listens when we contribute to electing members who are not even ours. (Laughter)

MS WATONGOLA: As I conclude my submission, I would like to say that when we lost the Chairperson LCV, the President was represented by none other than the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Affairs, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. He pledged that within two months’ time, the section of Budhumbula would have humps. To date, we do not have humps. 

Madam Speaker, I recall some two weeks back, the people of Budhumbula stopped you when two people were knocked at the same spot. I would like to thank you for stopping to talk to them. You stressed that we shall have humps but nothing has been done.

I, therefore, would like to say –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The group that demonstrated comes from my constituency. I was with the Minister of State for Transport, hon. Aggrey Bagire, yesterday, who also comes from my constituency. We have agreed to hold a meeting next Tuesday at 9.00 a.m. One of the issues to be discussed is related to what my colleague, hon. Watongola, is raising. 

Given that they accepted to hold a meeting with me, it only confirms that they listen. If they did not allow me to meet them, then I would say they do not listen. The information I wanted to give is that we have a meeting at 9.00a.m. next Tuesday.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you for the information, my colleague. Madam Speaker, my colleague from Bugabula County South is also a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I hope his words will be implemented.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the traffic police officers work on those vehicles that are not up to the required standard, for example the sugarcane vehicles. Some vehicles do not have light reflectors and brakes but you find them carrying sugarcane even in the night. I would like to request that we cool the people down and let Government listen to us. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, the issue raised by hon. Watongola is extremely serious. When hon. Byabagambi was the Minister of Works, I wrote to him as they were completing the Jinja-Kamuli Road and said I had been requested by the people that they wanted speed humps at Mafubira, Namulesa, Buwenge, Namayira, Busota and Budhumbula because these are death spots. That was many years ago and nothing has been done. When people die, it is us they look for.

Honourable members, I do not think we need a meeting on whether we should save our people. The ministry should just take action. We talked yesterday. I was in Kamuli yesterday morning and I was told the road had been closed for four hours because of that. I hope the minister will be able to do something about it. The issue is very serious.

3.26
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

We have some of our people who should have been compensated way back in April 2016. They were also given payment vouchers by UNRA. However, later on UNRA started demanding for land titles from the people in the municipality. Unfortunately, getting a land title is not easy but our people worked hard and the district land board approved their request for land titles. 

However, we are supposed to have regional offices working. Gulu District has a regional office for land and it should have started working by August. To date, our people have not been paid. Uganda National Roads Authority demands for land titles but we need a working regional office in order to get the land titles. What is stopping Gulu regional land office from working so that our people are paid? We are heading to 2018 and it is very unfortunate this has dragged on from 2016. 

Another issue is about our students of Gulu University not sitting exams. Can the Minister of Education and Sports explain to us why –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Where have you come from? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: I rose on information, Madam Speaker. Thank you. I would like to appreciate hon. Betty Aol for raising very important information about the problem in Gulu University. 

Madam Speaker, all of us witnessed or heard that Gulu University was closed and students did not do exams. The reason is that the staff went on strike because of their allowances which were not paid. As we talk now, parents are in great pain. They sent their children to school, rented for them houses or hostels and yet students were sent home and told to go back in January next year to sit for their exams. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of Gulu University needs to be investigated properly. If not, we are going to kill almost all the Government universities in the country. Every semester, you hear about strikes in all the Government universities in the country. 

This is the information I wanted to give, and I appreciate hon. Betty Aol for raising this very important concern.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for that information. On the – (Interruption)

MS JANEPHER EGUNYU: Thank you, hon. Betty Aol. The additional information I would like to give is about the closure of Busoga University. I sit on the Committee on Education and Sports. Gulu University was closed at the same time with Busoga University. I thought as Members of Parliament on the Committee on Education and Sports, we would be informed. 

The students and employees of those two universities definitely have an impact on our country. I support that we call the Minister of Education and Sports to come and explain to us whatever will happen to the lives of our people.

THE SPEAKER: I think the case has been made. Just put your request forward. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, Kitgum campus was just opened last year but it is now closed. Why is that so? Can the Minister of Education and Sports explain this to us? 

Finally, one simple but very important issue is about the refugees in the country. We would like to know if their children, who are students, can also be registered and get Ugandan national identity cards. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, with the way you are dressed, you are not visible; you cannot speak in this House. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Probably the Minister of Foreign Affairs – (Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Procedure, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You are still not visible. (Laughter) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I am glad that you can see me now. The point I would like to raise is very critical for this country. I think we have four ministers in charge of the education sector, including the First Lady of this country, but none of them is in the House.

Whereas I know that the Leader of Government Business is taking note of what is transpiring, we would be interested in an immediate response to this critical matter. I also have some additional outstanding questions; for example, when is Bunyoro University going to open? When is Busoga University going to be declared a public university? She needs to come here and answer these questions. 

Is it procedurally right for us to continue like this? At least I would be interested if you asked the Prime Minister to respond as to when the Minister of Education and Sports is going to come here and answer these critical matters. When is Bunyoro University going to open as a public university? 

THE SPEAKER: There is also Rwenzori. Prime Minister, this issue of the closure of universities midterm is very grave. Students are left in the air. When can we have a statement because it is really urgent? 

3.35
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I sit here as the Leader of Government Business of the House. Therefore, whatever we say here is recorded and my responsible ministers will be availed at an appropriate time because – (Member rose-)

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish and then you will respond. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: On behalf of the ministers who must respond, I would like to promise you that Government will respond to whatever has been raised. As to whether I am listening or not, I am listening full time except that I am also being supported by what we can get from the Hansard. Hence, Members should not worry whether I am sleeping or not. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister, but let us get the ministers to come and explain the issue of the closures because it is affecting so many young people. Parents have spent so much money that they need to know what the next step is. 

3.37
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About a month ago, the Red Pepper publication was raided and its editors and directors were arrested, and a radio station that belongs to the Red Pepper was also closed. 

Madam Speaker, the attack on the Red Pepper cannot be seen as an isolated case that is limited to the Red Pepper. As we talk now, the editors of the Daily Monitor and the New Vision, Mr Charles Bichachi and Mr Felix Osike respectively, are just out on bail. Top Radio has just issued a statement that they cannot host anybody critical of Government, specifically from the Opposition. 

When they raided the Red Pepper, 370 phones were taken from staff, 100 computers were confiscated and over 10,000 people have lost jobs. The cases that they are charged with are that they annoyed Gen. Kale Kayihura, Gen. Salim Saleh, Gen. Yoweri Museveni and Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba. 

That case notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, they were taken to Nalufenya for a week and from there, they were taken to court and have been remanded for three weeks. This is suffocation of the media. We might think that this is limited to the Red Pepper but as I talk now, a radio station in Kanungu was closed the other day. In Mbarara - (Interruption) 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether it is in order for this august House to discuss a matter that is before the courts of law. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you told me that you wanted to speak about the confiscation of the phones of the 5000 employees. You cannot talk about the case itself. Talk about the issue you came to talk to me about.  

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, there was the confiscation of the computers and phones and over 5000 young people have lost jobs –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the matter at hand is critical and of course we do not want to talk about it because it is in the courts of law. However, the information I would like to give my colleague is that there is a high level of impunity that we are allowing to build incrementally amongst Government institutions. Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), for example, has refused to renew licences of almost all media houses in this country. That is used as a method of gagging them when it comes to critical issues.

Two, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- I need protection from my honourable colleague, hon. Guma, who has confessed that he is not a man and from whom I have learnt that fact today. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, the impunity amongst Government institutions, in this particular case UCC, is denying Government revenue because they do not want to renew licences. In the process, they keep these media houses guessing whether they will survive until the following day; secondly, they are denied revenue-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think for this matter, you need to bring a motion so that we debate that sector specifically and pass a resolution.

MR SSEGONA: I thank you for your guidance, Madam Speaker.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, my prayers are that:

1. 	Government returns the equipment of the Red Pepper.
2. 	As the case goes on, like you guided, the radio station be opened.
3. 	The newspaper publication is also opened so that they can continue working because over 5,000 people now have lost jobs just because of UCC’s decision.

3.43
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

My home has been taken over by some armed men in army uniform for the second time. The first time was after the LCV elections, when six armed men surrounded my home for three weeks and I could not enter my house. This time, armed men have been cited in the forest near my compound and in my village and parish. I reported the matter to the police and the Resident State Attorney of Lira but nothing seems to have been done.

I have been unable to reach my village or my house for three weeks now. I wonder what is happening because my people have told me not to go home and yet we are going to have a very important function organised by the Bishop of Lango Diocese on Sunday the 17th of December. About 1,500 elderly people have been invited to pray and then we give them some gifts.

When I call the people in my village where the function is going to take place, they tell me that my life is at risk. I wonder what the security people are doing there. We do not understand why those armed men are there. They cannot be traced. An investigation should be carried out so that we get to understand why they are there and what they are looking for in the village.

My concern, therefore, is that the Minister of Internal Affairs, whom I have already informed, and army officials should take over and ensure that when I go there tomorrow, my life is safe even my people in the village are safe. My people in the village think that we may not have very successful Christmas celebrations. Therefore, this is a very serious matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I asked the Prime Minister to ensure that the Government supports the Members who are having security challenges. I talked about it yesterday. Therefore, I will equally ask them to assist you to resolve your issue.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BIOFUELS BILL, 2016

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please come back, honourable members. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the business we have today is Government business but I see ministers leaving as if they have nothing to do with this. This is a Government Bill.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Nandala, why are you on fire?

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have an issue with clause 8.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes I have a proposal, Madam Chairperson. The heading of clause 8 is, “Obligation to obtain licence”. I wanted us to change that heading to “licensing”; and then what is currently there becomes subclause (1) - “A person shall not produce…” - and then clause 9 becomes subclause (2) and it follows on like that. 

The reasoning behind this is that it will help the law to flow. This is because the first part says, “a person shall not produce…”, and yes you cannot produce without having licence. Therefore, first, a person shall not produce and secondly, the procedure of how to apply is given, and we continue on like that up to subclause (4).

The justification is for purposes of it to flow. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I would not agree with that arrangement. I was thought that hon. Nandala would bring on board something different. 

Looking at clause 8 - obligation to obtain licence - for me that title is okay. However, this title makes it an obligation on a person to have a licence in order to operate. Therefore, a subclause (2) must be inserted for punishment in case somebody chooses to operate, produce, transport biofuel, or blend the biofuel with petroleum products without a licence. The application for licence, that is clause 9, should remain a standalone clause. 

Therefore, I am proposing that we change the arrangement of the clause. There should be 8 (1) or 8 (a), which will read, “A person shall not produce, store or transport biofuels…” - that part should stand and should be named subclause (1) or paragraph (a). We should then have (b) or (2) pronouncing a punishment - “A person who acts without a licence shall…” and then we pronounce the punishment. 

I proposed this because when I looked at the punishment section or clause, it did not actually have any punishment on obligation to obtain licence. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, regarding what the colleague is raising, we have a punishment section and therefore you cannot bring it here. We want to make a good law. 

If we are talking about obligation to obtain a licence, we can say clause 8 should be about licensing and then we say, 
“(1) A person shall not operate without a licence. 
(2) A person who intends to apply…” and then we lay down the procedures for the application. That is how it should flow. 

Madam Chairperson, in order for colleagues to understand, I will mention my proposal again. I am saying that the heading of clause 8 should be “licensing” and the clause should flow as follows:

“(1) A person shall not produce, store or transport biofuels…” and then it continues to the end. “(2) A person who intends to produce, store and blend shall submit a written application”. That is also part of licensing. “(3) An application for a licence…” and then you give that procedure. That would provide a better flow of this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can agree and ask the drafts people to create the sequence.

MR BYARUGABA: I think hon. Nandala’s concerns do not harm the Bill and they straighten it out in a more legible manner. I want to concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have now deleted clause 9 because we have merged it with clause 8. Let us now go to clause 10.

Clause 10

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have issues with clause 10. Subclause (1) (a) says, “(a) determine that the requirements of the National Environment Act…” I recall that yesterday the chairman was struggling here with Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). I would like to insert under 10(1)(a), after National Environment Act, “and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards”. 

The justification is that you cannot only look at the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and leave out UNBS, because of quality issues. I think that we should insert UNBS to take care of the interests expressed by the chairman yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the two Acts named here - the National Environment Act and UNBS Act? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 11(3) reads, “A licence granted under this Act shall be valid for such period…” Somebody has invested $10 million and then he comes and is given a licence for six months; what happens to the investment? 

I think we should have a minimum period so that the other ones can be prescribed by the regulations. My justification for a minimum period is based on the investment somebody will have sunk in. Otherwise, with this I can make an investment and the man says, “I cannot give you a licence” and this will be an open cheque for corruption. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we say, “the licence shall be valid for at least five years or such a period as may be prescribed by the regulations”.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. From the way the clause is framed, definitely it will cater for the concerns raised by hon. Nandala. If there is such a matter, then it could be sorted out in the regulations. However, we cannot afford to put time within the Act because if in future we want to amend, again it will require us to bring the Act to Parliament. It is better for the regulations to sort out that matter. Since he has raised that concern, when the regulations are being made, those concerns can be catered for at that stage. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where did you get the six months you are complaining about, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, subclause (3) says, “A licence granted under this Act shall be valid for such period…” They are saying “such period” and the licensing officer can say, “I have given you six months” or “one year”. 

If the regulations will come here for Parliament to deal with this, I have no objections, and that is where I want to agree with Dr Lyomoki. However, if they are left there, this will be abused. Madam Chairperson, you have not chased after a licence. We are the ones who have been involved in chasing after licences. (Laughter) We know what it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should leave it as it is because this is a licence for construction and maybe it would require 10 years; I do not know. To operate this may require a different period, maybe 15 years; I do not know. There is also production, storage, transportation. You cannot have a standard timeframe for all that, so let us leave it as it is. Depending on what they have applied for, the authority will give it to them.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We decided that this clause should be dealt with by the regulations. Paying attention to some of the practices that have been going on, if you give a licence to somebody say for 15 years and it is not catered for under the regulations, that person can easily abuse the provisions of the licence given for their operations. That is why we decided that this should be regulated in the regulations, which shall look into the timeframe. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are not assisting us because you have no amendment as a committee.

MR OYET: No, we do not have any amendment as a committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us then leave it as it is.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, the provision says you must have a licence to produce, store, transport biofuels or blend biofuels in a petroleum product. What about those who do research? Did they consider them? Do I need a licence when I am conducting research?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would it be research under biofuels?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Somebody can be in possession of biofuels for purposes of conducting research on how to transform them into something else. Does he need licence?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, would a researcher holding biofuels require a licence?

MR PETER LOKERIS: The researchers do not require licences because they begin with getting their instruments and all the time they communicate what they are doing concerning this issue. They only give communication about what they are doing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH: I rise on clause 11.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have passed it.

MR ANYWARACH: There is something else, Madam Chairperson, which may escape our attention. If you look at clause 11(2), it says, “A licence shall, as the case may be, authorise a person to whom it is granted to construct and operate a facility…” The key words here are, “to construct and operate a facility”.

Madam Chairperson, when you read clause 11(2) together with the original clause 9, which is now 8(2) as amended by hon. Nandala, I think this subclause 11(2) should go there. We do not want to reinvent the wheel somewhere. If these must be the terms for the licence then they should be indicated clearly under the requirements for licence. 

In that case, under clause 11 we only have conditions of licence as follows: “(1) Where a licensing authority grants a licence, the licence shall be granted upon such terms and conditions as the licensing authority considers appropriate.” Subclause (3) would then become subclause (2) and would read as follows: “A licence granted under this Act shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed by regulations.” 

I am wondering why we should have subclause (2) under clause 11 and not under clause 8(2) as amended? Can the chairperson clarify?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you think it is placed wrongly? Do we agree with him?

MR BYARUGABA: Well, when you look at it very closely, he could have a point. Maybe the arrangement can be re-aligned for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall ask the people who will draft the Bill to find where to place it, although we have already passed it.

Clause 12

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to get clarification from the minister as far as clause 14 (1)(a) is concerned. It reads, “maintain a minimum stock of biofuel, as may be prescribed by regulations.” I would like to understand the intent of this, especially in the event that it is a private business which calls for the owner of the business to determine the stocks but not put restrictions as to which minimum stock should be kept.

It is even well articulated in clause 14(2), which reads, “The facilities used in the production of biofuels shall be in conformity with the national standards formulated by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards”. Also in clause 14 (1) (d), which says, “submit to the licensing authority data and information on the stocks, production and sale of biofuels as the case may be”. What is the relevance of 14 (1)(a) when the investor is protected in (d)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to raise two issues. First, you say, “A person who is granted a licence to produce biofuels…” Why don’t you say, “biofuels or blending biofuels with petroleum products”? The justification is that these are the same facilities that do the same work, so they should all move together.

Secondly, you are telling people to have minimum stock. Is Government going to invest in their facilities so that we tie down people’s cash to a minimum stock? If it is a private business, you cannot tell me - I may produce what I sell, so you cannot tell me to have a minimum stock. Who would pay for that minimum stock? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: In many areas, including banking, they say you must have some liquidity ratio. For this particular case, we said that you should maintain something for continuity, so that when you reach where you think it should be – It must be there at all times, so that you are able to maintain that minimum level. Otherwise, you can just vacate and we do not see anything. 

Even when we talk about Government’s fuel requirements, we always say that our storage tanks should have a certain minimum at all times. Therefore, these are obligations for you to have minimum stock for continuity in your business. This will not restrict you from doing anything.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I just want to bring something to your attention so that when we resume, I may not have to recommit it. Clause 13 is about -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have passed clause 13.

MR ANYWARACH: My concern with clause 13 relates to the security of business. Having a licence makes your business secure and fluid, and you can assign your licence to another party.

Whereas we are saying there must be information in writing to the licensing authority that you are assigning your licence to another party, it does not give the licensee an opportunity to be informed; for example, if the licensing authority denies me the right to be assigned that licence, I think I should be informed in writing and probably a period should be given.

Clause 13 is very good but in terms of specificity, it is very vague. It does not mention days, the rights of the licensee or the rights of the person being assigned and how they can complain. Maybe at a later time, I will recommit this clause if we think that there is point, or I ask for your indulgence to prevail so that we go back to it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 15.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we go to clause 15, I have noticed that we made an error on clause 14 (3). The second last line of clause 14 (3) says, “…submit a proposal for ceasing production indicting…” It should be “indicating”. It goes on to say, “…that may be prescribe by regulations”. It should be “that may be prescribed…” There is an English problem there and it should be corrected.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall ask the drafts people to correct the language and the spelling.

Clause 15

MR TINKASIIMRE: Clause 15 (c) says, “establish quality assurance systems…” A person who holds a licence to deal in biofuels and starts establishing quality assurance systems can be very clever and establish systems that favour him or her to produce fake or substandard products. Therefore, I would like to propose that we provide the quality assurance systems established by National Bureau of Standards and not the biofuel licensee holder.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, have you understood his argument? It is under the heading, “Obligations of person granted licence to blend biofuels in petroleum products.” That is where we are.

MR TINKASIIMRE: My interest was that as much as there is an obligation to establish quality assurance systems, we would be interested in the institution responsible for quality assurance, which in this case is Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). They should have a system that ensures that a person holding a licence to deal in biofuels should be able to satisfy and fulfil, all the time, all these – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we add the words, “establish quality assurance systems as per the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act”? 

MS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate his comment but I would like to alley his fears because clause 14 (2) cures his concern. If you read that clause, it cures all the concerns he has raised. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 15.

MS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, whereas we have pronounced ourselves on this, I think a Member raised it again. I know it might have to be recommitted. He has already talked about quality assurance systems and I would like to state that his fear is captured in clause 14 (2) which says, “The facilities used in the production of biofuels shall be in conformity with the national standards formulated by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That one is about facilities, but what about the product? I think clause 15 (2) is about whether the product conforms to the standards.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: My submission was, if you give a person holding a licence the responsibility to set up his own quality assurance system, he will set up a system that favours him. An enforcer of the regulation or the law will not catch him out because he will tell you that his system is in accordance with the law. Therefore, we would rather take away this responsibility and delete clause 15 (1)(c) and keep what is in clause 14.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, are you saying this is a function of the inspector, not the producer?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: His responsibility should be to conform but not to set up the system; otherwise, he will establish systems that favour him.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Tinkasiimire but I would like to suggest some rephrasing. I think that paragraph (c) should indicate that this person should comply with the established quality assurance systems. It means that this is coming from somewhere and the person who has been given the licence has to comply with the set quality assurance systems. Therefore, if we say that as an obligation or requirement, the person shall comply with the established quality assurance systems, I think it will cure the whole issue.

MR ALIONI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are contradicting ourselves. If you look at clause 10 (1)(a), there was already an amendment made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi to the effect that in order to be granted a licence, a person must meet all the conditions of NEMA and UNBS. 

Now, on clause 15 (1)(a), I like the point hon. Tinkasiimire is raising, but it still takes us back. This is because this provision calls for you to set up those obligations and after setting them up, you cannot be granted the licence unless what you have set up has been approved by UNBS. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from the chairperson and the minister. In the original Bill, under “obligation to obtain licence”, it says, “A person shall not produce, store or transport biofuels or blend biofuels…” 

I would like to know if we are not disempowering our farmers. Supposing I would like to make biofuels from cow dung and I am a local farmer, does it obligate me to go and seek for a licence? Where is the local content catered for in the Bill? If I am in the village and I would like to make something locally that can provide me lighting, why does this law tie me to look for a licence?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, there is something our honourable colleagues are missing. We must separate the general terms and conditions for licence from the specifics. This is where we are talking about blending biofuels with petroleum products. Clause 15 makes stricter and more specific obligations on the person blending the biofuels. 

Those other general terms like entering into the field or the sector of biofuels are okay. However, if you are going into the specific ones of mixing biofuels with petroleum products, then you will have to know you are again subjected to stricter obligations. That is my understanding and I agree with the committee absolutely.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, in the original Bill, under “obligation to obtain licence”, it says “A person shall not produce, store or transport biofuels or blend biofuels in petroleum products without a licence granted by the licensing authority in accordance with the requirements of this Act”. 

Supposing my local farmer, who is down at the grassroots, wants to make gas from cow dung locally, why do you require him to go and look for a licence whereas he can do it? You are disempowering the farmer.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you very much. You see, when we try to localise and trivialise these things and start talking about cow dung - Cow dung is not for blending. We are talking about biofuel blending. If you would like to make your power using the cow dung, you can do it there; you will not bring it for blending. I thought that should be said.  

On the obligation of a person to establish the systems that we have been talking about, I agree with the people who said that we should specify the controlling authority and say that this person is obligated to follow certain standards. As we have said here, this person can decide to do anything, but it should be according to the set standards by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. I agree that we can add that. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the minister for conceding. However, I want to comment on what hon. Kakooza was raising. If you read clause 3, which is the interpretation clause, it defines what biofuels are. It says, “‘biofuels’ means biodiesel and power ethanol”. It does not talk about biogas. Where did he get the biogas from? I am confused.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, go to the objectives of the Bill where it says, “creating a conducive environment for the production and management of biofuels including promoting the production of biofuels for power production…; promoting the availability of an alternative renewable energy…” I do not think the man from Kabula is in this category. He is producing his local power. I think these are commercial producers - power for the grid.

MR BYARUGABA: In any case, Madam Chairperson, cow dung does not produce ethanol or even biodiesel, and we are not talking about that. Therefore, let us not confuse some of these issues. However, your concerns are generally catered for in clause 8 which is already passed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us now amend clause 15 (c); instead of the word “establish” we shall use “comply” - . Therefore, it will read, “comply with the established quality assurance systems.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have further amendments. If you look at clause 14-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are on clause 15. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This will guide you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 14 says, “Obligations of person granted licence to produce biofuels”. This now refers to the person getting biofuels and mixing them with petroleum products. They are in the same category. We should therefore import clause 14 (2) and (3) and add them here, since they are in the same category. The justification is that they are the same. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if you read the headnote of clause 14, it says, “Obligations of person granted licence to produce biofuels.” It just focuses on only biofuels. The headnote of clause 15 on the other hand reads, “Obligations of person granted licence to blend biofuels in petroleum products.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me help you understand -(Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you are- 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, when you gave guidance on clause 14 and 15, you clearly stated that they have different headnotes and my understanding was that the chairperson ably understood the law. The assertion by hon. Nandala-Mafabi seems to challenge your guidance and allude that you do not understand what you are presiding over. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is out of order. Let us take a vote on clause 15 (c). 

MR ANYWARACH: Chairperson, my copy has paragraph (a) and then it skips to (c) and then (d). Clause 15 (a) refers to complying with occupational health and public safety, (c) is about establishing quality assurance systems, and (d) is about submitting to the licensing authority, data and information. I think there should be an amendment to arrange the sections to flow very well because there is no (b) here. It should be clause 15 (a), (b) and (c) so that we do away with (d). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there is no (b). So I put the question that clause 15 be amended as I proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The draft people can work on the sequence. 

Clause 16

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this part is about penalties. A company can never commit a crime; it is individuals who commit crimes and make companies pay. Therefore, I would like to amend where it says, “…may be charged jointly…” to “…shall be charged jointly…” The justification -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 17 (1) reads, “Where a person charged with an offence under this Act is a body corporate, every person who, at the time the offence is committed, was director, manager, secretary or similar officer or agent of the body corporate, may be charged jointly…” 

Madam Chairperson, there is no company that can commit a crime; it is individuals who commit crimes. When you allow them to say that somebody will commit a crime and make a company pay, the people who suffer are the shareholders. Therefore, in order to avoid having people run away from their responsibility, we should remove the word “may” and insert the word “shall”. That will help us catch criminals. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think our microphones are now a problem because everybody can just pull them. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, on the same issue of clause 16 (2), I realise that the 5000 currency points –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have finished that one. We are on clause 17. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, concerning the amendment that was moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in the laws that govern companies and their workers, there is a principle of vicarious liability. According to that principle, a company is vicariously liable for the misdeeds of a person working for it in the course of his or her duties. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi does not want an employee to be protected at all and this becomes very difficult. I get an appointment letter and I start working in a company but because of the job I am doing, somewhere a crime is committed and you want me to be answerable; no way! Let the company take over; it is not my responsibility. If I have not done my job well, then the company should fire me and not say that I should be prosecuted.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is a cardinal principle of company law that the company is a separate legal entity from its officers, so we cannot argue with that.        

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, subclause (4) clearly states that an employer is answerable and liable for any acts or omission of the employees. Here, the employer is now answerable and the company is answerable for the omission. 

However, subclause (3) states that where a staff did something without knowing or where it was an omission on his part, then he is not answerable. Therefore, the member of staff or employee is covered. That is why we must protect companies. 

Biofuels are also dangerous. Somebody can make it dangerous to the lives of the people. If you do not prescribe sanctions here for that person and you say the company will be responsible, at the end of the day you will have a problem. Biofuel is different from having- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 17 (4) is on the principle of vicarious liability, which is also established in law. I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, clause 19 is on the powers of the ministry. We propose to delete the word “regular” appearing in subclause (1) (a) and (b). The justification is: to ensure that the premises can be accessed at all times for inspection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you go there at night and inspect? 

MR BYARUGABA: Most industries these days are encouraged to work at night because of electricity costs. It is cheaper to operate at night.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you do not want the working hours? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: We are just removing the word “regular”. So, it will read, “…during working hours…”

MS MASIKO: Madam Chair, I just want to agree. We already have “working hours”, so we are saying it should read, “during working hours” rather than including the word “regular” because we think it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes; so, the idea is to remove the word “regular”.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think “regular” means the frequency. It is not about the time that premise is visited but the frequency. Therefore, you cannot talk about working hours or at night because “regular” here refers to frequency.

If we were talking about the number of times, if you wanted to regulate that, then it would apply, but you cannot regulate that. You cannot also say that it must be visited at a certain time because inspection would then lose value; someone will prepare for the inspection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why there is a proposal to delete the word “regular” and say, “during working hours”. Therefore, I put the question that clause 19 be amended-

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I have two issues to raise. I hope this Part V, especially the powers of the ministry, does not take away the constitutional mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Secondly, I think we should have regular and working hours. This is because “regular” refers to frequency; the minister may choose to go there twice a month or maybe four times in a month and then during working hours. Therefore, the two can still go together.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, this is a function of inspection. All they are saying is that you can choose to inspect at 6 O’clock or 10 O’clock - If they are open, you go and inspect them. 

I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, the committee would like to propose the deletion of the entire clause. The justification is that the minister, through regulations, gives effect to the provisions of the Act, hence there will be no need for directives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the law therefore complete? Are there no more policy issues?

MR BYARUGABA: We did harmonize and agree that actually, regulations will cover all that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing there are new areas after the regulations, what will happen?

MR BYARUGABA: The new areas will be covered under the amended regulations.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to support the chairman on this. This is because even though ministers guide policy implementation, they largely concentrate on the politics of the day and sometimes they can interfere with the functioning of the industry. 

If we do not restrict this to something that is written in guidelines that have to be implemented by an authority, then we are going to run into problems. A minister will rise up and say that this plant has to be closed as a directive, simply because the person operating it is not supporting Government and that will be detrimental because we will have made a heavy investment in that plant.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, in this law the authority is just going to be an official and not a body. Therefore, I would think that the purpose of this provision was to give powers to the minister to intervene in certain exceptional circumstances. 

I think that we should look at ministers and the normal duty they are supposed to undertake. I know that right now, the ministers are not doing what they are supposed to do. However, the actual powers and mandate of a minister are to preside over a sector and to guide its performance; we should have that in mind.

We should not look at the current situation because this is temporary. In future, it will be overtaken by events, and this law is going to outlive the current minister. Therefore, we should not worry so much about that, but we should make a law for the people of Uganda, a law that will stand the taste of time.

In this case, if you look at an authority, it is just a commission but it is not going to be a big body. Therefore, they can easily make certain mistakes because they are just officials. Therefore, this provision would be very useful in that circumstance. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know that we are talking about a new area; not everybody knows about it and it is constantly evolving. Supposing a new product comes up and the minister wants the authority to take it up, you are telling him “do not say anything; you just keep quiet”. You are really silencing the minister.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, clause 20 is about the minister’s day-to-day work in his ministry. Therefore, to include all that he does every other day as part of his work in the law, we thought was a -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we delete this provision and then a small man comes up and says, “You cannot direct me; I am only going to follow the Act”, what will happen?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My point is basically to emphasize the fear of micro management. Many times, we have seen officials who are over powered and they tend to micromanage. In addition, when you have a statement reading, “…and the officials of the ministry shall comply with the directives”, you may have an individual in his office literally sending directives everywhere and everyone cannot work because of those directives. Therefore, this encourages excessive power.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you think?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We discussed this issue of policy and it has now come up again because here we are saying “on matters of policy”. When we discussed, we almost agreed but then we said the minister can have a lot of power. However, someone should have power in order to tell someone to do something. If you do not have power, they can even defy you. 

These are policy matters. Honourable members, you can come to me and say “this thing has not been done” and then I go to my office and tell them, “You have not done this”. If I see it is not done, I just write and say, “Please, do this so that we can continue”. However, to say that I cannot do anything would be appalling. Anyway, we had thought we would put it in the regulations. The first time we said it should be in the law -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, clause 21 is about prohibition of activities against fair competition. The committee would like to submit that under subclause (2), we delete the words, “or other conditions or restrictions which are not commercially justifiable”. Therefore, the proposal is recast in the following manner: “(2) A person granted a licence to produce biofuels or to blend biofuels with petroleum products shall sell biofuels without any form of discrimination by means of quality, quantity or price.” 

The justification is that the phrase is ambiguous as it does not define what amounts to “other conditions or restrictions which are not commercially justifiable”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting all those words after “price”? Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, if you take a closer look at clause 21, subclause (3) says, “The price of biofuels at all stages for which licences are granted shall be governed by the rules of supply and demand in a free and competitive market.” 

The word “supply” means it is either in excess or you undersupply, which can even lead to hoarding. Read that and combine it with subclause (1), where you say, “Persons granted a licence to produce biofuels or to blend biofuels with petroleum products shall not control prices or create artificial shortages of biofuels…” 

In essence, subclause (3) knocks out subclause (1). This is a free market economy where prices are determined by the forces of supply and demand. What do we intend to achieve when we appear to put a prohibition in subclause (1) and then we open it up in subclause (3) by leaving it to forces of supply and demand? Of course, it is my right to hoard, so you are not going to control me. 

I think we need to rethink the whole of clause 21. Short of that, if you want to prohibit activities against fair competition, then let us do away with subclause (3) so that subjecting the biofuel prices to demand and supply should now not be in the equation. Short of that, we would have been beaten hands down by our own provision.

Finally, in subclause (4) you say, “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand currency points”. How do you punish me for my choice to run my business in a free market economy? It even means that subclause (4) automatically collapses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, supposing in subclause (1) we remove the words, “not control prices” and just say, “…shall not create artificial shortages of biofuels or engage in any other restrictive trade practices…”? Do you really want the word “prices” here? We can leave it out. Let us delete the words, “control prices”. Is that okay?

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR BYARUGABA: Under clause 22 (2), the committee would like to insert a new paragraph (f) immediately after paragraph (e) to read as follows: “The records and documents to be kept and returns to be submitted by biofuel producers, blenders and sellers.” This is to regulate exportation of biofuels, record keeping and validity of licences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you introducing a new subclause?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I see a contradiction in clause 22(3) and clause 16(2). Clause 22(3) states thus: “Regulations made under this Act may prescribe in respect of contravention of the regulations a penalty not exceeding two thousand currency points and in case of a continuing offence and additional fine not exceeding five thousand currency points for each day or part of the day on which the offence continues.” 

However, in clause 16(2) we are saying, “A person who commits an offence under subsection (1) shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding five thousand currency points and in case of a continuing offence, to an additional fine not exceeding two thousand currency points for every day or part of the day during which the offence continues.” 

Madam Chairperson, I thought there should be harmonisation of these.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you explain the discrepancies between the penalty under clause 16(2) and the penalty in the regulations?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Well, we thought specific issues should be in the regulations. There are many offences these people can commit in that kind of industry and we said for the first offence, where an offender is not a habitual offender, it must be light. If you became a habitual offender, it should be to deter you from such repetitive actions. We thought we should include those penalties but Parliament can amend the provision the way it sees fit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have now read the provision; these are specific offences and the other penalties are in breach of the regulations. Therefore, they are different.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, this being a new sector, and for purposes of keeping the house in the know, I would like to propose that we insert a small subclause (4) requiring the minister’s regulations to be laid on the Floor of the House. – (Interjection) - I mean the regulations which have been made – (Interjection) - No, we do not approve; they are laid for the information of Parliament. 

Of course, it should be a requirement but many times ministers run away after they have made regulations and never lay them on the Floor of the House. I realised this when we were making the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) regulations, which required the minister to lay them in the House, but he was running away from the responsibility of laying them on the Table. Being a new sector, we would like to make it a requirement for the minister to lay them on the Table for Members of Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is part of accountability. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Chairperson, we have inserted that in our Petroleum Bills and we have been laying them on the Table. There is no harm if we have to do so here too.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this law mentions regulations but there are no accompanying regulations to it. Usually, when dealing with the parent law, the regulations must accompany it and Parliament must approve them. Even the subsequent laws are done the same way. That is why I was saying he should lay them on the Table.

Arising from the above, I would like to move an amendment that the regulations to this law must be laid on the Table and approved by Parliament before they become law.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, my submission was to require the minister to provide Members of Parliament with information so that they know what is going on in the sector. Because we have approved the Act and delegated this subsidiary legislative power to the minister, we would like to require him to make these regulations. Therefore, as a check, we are requesting the minister to lay them on the Table. 

If we are not satisfied with them, then you can raise an accountability question and say that they are contravening a given Act. As to requiring us to go through another rigorous process of passing regulations, we are saying no because that is administrative. We are not even interested in going into that particular arena. We are interested in our interplay of politics and the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to request that we support that proposal. I will give you two examples. When we made the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2014, we established a trust fund but up to now, regulations have not been made. Secondly, we passed the Islamic banking law more than two years ago! 

We need to ensure that the minister will bring regulations here because when they leave here, they go and relax.

MR ANYWARACH: In that light, therefore, I think the amendment should be in clause 22, so that (1) (a) reads, “The minister shall by statutory instrument make regulations for giving effect to provisions of this Act; and (1) (b) should read, “Such regulations shall be laid on the Table of Parliament.” This should be under clause 22 (1) so that we do not have a standalone (4) after the offences under (3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: There were two amendments. One was proposed by the chairperson and the other by hon. Tinkasiimire. Hon. Anywarach, your concern is about the placement. Can we approve the text and then our legal people will align them? I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed by the two Members.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on the issue of time, I think we should hold the Government more accountable not to sleep after making an Act. Sometimes, they just go away once we finish their law. We need a timeframe for the regulations.

MR TINKASIIMRE: Madam Chairperson, your observation is our biggest concern. Just this afternoon, a Member raised an issue that Uganda Communications Commission is not issuing licences because the minister responsible for issuing guidelines on licensing has not yet read through the guidelines; so, they cannot proceed. 

The issue you have just raised is very critical. I think as Members of Parliament responsible for making laws, it is proper that what you have proposed is put into effect.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wanted you to make a proposal because I cannot do it. Honourable minister, can you make a proposal?

MR TINKASIIMRE: I would like to propose one month. Honourable minister – (Interjection) - you cannot play an oversight role over yourself.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, his proposal will be part of the law.

MR TINKASIIMRE: Madam Chairperson, as a person responsible for playing an oversight role over the Executive, I think a period of one month is sufficient enough for the minister to have produced the regulations. There is no reason for you to bring a law when you are not ready to regulate it.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, it is very important that we have a timeline. We welcome that proposal because it makes the Executive accountable to Parliament in a timely manner. However, one month is a short time because when you are making these regulations, you consult here and there. Therefore, I would like to propose a period of three months because it will provide sufficient time for us to consult and then come here. Thank you.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also agree with his proposal although my suggestion was four months. I thought Government would need to put structures in place, approve funding and all this takes time. I do not think it can be done in one month. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Chairperson, I second the proposal of three months because implementation involves planning and this will help include everything so that when we kick off, it becomes more effective. Therefore, I second a three months’ period. Thank you.

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that we have been interacting with the ministry for quite some time. They committed to us some time back that as soon as the Bill is finalised, the regulations will come out within two months. I do not know why my counterpart is not confirming the earlier position they committed to. If that is the position, then we should go with two months. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we shall not prescribe time Bill by Bill. Let us have a common standard in this House. If you say three months or otherwise, then we put them to task. Let us go with three months. I request the legal officers to include that new clause. 

MR TINKASIIMRE: Madam Chairperson, we are going to provide it as subclause (5). I would like to propose that it shall be the duty of the minister to lay on the Table the regulations in a period not exceeding three months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that subclause (4)?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: It should be (5)- a standalone. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, does it become clause 23 and then we amend the next clause 23 to become clause 24?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Let it be a subclause of clause 22. It does no harm. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Regulations made under this Act shall be laid by the minister within three months.”

MR TINKASIIMIRE: We can use 90 days or “not exceeding” - 

MR BYARUGABA: This provision would be good, to ensure that what we pass is also put into practice. However, this being a new area, maybe six months would suffice -(Interjections)- Okay, I am not going to raise more noise on this; three months it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that a new subclause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23

MR BYARUGABA: We would like to insert a new clause after Schedule 1, which should include the list of food crops that should never be used to produce biofuels -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not yet reached there. We are not yet on the schedule. We are on clause 23. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to amend clause 23 to read as follows: “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, amend the schedule to this Act.” 

The justification is that we have now passed it as an Act, therefore in order to amend it, Parliament must approve. Since it is an Act passed by Parliament, any change to it must be by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would you like this House to debate a statutory instrument?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it says, “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, amend the schedules to this Act.” We are now going to pass the schedules. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like him to come back here with a statutory instrument so that we can debate it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you would like to amend the schedule, you should give the reason why. Since Parliament approved the schedule, it should be the one to approve the amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we cannot run the ministry like that. Supposing a new policy issue arises and the Cabinet passes it, must they come here? It can be laid on the Table but not with our approval.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, in the same way that we have handled the regulations, let us not make it very difficult for the ministers to do their work, otherwise they will start blaming us for tying their hands. Let us allow them to do their work but they should keep us informed, particularly when they are amending the schedule. 

We can put a provision in this case to provide that the minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory instrument, amend the schedule to this Act and shall also cause it to be laid on the Floor of the House.

MS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, thank you for this opportunity. I appreciate the fact that we are so suspicious of Cabinet doing their work but we should also be mindful that we have an oversight role. It would reflect poorly on us if we cannot carry out our oversight role effectively. 

I would like to request my honourable colleague to leave this amendment as it is so that we allow it to read, “The minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory instrument, amend the schedules to this Act.” You will realise that we have two schedules to this Act. They are not so heavy that Cabinet cannot amend them. Therefore, I beg that we leave it as it is.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, there is only one schedule and it is about currency points. It states, “A currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000”.

MR BYARUGABA: The committee is proposing to introduce another schedule, which is Schedule 2.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, looking at the currency points, for example - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet reached there.

MR ANYWARACH: Okay. If the schedule is in question then as long as it touches on the amount of money payable under this Act, a copy must be laid on the Table so that we do not have a situation where a minister hijacks matters and introduces currency points on his own to stifle businesses or punish business persons. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I propose a correction in clause 24. I think it is an editing error in the main law. In the second last line of clause 24 (2), it should read, “within one year” and not “with one year”. I believe it was an omission. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

The Schedule

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, the committee would like to propose the creation of another schedule - Schedule No. 2 - to ensure that there is food security in the country. 

After the commencement of this very lucrative industry, people may end up using every foodstuff to make biofuels. Therefore, we created another schedule of foodstuffs that shall not be touched in the manufacture of biofuels. These foodstuffs include maize, soya beans, cassava, millet, groundnuts, wheat and bananas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Byarugaba, what is your rationale for that list? 

MR BYARUGABA: The rationale is to ensure food security in this country. 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, whereas we would like to appreciate were the chairman is coming from on this point, we do not see the reference in the Bill to the schedule he is referring to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is introducing a new schedule. 

MR KARUHANGA: We only have a schedule here but what he is saying is not provided for in the Bill. Let me make it clearer. You are proposing a new schedule and I heard you speak to what you want schedule 2 to achieve. However, I am looking for a reference in the Bill to food security and I do not see it here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, he is asking which part of this Bill your proposal is grounded on. 

MR BYARUGUBA: Madam Chairperson, you will recall that after yesterday’s session, you did instruct that we go and harmonise our positions and come up with a renewed position. It was during this harmonisation that we felt it necessary to introduce a second schedule to ensure that some food crops are not included in the production of biofuels. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what Members are saying is that you ought to have had a clause to deal with food security in the Bill and then produce the schedule. 

MR BYARUGABA: We never considered that. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, as much as we would like to accommodate his schedule at this stage, I think he is running too fast. Before you reach there, does the Government have a policy on food security in this country? If not, what is the basis of this schedule? 

I think we should not entertain something that is not backed by policy or research simply because a Member is very ambitious and active in legislating for the sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, he is performing a delegated responsibility of this House. We are the ones who asked him and the committee to study this Bill and advise us. 

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, the speaker who was previously holding the Floor needs to know that as we speak, Government has a food security policy in place. I do not have it here but I would like to inform you that the Government of Uganda has a food security policy in place. 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I seek your guidance. What would be the harm in having this schedule in the statutory instruments, considering that we do not have a grounding clause in this Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you believe that food should be protected from being used as a biofuel, why can’t you just create a one sentence clause in the Bill? Is it important to protect some food?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are very interested in food security but at the same time, we are also looking at productivity in the agricultural sector. If we can produce cassava in large quantities to cater for food security and at the same time, what you do not consume is used to produce biofuels, you are adding value to the sector. 

Therefore, I do not think that we should stick to this clause. Since it was not well thought out and it is not anchored within the principles of the Bill, I propose that we delete it. Thank you. 

MR NSAMBA: I think we should appreciate that a few months ago, this country had a challenge with food. There are times when food is aplenty and there are also times when we have scarcity. Therefore, when a Member comes up to say that we should provide for such times, we better think about this instead of saying that we drop it. Yes, there are times when we have plenty of maize and we need biofuels to consume it so that the price of maize can go up, but there are also times when there is food shortage. 

Madam Chairperson, all we need is the regulatory ability of the minister to know when to allow certain foods to be used to produce biofuels. Otherwise, we run a risk of biofuels consuming all the food and people will be left with nothing to eat. 

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We looked at this issue in two aspects. Uganda is a tropical country where the feedstock, in terms of trees such as Jatropha and all the others, can grow very fast. We can even get all this grass and convert it into biofuel. We can also get local biofuel from all the biodegradable waste that we have in this country. 

Therefore, we think that we should not risk the food security of this country at this time. Food should be processed as food. If we have excess food, let us process it and sell it as food to get money. Since we have enough crops for feedstock and biofuel, let us restrict the food production chain to the food side and maintain the other feedstock from crops into biofuel. This will enable us to have a balance to protect ourselves environmentally and also protect the food value chain. That was why we thought some food products should be protected from this lucrative business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that brings us to the question on whether we have a policy. I have been complaining here about food being sold out of this country to Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania but no one has said anything about it. 

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you. My concern is about the threshold of the entire Bill - the licensing and production. I wonder whether our molasses producers - the sukali gulu producers - will be licensed under this Act. What is the threshold? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Naggayi, we finished with the licensing. 

MS NAGGAYI: Since it is going to be after a one year commencement - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are talking about currency points and the new schedule. 

MS NAGGAYI: Honourable chairperson, Members of Parliament are going to come back here after six months saying people are arresting local brewers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us address the proposal by the chairperson concerning the new schedule. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. While I agree that we need to ensure food security in Uganda, I remember that in the Ninth Parliament we agreed or there was information to the effect that Government was supposed to set up food silos. 

I do not believe in curtailing the productivity of farmers; I think that Government should plan. Let the farmers produce as much as they can and let Government take care of food security by introducing food silos, as they promised. We must encourage farmers to be as productive as they can. Thank you.

MR SONGA ONEGIU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have not seen any place in the world where they have restricted certain crops for biofuels. If you restrict, people will not be encouraged to produce. If we grow cassava in Uganda, for example, the cassava growing region need to - (Interjection) - The best thing we should do is not include the restricted crops in this law. 

Avocado, for example, gives us about 6,000 litres of biofuel per acre, and there are many places growing avocado but there is no market for it. Therefore, in order to encourage people to double production, we should not restrict certain crops. I think that will help us a lot.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Minister of State for Finance brought the economic argument that farmers should be allowed to grow what they can and sell what they can. Why don’t we leave the restriction?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have studied a bit about the production of biofuels in the world and one of the most important crops used to produce biofuels is maize. We are debating as if we shall be limited to the production of raw materials from the current farmers. However, when we pass the law, some investors can come into the country to grow maize strictly for biofuels. 

We are thinking that we shall be limited to the current production from peasants but if we have a law, we can attract investors who will come to grow maize or cassava for biofuels. If we start exempting certain food crops, it means that we shall lose those types of investors. Therefore, this is well intended but we shall end up losing the economic aspect of this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, supposing I was in Budadiri and I have 1,000 acres of bananas, I sell some and fail to sell some and then you say, “Do not dare”, what do I do with the rest? What will happen? I have grown them but you are saying, “Do not touch”. Why don’t you leave it?

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, I think there are two issues that we have to take into consideration. First of all, the policy of this Government is that of a free economy. Somebody who comes to invest should be allowed to process what he or she produces to enable him or her to go ahead with the project. Based on the free economy, I think we should not have restrictions on the production of anything. 

In addition, Government is in the process of establishing food stability by setting up 60 silos in different districts of the country where a lot of production is being done. Therefore, sooner than later, we shall be able to stabilise our food security. As such, worries of Government not having a policy do not arise. I think we should allow people to process what they produce.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, are you still insisting on your amendment?

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Bearing in mind the situation that is coming up and the mood in the House, on behalf of the committee, I wish to concede.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, we should not lose track of this very important matter in this country. Whereas he erroneously raised this issue and we are asking him to shelve it, it is very critical. I have been convinced, after reading the policy. You are talking of the silos, which are provided for in the policy -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not talking about the silos. We are dealing with the schedule.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Can we ask the minister -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there is nothing to discuss now as he has withdrawn his proposal. I put the question that Schedule 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go back to clause 4, which we stood over yesterday.

Clause 4

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 - petroleum products supplied in Uganda to be blended with biofuels. We would like to substitute subclause (2) with the following: “(2) The Petroleum Supply Act shall with the necessary modifications apply to the supply of blended petroleum products in Uganda supplied under this Act.”

The justification is that section 5 of the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 defines “blended petroleum products” as products derived from refining and processing of petroleum and other oils. Therefore, the blended petroleum products envisaged are without biofuels. Based on this, therefore, there is need for modification of the provisions in the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 so as to apply to the supply of blended petroleum products in Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, subclause (1) says, “All petroleum products to be supplied in Uganda shall be blended…” That means that from now on, we shall have either blended petroleum products or biogas. That is not right. We should state it as, “Petroleum products to be supplied in Uganda may be blended…”

Secondly, since petroleum products are already under the Petroleum Supply Act, the moment the product is blended, it ceases to be under the Petroleum Supply Act and comes under the Biofuels Act because we are talking about blended biofuels. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to introduce another clause to read, “All facilities dealing in biofuels and blended biofuels be clearly marked as such.” This is to avoid those that are not dealing in biofuels to also do the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing is what we had proposed yesterday before we adjourned. We had removed the word “all”, and put “may” instead of “shall”. It is the second part, which was causing a problem. You have made a proposal; just repeat your proposal and we take a vote.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I was saying that the moment you blend it, it ceases to be under the Petroleum Supply Act because petroleum is about refining of oils and so on. Therefore, the moment it becomes blended, it leaves that area. As such, it should be governed under this Act because here we are dealing with blended biofuels. I wanted us to say, “All blended petroleum products supplied in Uganda shall be governed by this Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is what the committee chairperson has proposed - that the other Act will apply with the necessary modifications to this one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason I am raising this is because petroleum products are governed under the Petroleum Supply Act. The moment you blend, they cease to be under the Petroleum Supply Act. Therefore, you cannot say, “as modified”. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, we are all aware about cross-referencing. When you say that the other law will apply with modifications, what are these modifications that the House is passing? Why are we giving blanket authority that the Petroleum Supply Act will apply to this law with modifications? What are these modifications and who determines what these modifications will be? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this law is about blending and you are blending petroleum products with biofuels. The moment you blend, you now leave the Petroleum Supply Act. 

We do not need that modification, as my sister has raised. What are these modifications? Unless we also want to amend the Petroleum Supply Act now and say that these are the modifications, which are going to deal with blended products. That cannot work as it will be subject to abuse. 

The other point, which I raised, is that the facilities must be marked. When you go to the facilities, which are handling biofuels or blended fuel, they should be clearly marked. For example, if you went to Shell petrol stations, you will see that they have clearly marked areas where to access “V-Power”. 

This will also avoid situations where people are sold products that they do not want. Biofuels might be cheaper but if you do not mark them, somebody may be told that it is the normal petroleum product yet it is biofuel. Therefore, it is better to mark and clearly gazette them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are moving ahead. Under the interpretation section of the Petroleum Supply Act, petroleum products are defined as follows: “‘Petroleum products’ means organic compounds, pure or blended, which are derived from the refining and processing of petroleum, including, but not limited to, the following — 
(a) 	asphalts, bitumens, petroleum coke and other residual products; 
(b) 	bunkers or heavy residual fuel oils for combustion engines or industrial heat processes, such as burners for boilers or heating furnaces; 
(c) 	commercial gases namely, methane, ethane, propane, butane and other similar petroleum gases produced in the refining process, or mixtures of those gases, whether in gaseous or liquefied state…” 
 
There is a long list there. Do the biofuels fall under the Petroleum Supply Act? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: They do not fall there because you have to mix them. These ones are got as a result of refining and the moment you have done it through that process, it is a different product. That is why you get this product and mix it with biofuels. The other one is not mixed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do you want us to deal with blended products, which are not part of this?

MR PETER LOKERIS: According to what he was saying, when it comes to commercialisation, it has already bypassed the processing and so on. Therefore, when you go to sell, it should fall under the Petroleum Supply Act, which is in the market. He is saying that this should be controlled by the Petroleum Supply Act because it has become a useable petroleum product since it has been blended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When are you amending the Petroleum Supply Act to include biofuels?

MR PETER LOKERIS: This is a new import, which he has suggested. We did not intend to amend that one. We wanted it to be independent. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you put the proper clauses in this Bill and leave the Petroleum Supply Act alone? Why don’t you bring the conditions here?

MR BYARUGABA: We are saying that the Petroleum Supply Act will apply to biofuels only where it is not provided for in this Act. It is just as simple as that.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: In the event those involved in the industry have to go to court, regarding what the Chair was raising, when are you bringing the amendment? I am very sure that in the interpretation clause, biofuels are not defined as part of the petroleum supply products. Why do you want to apply a law to something that is not defined by the Act? I do not understand it. You want to achieve a lot today by using this Act. No, go and do your work.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi had a point because we are talking about a product of biofuel blended with petroleum and governed under the Petroleum Supply Act. If this is going to be an Act on its own, I find logic in what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying. 

Petroleum products are governed under the Petroleum Supply Act. The moment we blend, and in this Act we have mentioned its governance, storage and production, we simply insert a section that once it is a blended product, it is governed under this Act. That will save us from going back to the Petroleum Supply Act.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, that is exactly what clause 4 has done. My understanding is that we are asking, “Can petroleum products in Uganda be blended with biofuels?” The answer is yes. The moment they are blended, there is a product with petroleum products in it and it must be guided by the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003.

Madam Chairperson, I think this provision under clause 4 is clearer than anything else except for the word “shall” which I thought we amended yesterday. However, if we want it to be strictly blended, we are not saying it will be in the context of all products but if it has to be, then it must be blended with our petroleum products in Uganda.  

Madam Chairperson, I think clause 4 is very clear. I do not see any anomalies here.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not very clear because the word “supply” appears twice in the same sentence. It says, “All blended petroleum products to be supplied in Uganda shall be supplied under the Petroleum Supply Act.” Let us correct the English and say, “The Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 shall apply to all blended petroleum products.” This is a superior law and everything falls under it.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 -

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, in Uganda people own land and sell it. However, because land has a great impact on families, it was thought important to regulate the sale of land, so that before you sell a piece of land where the family derives its livelihood, the wife should sign. This was done to limit the powers of the owners of land from selling land anyhow and to protect families.

In this issue –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, where does land come in in clause 4?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I am giving it as an example because the issue of food security for the families, before they sell maize by-products -

THE CHAIRPERSON: All those crops have been freed. What we are saying is that once the products are blended, the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 will apply. What has that got to do with food? Let us take the vote on the blending.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we also stood over clause 6.

MR BYARUGABA: The committee agreed with the provisions of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards in their original law and we agreed to abide by your advice. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 6 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, deleted.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any changes to the interpretations?
 
MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, we would like to substitute the definitions of biofuels, minister and ministry with the following:

“‘Biofuels’ means biodiesel, bioethanol and other fuels made from biomass and primarily used for motive, thermal and power generation, with quality specifications in accordance with national standards.” The justification is: for clarity on the use and quality of the biofuel. 

“‘Minister’ means the minister responsible for energy.” 
“‘Ministry’ means the ministry responsible for energy.” 

Those are the only amendments we have proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not objecting to what the chairperson has proposed. However, if you look at the definition of “blended petroleum product”, you are saying that it means a petroleum product that is blended with biofuel. Now, look at clause 15, which is about the obligations of person granted licence to blend biofuels in petroleum products. 

The minister responsible for issuing the licence is now the ministry responsible for energy. Why then are we deleting the ministry responsible for biofuels and replacing it with the ministry responsible for petroleum and yet this is dealing with biofuels?

I would like to also propose a better definition. I do not want us to call this petroleum because it has ceased to be petroleum; it is now a blended fuel. Why don’t we remove the word “petroleum” and say, “…means a blended biofuel”? This is the blending only applies where you get a petroleum product and add a biofuel. That is it. The moment you change it – 

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to give some clarification that although we are blending, we should be mindful that the petroleum product is 80 per cent and the biofuel is 20 per cent. This means that we cannot leave petroleum completely out. Thank you.

MR SONGA ONEGIU: When you look at the renewal energy policy that talks about biofuel in 3.5.7, it is about biofuel promotion and prediction and clause 3 talks about the Commissioner, Petroleum Supply licensing the blending of the 20 per cent of the biofuel. Therefore, automatically, the blended petroleum is under the Petroleum Act and it is under that ministry. I therefore agree with hon. Masiko.
  
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I concede on that one. The last definition says, “‘petroleum product’ means petrol and diesel”. Why haven’t you included paraffin? Paraffin can be blended and this will help us to reduce carbon monoxide –(Interjection)- Honourable minister, under what category does paraffin belong?

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, when we were discussing the working hours, we removed the word “regular”. However, it was mentioned that working hours also include night hours. I am wondering whether we should not define it in the interpretation section to include the hours between 8.00 a.m. up to midnight, or does it run the whole 24-hour cycle? We could also leave it to be defined in the regulations. However, I think we need to come up with something since it is peculiar and it is not the usual 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the issue of working hours is for the company. All we are saying is that the inspector can go there whenever they are working, whether on a Sunday or at night. I think we should leave it.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, still under the interpretation, I need to understand “feedstock”. This is because we opened up and said we should not discriminate on the crops that are going to be used. I do not know how we are now going to describe the raw materials which come from the other crops. 

Here, “feedstock” means the raw material from which biofuel is manufactured and it includes animal fats, molasses and sweet sorghum stalks. Where does that leave others?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The word “includes” means there can be more. Therefore, it is okay.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I beg for your indulgence to recommit clause 9. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will recommit when the House has resumed. You have to make that supplication. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Biofuels Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: Let him move the adoption first and then you can come in.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byarugaba, you can now rise. 

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. It is so far so good. However, after the harmonisation, we agreed to request humbly that we recommit clause 1 concerning the commencement and we maintain the text as it was in the original submission. It states, “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument”. 

Yesterday, we passed that this takes immediate effect after enactment. However, we found this rather difficult for this young industry that needs a lot of feedstock especially with the biodiesel. The ethanol is in plenty; it comes from sugarcane and with it, we can even start tomorrow. However, with diesel, it may need some staggering of the commencement of some of the sections of this Act and hence, our request for a recommittal.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I seek from the chairperson is whether by the time the Bill was prepared by the ministry, they had not foreseen the need for time to prepare for that. If they were ready by that time, there would be no need for us to postpone the time of commencement. I believe by the time the ministry prepared this Bill, they were aware of the challenges. 

Unless convinced otherwise, I am still very reluctant to support your proposal because by the time Government brings a Bill, they should be ready to have it start on the date of assent.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, even then, we usually have the Certificate of Financial Implications, which details the date within which this Bill is supposed to be enacted. I do not know whether the chairperson has looked at that certificate to see that if we postpone, it would still be relevant and effective in financing the Bill. 

To that extent, I urge the chairperson of the committee to reconsider and drop that proposal because we are not legislating in anticipation of the future. The problems to be solved are now and we cannot give room for any further delays.

MR BYARUGABA: Honourable colleagues, this is not the first Act to be done this way. We have the following Acts that have been staggered: the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003; the Public Private Partnership Act, 2014; the Contracts Act, 2010; and the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010. Therefore, I am trying to justify that this is not a unique case –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo has put forward a very specific question regarding the Certificate of Financial Implications that needs an answer. Is the member in order to divert without answering that question and instead set another question for himself? Can he please restrict himself to the Certificate of Financial Implications?

THE SPEAKER: The minister should probably tell us what the coverage of the Certificate of Financial Implications is. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, this kind of industry has got different platforms that you have to set up. Due to these platforms, it takes some time to implement them. Therefore, we thought if we did it in a staggered manner, the way we have done the rest, then you can deal with this stage and the other one comes later until we reach perfection. However, the other proposal is saying “immediately” as if everything is ready. That is the problem. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable minister has also made the same mistake. The question is very specific, regarding the Certificate of Financial Implications. Can you answer the question regarding the Certificate of Financial Implications? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: When all these Acts are brought, there is a Certificate of Financial Implications cleared by Cabinet. Even then, we said that we shall stagger but the Certificate of Financial Implications is there. It has already been arrived at. It is only on the time of commencement when we are asking why we should not be allowed to stagger.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if we say that it is assented to within one month, do you see a flood of people saying they would want to apply this Act immediately? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: If we say one month, I think there will be a lot of people coming and we shall not be able to handle them in a perfect manner. 

THE SPEAKER: Does that mean your structures are not in place to handle this law? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: No, the departments and the producers are there but we need to be given time to go and tell them to work so that we achieve what we want.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the risk of speaking contrary to what the chairperson of my committee has said, when we considered the Bill as a committee, we visited a factory in Mukono that is already doing the blending process, somewhere as you go towards Kayunga. Also, Kakira sugar factory is already doing some blending. 

Madam Speaker, why then do we pass a law for which certain people are already doing the activity without regulation and we say we should defer the commencement? I think that if it is in the wisdom of the House that we pass the law today, then the commencement should also be with immediate effect after its assent. 

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Biofuel production is a capital intensive venture. I would request this House to realise that although we might have ethanol in place, the biodiesel is still lacking. We need a lot of work on acquisition of land, production of the feedstock, putting in place the labour, the technology and the like. 

Therefore, I would like to ask –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the law we are passing is for producers and nobody will come for the licence unless they are ready to produce. The members of the committee are trying to defend this sequencing and I do not know why. I do not understand it. Hon. Ariko has just said Kakira is producing. If biodiesel is not available, we can use ethanol to do the exercise, and there is already a transitional clause, clause 24. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the Member in order to mislead the House when the producers and the products are there? We can wait for what is missing but we should continue to produce with what is there. Is she in order to come and tell us that they want sequencing? 

THE SPEAKER: I think I want the minister to satisfy us. What do you anticipate that will cause you to stagger? Give us an example of something that requires you to stagger. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, due to the eagerness we have in this field and availability of some of the materials, I concede. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka, did you want a recommittal? 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise for trying to jump the gun earlier, but I had wanted to recommit clause 9 for concerns of food security. 

Madam Speaker, I can see that in clause 9(2)(h), the Minister of Agriculture will make sure that before the licence is issued, there is food security. However, this is for the producer. I wonder whether it would not be possible for us to protect food security at household level here, so that households will not sell their supplies for biofuel unless they have food security. This is very crucial to us. 

I heard the Prime Minister say that because we run a liberalised economy, people should sell whatever they produce. However, it is the responsibility of Government to protect its citizens. It should be important to us that we protect the food security at household level. Therefore, I propose a separate subsection –(Interruption) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, whereas my colleague is raising a very critical matter, she must understand that it belongs to an independent ministry, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

There is already an existing policy but there is no legal framework guiding the policy. The honourable member has proposed that we move the House to force the minister to bring a regulatory framework in order to provide for food security. However, is she procedurally right to attempt to now start confusing trading in biofuel production with food security?

Whereas they are related, this is regulated by forces of demand and supply. If you want food security, you must go at household level and say each household must have a certain acre. If you produce beans, you must have this one in your store. If the Government is to have - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are going into a lecture. I do appreciate your point but it is a matter that the chairperson of the committee tried to bring in and we advised him to leave it out. Therefore, leave the food issue because it will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your guidance but what hon. Tinkasiimire was saying is already here. I am not the one who imported food security into the Bill; it is already there. The responsibility for the Minister of Agriculture – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka, the chairperson came here with a list - bananas, matooke, maize - and we said that he should leave out the food issue. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE BIOFUELS BILL, 2016

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Biofuels Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Biofuels Bill, 2016 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE BIOFUELS ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. Congratulations to the Minister of Energy and Minerals, our chairperson and the members of the Committee on Natural Resources.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE ALTERATION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF BUTEBO AND PALLISA DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Where are you going? This is Government business. You must stay there.

6.12
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, on 10 September 2017, I presented a motion for the alteration of the boundaries of Butebo and Pallisa districts to have Kibale County as part of Butebo District in accordance with a resolution of Pallisa District Council of September 28.However, to this day, a resolution from Parliament  on this issue has not yet been pronounced and this has led to conflict and non-functionality of the district councils in both Pallisa and Butebo districts as described below.

Madam Speaker, after presentation of the motion, I carried out further consultations with various authorities on this very issue. I held and chaired consultative meetings with the honourable members of Parliament from Pallisa and Butebo at various times. I further had informal interactions with the Pallisa District chairperson to resolve the matter. 

However, there was no consensus on the matter and yet Butebo District Local Government Council has not functioned since it came into effect on 1 July 2017, thereby affecting service delivery in the new district. The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), for example, cannot recruit staff at the district without constitution and appointment of the District Service Commission.

I would like to bring it to your attention, Madam Speaker, that I have received numerous petitions from Pallisa District in regards to the composition of Butebo and Pallisa district boundaries. One such petition echoes the earlier Pallisa District Council resolution of 2008 under minute 19/208/09, which states that the new district of Butebo shall be composed of Kibale, Opwateta, Butebo, Petete, Kanginima, Kakoro, Kabwangasi subcounties with district headquarters at the county headquarters.

However, when Parliament pronounced itself on this matter, it was in contradiction with the earlier position taken by the district council and the historical and traditional borders of Pallisa and Butebo districts.

In another petition, it is alleged that the councillors from Kibale and Opwateta sub counties, which are considered part of Butebo District, are attending standing committee meetings of Pallisa District, which poses the issue of legality of decisions taken by those committees.

Further still, I am informed that the planning and budgeting process in Pallisa District has been halted by the district’s executive committee, who are urgently requesting for a resolution to the issues surrounding Kibale County. This means that the Pallisa District Council is non-functional pending a resolution and a solution to this matter.

Further, consultations were held with the Solicitor-General on the same matter and on 15 November 2017, the ministry received legal advice from the Solicitor-General. According to the Solicitor-General, Pallisa District complied with Article 179 (1) of the 1995 Constitution on creation of new districts, to the effect that the creation of Butebo District by Parliament was legal and the description of the counties that constitute Butebo District omitted Kibale county, which was an error. 

Additionally, Solicitor-General said that Article 179(2) of the 1995 Constitution mandates Parliament to alter boundaries of districts and that any proposals to alter the boundaries of Pallisa District should be submitted to Parliament. The Solicitor-General concluded his guidance with the opinion that any person interested in changing the boundaries of the existing local governments has to seek the approval of Parliament. 

It is against this background that I call upon colleagues to pronounce themselves on the matter of having Kibale County as part of Butebo District in accordance with the resolution of the Pallisa District Council of September 2008. This will lead to the proper functionality of both Pallisa and Butebo district local governments accordingly.

Madam Speaker, originally, Butebo was a county of its own and Kibale was part of Butebo County. I have no powers to grant the old Kibale County to Pallisa; we would require Parliament to do it. In other words, there is actually no resolution from Pallisa District recalling Kibale to Pallisa and at the same time, there is no resolution rejecting Kibale by Butebo. Therefore, logically, the law governing us now is to have Kibale as part of Butebo District and any other matters can be discussed later. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, why don’t you restate your resolution so that we know how to move because that is just a statement? Tell us what you want us to do by resolution.

MAJ. (Rtd) BUTIME: The motion reads:
“WHEREAS Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of districts;

AND WHEREAS Pallisa District Council, in its council meeting held on 18 September 2008, under Minute 19/2008, resolved that a new district called Butebo, comprising the then Butebo County, which comprised the subcounties of Opwateta, Kanginima, Kakoro, Kabwangasi, Petete, Butebo and Kibale, be created out of Pallisa District;

AWARE that by the 18 September 2008 when Pallisa District Council resolved to create Butebo District, Kibale and Opwateta were both subcounties in Butebo County;

NOTING THAT Parliament, in its resolutions of 4 August 2015, resolved to create Kibale County out of Butebo County in Pallisa District; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT Parliament, in its resolution of 3 September 2015, resolved to create Butebo District in accordance with the Pallisa District Resolution of 18 September 2008 but omitted to include the newly created Kibale County as part of Butebo District; 

AND WHEREAS I held and chaired consultative meetings with the Members of Parliament from both districts, including the District Chairperson of Pallisa on 23 August 2017 to resolve the matter;

AND NOTING THAT there was no consensus on the matter yet Butebo District Local Government Council has not functioned since 1 July 2017, thereby affecting service delivery in the district;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Pallisa District Local Government Council are representatives of constituencies in Butebo District, thereby paralysing council business in Pallisa;

AWARE THAT on 15 November 2017, the ministry received legal advice from the Solicitor-General to the effect that the creation of Butebo District by Parliament was legal and the description of the counties that constitute Butebo District omitted Kibale County, which was an error in the records of submission of the ministry to Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. That the boundaries of the newly created Butebo District be corrected to include Kibale County as part of Butebo District;
    2. That this correction takes effect on 1 July 2017 to enable the people of Kibale County participate in the elections of the new Butebo District leadership.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we need to address this issue and complete it. I have been to Pallisa and as soon I arrived, they told me about their inability to work. The same thing is happening on the other side. There is no governance. We are sending money but no one is checking on the accounting officers. There is a very serious vacuum and we need address it very quickly so that people can enjoy their rights.

6.27
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, this matter was concluded by Parliament but actually, it is the ministry that is bringing confusion in Pallisa. 

I come from Pallisa and I am aware of the dynamics in that district. When you follow the timelines, first of all for creating Kibale and Pallisa District, Parliament did not omit Kibale from Pallisa. What is coming up is because of the politics of Pallisa. The Minister of State for Local Government, my sister, hon. Jennifer Namuyangu, is actually behind this confusion and all that is because of politics and - (Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I was not in Parliament at the time this resolution was passed. The same error was made in respect of Omoro District and we rectified it through Parliament. Therefore, is he in order? In addition, is he in order not to declare his interests that he wants to contest in Butebo and that is the reason he wants Kibale Sub County to go away? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please settle down. Yesterday, we agreed to be courteous to one another and not to make unsubstantiated allegations. The honourable minister is from Kibuuku. Let us concentrate on the facts and solve the problem. I do not want to hear allegations. Concentrate on the facts and the solutions.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. First of all, I come from Pallisa and from Butebo County. Therefore, there is no way I can contest in Kibale –

THE SPEAKER: Leave out those contesting things. Address the boundaries issue.

DR LYOMOKI: I am clarifying this because I come from Butebo and not Kibale. Therefore, even if Kibale came back to Butebo, it would be a subcounty and I cannot contest for district MP. So, really, there is no way; it can never happen. Whether Kibale Sub County came to Butebo or not, I can never contest for Butebo District MP because I am not a woman. 

If the Ministry of Local Government –(Ms Namuyangu rose_) - I have refused the information from the hon. Jennifer Namuyangu. [Ms Namuyangu: Dr Lyomoki knows that his wife contested and lost and she has interests-] - I refuse the information. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I said that the ministry is responsible for this because when Parliament passed this resolution, we were mindful of the fact that Kibale had stopped being part of Butebo. Actually, we have guidance from the Solicitor-General dated 20 April 2017 and addressed to the Chairperson LC V of Pallisa. In this guidance, the Solicitor-General actually said it was right for Kibale to remain as part of Pallisa. 

I am, therefore, shocked to hear that there is other advice purportedly from the Solicitor-General on the same matter giving a contrary view from an earlier position. 

Therefore, I would like to lay on the Table, the guidance from the Solicitor-General dated 20 April 2017, which concluded that at the time Butebo County was given a district status, Kibale County was not part of it. It is clearly articulated in this guidance from the Solicitor-General. I am therefore, shocked that the minister said there is guidance without laying the document on the Table. That means there is manipulation and falsehood on the side of the Minister of Local Government.

Madam Speaker, I have met the people of Pallisa. We have the councillors from Kibale here and no one from Kibale supports the direction the minister is talking about. The people the minister is relying on are from other counties of Pallisa and those people do not even have a stake. 

Even before we left, - I am now in Butebo District – initially there were four counties, namely Pallisa, Agule, Butebo and Kibale, but now Butebo was given a district status. Each of these four counties had equal stake in the original Pallisa. There is no way two other counties can now refuse Kibale since previously, each had equal stake, and they cannot constitute the original district council since Butebo is no longer part of them.

Therefore, if Parliament attempts to change the original boundaries of Pallisa to exclude Kibale, it will tantamount to a new resolution of Parliament. The argument is that the initial resolution by Pallisa District Council included Kibale County in Butebo. That was the original case before it was brought to Parliament. However, Parliament in its wisdom -

THE SPEAKER: Is there an original and a non-original resolution?

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, the district resolutions were brought to Parliament earlier. However, by the time the resolution reached Parliament, the situation down on the ground had changed. Therefore, by the time -

THE SPEAKER: Did they bring that change to the attention of the minister and Parliament? We are dealing with a resolution of 2008 from the then district council.

DR LYOMOKI: That is right. However, Parliament has the right to take cognisance of new factors and that is what was done. By the time the resolution was brought to Parliament, the resolution of the district council had been overtaken by events and Parliament indeed recognised that and so one cannot come -

THE SPEAKER: What events had overtaken the resolution?

DR LYOMOKI: The events were that Kibale had become a county. Madam Speaker, the initial resolution of the district council was taken at a time Kibale was not a county yet; it was a subcounty.

THE SPEAKER: Was it a subcounty in Butebo?

DR LYOMOKI: A subcounty in Pallisa District but in Butebo County. Allow me to clarify this. Initially, Kibale was part of Butebo County; it was a subcounty in Butebo County. By the time the district council made the resolution, Kibale was a subcounty in Butebo County in Pallisa District. However, when the matter reached Parliament, Kibale had become a county. It was no longer a subcounty in Butebo County.

Madam Speaker, the pronouncement here was in terms of Butebo County, which had become an independent county. I hope you are getting the point. By the time the resolution came here, Parliament in its wisdom, and with the minister’s guidance, excluded Kibale because Kibale had become a county outside Butebo County. Otherwise, if we wanted to include Kibale as part of this new district, then we would have pronounced ourselves and said that Butebo District would comprise of the two counties of Butebo and Kibale, but we did not do that.

Therefore, what I am saying is that the ministry is trying to misguide the House by saying it was an erroneous decision made by Parliament, which is not correct. Parliament knew very well that Kibale was a new county in Pallisa and not in the new district of Butebo; there was no error at that time because we knew it very well. All Members of Parliament from that area were all here and we knew what we were doing. This is just a new thing coming up now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, when did Kibale become a county? Let me first hear from hon. Lyomoki.

MR MUDUKOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that in August 2015, Kibale became a county and in September 2015, Butebo became a district –(Interruption)

MR OSEKU: His information is erroneous -

THE SPEAKER: I will give you an opportunity to raise the clarification. 

MR MUDUKOI: That is what I am saying and for that matter therefore – 

THE SPEAKER: You are saying the creation of Kibale preceded the creation of Butebo. Now, when Kibale was created, where did it belong?

MR MUDUKOI: Kibale became an independent county. 

THE SPEAKER: But a county must belong somewhere.

MR MUDUKOI: It became an independent county in Pallisa District. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you a county within a district?

MR MUDUKOI: What happened was that initially, Kibale had been part of Butebo County but it became a county in August in Pallisa. Butebo and Kibale have been one. Actually, Kibale constituted seven subcounties but in August 2015, Kibale became a county in Pallisa District. However, Pallisa District Council had resolved in 2008 to create seven subcounties in Butebo District. Therefore, by the time Butebo became a district, Kibale had already become a county one month earlier. 

THE SPEAKER: When it became a county, in which district was it born? 

MR MUDUKOI: Pallisa District. 

THE SPEAKER: The home is Pallisa District?

MR MUDUKOI: Yes. Kibale has been part of Pallisa District.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I lay on the Table a copy of the Resolution of Parliament, which created Kibale County, dated 4 August 2015. This resolution curved Kibale County out of Butebo and left it in Pallisa District. It was because initially, Pallisa had Butebo -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are trying to find a solution. Please allow -

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker. It is hurting to see that some of us are trying to mislead this House. First of all, districts are created based on subcounties and not counties. Secondly, we have a report of Parliament duly signed on each page and presented in this House in July 2014 recommending the creation of Butebo District as a result of a resolution by Pallisa District Local Government Council in 2008. 

Madam Speaker, that report, which this House passed after the creation of Kibale County, still mentioned the subcounties under the proposed Butebo District. Once more, I will read for this House the seven subcounties: Butebo, Kibale, Kakoro, Kabwangasi, Opwateta, Petete and Kanginima. These are still the subcounties under Butebo District that we created after the creation of Kibale County. So, are these Members in order to really mislead this House when there is a clear record of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opolot, you are not helping us. What is your position? You are just reading the names of subcounties, which I do not know.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, personally I think we are trying to circumvent something. The truth is that as per the report we adopted as a House, Kibale and Opwateta subcounties are part of Butebo District that was created at that time. 

As someone from Pallisa, I would have loved that as we argue that Kibale County is no longer part of the proposed district, we should remember that there should be a resolution from Pallisa District Local Council excluding the two subcounties. However, in the absence of such a resolution, the original resolution stands. 

Madam Speaker, Article 179 of the Constitution states that Parliament may alter the boundaries, but the same Article says that in so doing, Parliament shall by law empower the district councils and other lower local government units. I would have loved to see this House usher us into a process where the people can express their interests but not Parliament doing it at this level when the people have not been involved. (Applause) 

The honourable minister has clearly said that he has got numerous petitions on this matter. I would, therefore, like to propose that we internalise the report of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service on all the considerations made in the creation of Butebo District and then we take a decision here.

THE SPEAKER: You said Parliament has the power to alter boundaries; did a motion come here to alter those boundaries? 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: There is no other motion. The only motion we have here is that one from the minister, which is to correct the error.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, first of all, my colleague is referring to a record of 2014 –(Interjections)– Whatever he is referring to is a record of 2014. What we have here is that Kibale County was formed in August 2015. The resolution that Parliament passed on 3 September 2015 says, “Butebo District, currently part of Pallisa District, consists of Butebo County with its headquarters at Butebo Trading Centre.”  By this time, Kibale County had already been formed in August 2015, and as you can see, the resolution to create Butebo District was passed by Parliament in September 2015.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying Kibale remained in Pallisa?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes and actually, even if you are talking about the people, we know very well the sentiments of the people of Kibale County. All the people of Kibale County would like to remain in Pallisa District –(Interjections)– Yes, that is the truth! 

The current Chairperson LC V of Pallisa District comes from Kibale County. Therefore, the argument is that they are trying to close off the chairperson so that he does not remain the chairperson of Pallisa District. It is just politics. The Chairperson of Pallisa District and the people of Kibale are very comfortable with remaining - 

THE SPEAKER: No, we are not dealing with positions; we are talking about boundaries. Therefore, let us concentrate on the boundaries.

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, we also have the Member of Parliament for Kibale County in this House and he can come and state what his people are saying. Madam Speaker, I request that the Member of Parliament for Kibale County speaks about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: He will speak.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much.

6.50
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I can see how people are playing with the resolutions of Parliament. This is why at times Parliament is taken very unserious. 

He has read a resolution; I do not know whether it is correct but he said that Butebo District would consist of Butebo County. The minister told us there was an omission concerning Kibale. Even if there was an omission concerning Kibale, I believe our resolutions are made after going through consultations - first, second and third readings are done before a conclusion is made.

Madam Speaker, if Parliament made that resolution, I would like to believe it was very sober. I would like to believe that Parliament was very aware they had already created Kibale County and as such, Butebo County was a standalone county. Therefore, the moment the resolution came out to create Butebo District - The Article that the minister read in part just said that Parliament can alter boundaries but the same Article says Parliament can create districts by way of resolution. 

If the minister is interested in Kibale County being in Butebo District, then he should bring a prayer to Parliament to take Kibale County to Butebo District, which must be supported by two-thirds of this Parliament. If the minister thinks Kibale County was already omitted from Butebo District, why is Butebo District not - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if Kibale was created in August 2015, how can it now become part of something, which was created later? They say Butebo was created in September and the other in August, so it was already in existence. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I was still on the Floor; I had only allowed a point of information –(Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is on Article 179 of the Constitution as quoted by the minister. He did not read clause 4, but it is very important to consider the interests of the people that you are talking about. 

I know while we sat here, we sent our committee down to Kibale County and they found out what the people wanted. I do not have a conflict of interest. Yes, I was born there but I am married in Soroti. However, it is in the interest of the people of Kibale County to stay in Pallisa District. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the creation of Pallisa County was also done out of some serious disagreements. We cannot go back to the same conflict that existed and which we tried to resolve by creating Kibale County. The moment we do that, we are going back to the original conflict, which will be worse than what we have. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Okay, thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that since there is already a resolution of Parliament that created Butebo District out of Butebo County, the minister should be ordered not to interfere with the operations of Butebo District. As such, he should also not interfere with operations of Pallisa District, which includes Kibale County. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

6.54
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The issue before us now is not a simple one. In the last Parliament, I was a Member of the committee while we created this new district. I was also part of the delegation that went to Pallisa and met the community of Opwateta and Kibale sub counties. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we were almost lynched while we did our committee work. The truth of the matter is that the people of Kibale want to remain in Pallisa. (Applause) One of the reasons they wanted to lynch us was that they thought that we were conniving with the people who wanted to take them to Butebo District. 

Also, the fact of the matter is that originally, Kibale and Opwateta were part of Butebo but when the new county was created, of course they were removed from Butebo. Therefore, it is a very serious and complicated issue. There is a lot of politics in this issue and I think we need time to go over this issue with all the information. 

Madam Speaker, looking at what is happening on the Floor of Parliament between the Members from that area, Parliament needs to get these documents because as you can see, even the statement from the minister says that Parliament made an error. However, by the time we came up with the decision to present to this Parliament as a committee, there was no error. In fact, there was wisdom after seeing what was on the ground, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to simplify this. There was a district called Pallisa, which had Butebo, Kibale, Agule and Pallisa. In August 2015, Kibale became a county within Pallisa and then one month later, Butebo became a district. So, where is - Okay, let us hear from the Minister of State for Northern Uganda; she was the chairperson of that committee in the last Parliament.

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was the chairperson of the committee and I would like to agree with what hon. Santa Alum has said. The situation on the ground was not hospitable; it was hostile. However, we understood it then because we needed to balance the area with the population. That was one of the reasons for putting the different number of subcounties in the different counties and districts. 

The reason the district came later was because the resolution for creating counties came first. By that time, the creation of new districts was still under a moratorium. One month later, after the counties had been created, this House said they could not sit and do nothing about the districts that were being demanded. Hon. Jacob Opolot read one of the recommendations we made in letting the two subcounties be part of Butebo District to create a balance and also for matters of resource management. However, that was then and this House passed it. 

Since that time, if the situation has changed, then it should be taken back to the people. The people of Pallisa and Butebo should help us and come to a consensus. They should be honest enough to tell us where they want to belong and why. It should not be this Parliament. After all, if the minister decides to bring any motions here, it will depend on the recommendations of the local governments in existence now. Therefore, my recommendation is that the people of Pallisa and Butebo should help us and be honest and candid on this matter. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I speak here, I represent the people of Kasilo. I am their voice here. In this House, we have a Member of Parliament for Kibale County and I believe he speaks for the people of Kibale just like I speak for the people of Kasilo. Therefore, is the minister saying that the honourable member for Kibale County is not competent enough to tell Parliament where his people want to belong? Can he clarify that? 

7.00
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to make some corrections as well as clarifications. 

First, I would like to clarify on the date the minister stated when the motion was brought here. On that day, debate ensued and indeed guidance by the Speaker was given to the effect that the minister needed to go, consult and harmonise the situation. However, the minister has come back, as it were, to create more problems in the House. 

The only way to harmonise this situation is to consider the interests of the people. Article 1 of the Constitution provides that power belongs to the people and they choose who and how they should be governed. Am I right? Therefore, they choose where to belong, who represents them and indeed, as hon. Okupa rightly said, I am here to speak for the people of Kibale. We are also lucky that a team from this House went to that place and saw what was there.

In reference to the justification the minister gave for this motion, which he based on the District Council resolution in 2008, I want to say that in law, it is agreed that something overtaken by events can no longer stand. Secondly, immediately this resolution was made, the people of Kibale petitioned this Parliament, and we want to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you received them. They highlighted their plight and you were kind enough to send the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to Kibale. 

The committee met the people, consulted them and brought back a report, which hon. Jacob Opolot was talking about, that captured those concerns. The people of Kibale, like I think some two other areas, did not want to belong to the proposed district. That was enough to tell us. The advice given by the committee was that there would be a conflict and therefore, there was need to review those proposed boundaries.

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Lyomoki when he says that Parliament was alive to some of this background information when forming the new district. Therefore, in law again, I want to say that in equity, where two interests are competing, the first in time prevails. Therefore, the creation of Kibale County supersedes the issue of the district. 

In addition, the minister was referring to an interpretation from the Solicitor-General. I tendered here a copy of this interpretation, which was in April this year. The minister has not tendered in the one he is referring to. There is a political team that went to him and also wrote to the Minister of Justice asking for interpretation and that office produced a fake resolution –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Honourable, you should not bother telling us much about the guidance of the Solicitor-General or Attorney-General. In the case of hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and four others of the Supreme Court, it was held that the guidance of the Solicitor-General and Attorney-General shall not be binding on Parliament; it is advisory. Therefore, we can take their advice but in this particular case, we find the advice misleading and we shall do otherwise. Thank you.

MR OSEKU: Madam Speaker, allow me say something now. It is true that the Ministry of Local Government is responsible for this confusion. Since 2015, when these areas were created, they cannot pretend that they did not look at what Parliament resolved.

Whereas the districts are empowered to propose the boundaries and they recommend the creation of districts, the ultimate power rests with Parliament. I want to believe because it is also stated in Article 179 of the Constitution and –(Interruption)

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, you can tell from that that there are several interests in the Pallisa issues. Personally, I will speak for the people of Pallisa. I would like to agree with hon. Oseku when he says that all power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution. Article 1 states that:

“(2)	Without limiting the effect of clause (1) of this article, all authority in the State…
(3) 	All power and authority of Government and its organs derive from the Constitution…”

Madam Speaker, Article 179, which is on local government units, states thus: 
“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may-
(a) 	alter the boundaries of districts; and
(b) 	create new districts.

(2) 	Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all the Members of Parliament.

(3) 	Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create new local government units within their districts.”

Therefore, for one to say that districts may propose but Parliament may not go by that - Whatever we are going to do should originate from the people in whom power lies and that is why I said here earlier that it is important that the people are brought into this issue. Therefore, is the hon. Oseku in order to mislead this House and say that the district councils may only propose and yet the Constitution, which is the supreme organ, says otherwise?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, would it be okay to have those two districts sit and give us a position? I am just asking, give me your views on that.

MR OSEKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Member of Parliament for Butebo District is here and the one for Kibale. Those are the two places which are directly affected. For the part of Kibale, I consider this a matter of right - the right to choose where to belong, to choose who governs them and how they are governed.

They have been in Pallisa since time immemorial. Therefore, I think it would not be proper for us to legislate the people of Kibale out of where they wish to be. For sure, Article 79 of the Constitution says Parliament shall make laws for the peace, good governance, development and order –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening to hon. Richard Oseku very attentively. He mentioned clearly that the people of Kibale chose where they wanted to belong. I would like to find out; after choosing where to go, what were the legal practices that were followed? It is not a matter of saying, “I want to be there” and you end up there. Was it resolved in the council? Where was it resolved after choosing that they want to go there? What was the legal process that was followed? That is the clarification I seek from you.

MR OSEKU: Honourable member, when you are where you are, you do not again choose where you want to go. The people of Kibale wish to remain where they are. This will of the people of Kibale is in tandem with the resolution of this Parliament that created Butebo District to comprise Butebo County and for Kibale to remain in Pallisa District. 

As the representative of the people of Kibale, I consider this matter settled. I do not see the reason why somebody is wishing to come and undo what Parliament has already resolved and which captures the interest of the people of Kibale.

Madam Speaker, for that matter, my prayer is that this Parliament adopts what it resolved and the motion of the minister could kindly be withdrawn so that things go back to normal. The people of Butebo can go ahead to elect their leaders. The people of Pallisa can also go ahead to elect their leaders and the district council exercises the powers conferred on them by the law for good governance.

The local government - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should simplify this matter. There was the district of Pallisa. It went on growing and a child called Kibale was created as a child of Pallisa. Later another child said “I am leaving” and the child became Butebo. That means they did not leave? Did they leave Pallisa?

MR OSEKU: Madam Speaker, I have a clarification here. Indeed, on 1 July 2017, Butebo District was operationalised. It is there and there is a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)–

THE SPEAKER: Without Kibale?

MR OSEKU: Without Kibale. There is a CAO. There is a District Police Commander (DPC) and acting Resident District Commissioner (RDC). It is just that the Minister of Local Government stopped the election of the interim district executive committee claiming that he was coming here to first include Kibale. 

In the motion, which he brought, he said he stopped the election of the interim executive committee because they said it would disenfranchise the people of Kibale, which was very dishonest because the people of Kibale do not even wish to participate in elections in Butebo.

As I speak, the minister, through the CAO, has blocked even the entitlements of public servants in Kibale. They have refused to pay them because they are saying they must first go to Butebo. This is very unfortunate and this is where one suspects some underhand engagement by the ministry, which is not proper.

7.16
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek the indulgence of the House as a neighbour to Pallisa and somebody who has also had a lot of interest in this particular matter and as chairman of Bukedi Parliamentary Caucus. 

We have also had some bit of intervention at the level of the caucus to see that we resolve this matter without us coming to Parliament, and we engage Members who may not generally have the interest of Pallisa or Butebo but we use the Members of Parliament from the two districts. I believe that when we even allow other Members to discuss this matter, we try to create areas where we find some element of hostility which comes out.

Madam Speaker, the issue here is that there is a lot of politics in this and until we leave politics out of this matter, we shall not resolve it. (Applause) We shall still be complicating issues by bringing in more technicalities of whether at the time of the creation of Butebo District, Kibale was part of Butebo or Pallisa. It will continue confusing us.

I believe we need to look at where we can have the people live comfortably. If at a certain time the dynamics change and we feel the people are not comfortable the other side and we want to correct the process, we can initiate the process. If there is an error, just as the minister has said, and we all agree that there is an error, Parliament in its wisdom can come and mitigate this. These are things we should be talking about. 

I do not see us resolving this matter today. We might talk about this matter and agree but at the end of the day, would we have resolved it in Pallisa and Butebo? We can decide here but we will not have resolved it and the conflict will still come up. Have we resolved it between the two Members? I see that hon. Oseku and hon. Opolot seem not to be talking to each other - (Interjections)- We need to know about this. 

Madam Speaker, I just came here as a person who has had a direct interest in this particular area. I know they have been fixed in this district. Procedures have been taken and there are new developments that have come up. If the people of Kibale feel they will be comfortable to stay in Pallisa, we resolve it here and we take a decision and allow them to move and the district also moves. 

I will not shy away from mentioning this because right now, I do not see them comfortably living in Butebo. We shall still get back to square one and come back here when there are issues and maybe another petition comes up.

7.20
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Kibale has now taken almost five months. Other districts have already elected their representatives and they have district councils. It is six months down the road and Butebo District and Pallisa District do not have councils yet a lot of money is allocated to these districts. This is because there is no political leadership to monitor the resources allocated to these districts.

First of all, the Minister of Local Government has taken a long time. We frequented the Ministry of Local Government several times but the matter has not been brought to Parliament. It has been on the Order Paper several times but the Minister of Local Government was not there and yet, there are a lot of issues that have taken place down there. This issue has to be resolved –

THE SPEAKER: That is why it is on the Order Paper today and you heard me tell the minister that I want answers today. Give us a proposal.

MR MUDUKOI: Madam Speaker, Article 179 says:
“(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may-
    (a) alter the boundaries of the district; and 
    (b) create new districts.” 

What happened is that in September, Butebo became a district when Kibale was already a county. The resolution of Parliament was that Butebo District, which is currently part of Pallisa District, comprises Butebo County with its headquarters at Butebo Trading Centre. For that matter, therefore, if Butebo District was created when Kibale County was already in place, I do not see why we are beating around the bush. This was already done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are wasting time. In 2015, we created Butebo District out of Pallisa. What remained of Pallisa was now Kibale and the others. Then surely they are part of Pallisa. Aren’t they part of Pallisa?

MR MUDUKOI: Madam Speaker, the challenge we are facing is that at the moment, we do not need any resolution. The problem is that the Minister of Local Government stopped the operation of this district in accordance with the resolution of Parliament. That is the only challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying there is no issue about Kibale being in the air?

MR MUDUKOI: Madam Speaker, what we should do is to order the Minister of Local Government to stop interfering with what was resolved. That is all.

7.23
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, having heard from the different Members of Parliament seated here; and aware that Kibale became a county annexed to Pallisa District prior to the creation of Butebo District; further aware that Butebo District was one of the districts that were passed in this very Parliament with clear boundaries without - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I need protection from the honourable member.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the Member to finish? 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural point. I sense that hon. Amongin is about to move a motion that is not in conformity with the progress of this harmonious resolution. According to Article 179, of the Constitution, resolutions on matters like this require that the majority of all Members of this august House – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are in breach of the rule against anticipation. Sit down. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that this august House passed a resolution to create Kibale County prior to the creation of Butebo District; further aware that Parliament created Butebo District with clear demarcations on the boundaries; I would like to move a motion without notice that Kibale County that was annexed to Pallisa District remains where it originally belonged and that the status quo of Butebo District stays as passed by this House. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a decision was taken by this House and Butebo District was created. What remained was Pallisa. What remained in Pallisa District is still in Pallisa and what came out was Butebo.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, we talked about a report of this House and that report mentioned the subcounties in Butebo District. I would like to get that clarification. What do the two subcounties of Kibale and Opwateta, which are part of Butebo District, do? That report came after the creation of Kibale.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has gone. However, the minister had said that it was created for convenience, to create numbers and increase size. That is what she said. Is that what the people agreed to? The Minister of State for Northern Uganda, hon. Kwiyucwiny, said they thought they should get numbers. It is on the Hansard. It was not the will of the people; it was for convenience.

Honourable members, the boundaries were settled long ago by the resolution of this House. Butebo District is Butebo District; all those others remaining are in Pallisa District. (Applause) Honourable minister, please go and actualise the local government of Butebo so that they can do their governance and the others continue with their work. 

Honourable members, we now revert to the original position. Honourable minister, go and activate those two local governments. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO FORMULATE SPECIFIC  INTERVENTIONS TOWARDS THE IMPROVEMENT OF EDUCATION STANDARDS IN DISTRICTS THAT CONSISTENTLY PERFORM POORLY IN NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 7.30 p.m.  I would like to suggest that we start with this tomorrow. Thank you, Members. I congratulate the people of Pallisa for getting back their governance. Go home and do your work. The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 December 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
