Tuesday, 9 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. There are lots of important matters on the Order Paper. My communication is just to welcome you to this sitting. Thank you very much. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But administration of oaths should have been item 2 before my communication. Okay proceed.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable members are still organising to bring in our MP-elect. So, I feel that maybe we could give them five minutes so that we organise the visitor and we welcome her in a more appropriate manner. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, Madam Clerk. Please bring the member-elect in and at the same time let me recognise, in the Distinguished Members’ Gallery, the presence of Gen. Mugisha Muntu, the President of the Forum for Democratic Change. (Applause)

The oaths were administered to:
Lucy Akello.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not approach the Speaker from the left. You approach from the right. (Laughter)

Hon. Lucy Akello, you are the Member of Parliament for Amuru District. I welcome you to this Parliament to join your colleagues who have been here for a few years now. Let me inform you that this is the highest legal and political forum where matters of this country are discussed. 

Issues coming from Amuru may constitute very little percentage of what happens here because we consider the whole country and how this country relates to the whole world. So, you have joined the community of people of this country elected, just like you have been elected, to come and represent this country’s views, visions, laws, policies and budget for the benefit of the people. You are very welcome! (Applause)

May I take this opportunity to welcome Dr Olara Otunnu, the President General of the Uganda People’s Congress, who is also in the Distinguished Members’ Gallery.

So, please, you can choose which side you would like to sit on -(Laughter)- you will be escorted.

Now these are two documents: this first one is the Constitution, which you have just sworn to uphold, protect and defend by word of this House. No other means is allowed in this place. This is also the Rules for Procedure, by which you process your views, ideas, motions and your questions about the people of Amuru. You will be using this to guide you on how to do it. This also helps you to put your ideas across. So, look at them and internalize them, they will help you. Proceed, you are very welcome. The ipad will be from the Clerk – (Laughter)

2.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can see I am very excited; I would like to welcome hon. Lucy Akello to this august House. We are very happy that you are here.

Over the last three years, we have managed to snatch eight seats from our colleagues this side and they have not snatched any from us. That means that we are growing and they are dying off softly. 

We have, through inter-party cooperation, won four seats and Amuru was the last one. Before that was Luweero and we would like to tell our friends that we are going to Busia and Bugiri and we are going to win those seats as well. (Applause)

DEPTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order in the gallery? 

MR OGUTTU: Actually, from the results if you analysed them, if we had cooperated during elections, we could have in a straightforward way won 10 more seats across the country and we hope we are going to cooperate in 2016. 

We would like to thank our party leaders who have worked together. So far our number in Parliament now is 64 but because the time to the end of this 9th Parliament is short, we may not increase on that but most likely, we are going to win the LCV seats of Busia and Bugiri and that will be another bonus for us.

Winning a by-election, Mr Speaker, is not that there is no rigging. Actually, there is always rigging. What we do during a by-election is deploy many of us and reduce on ballot stuffing, which is done during the general elections when everybody is on their own. But when all of us go at once, we reduce on ballot stuffing and theft of declaration forms. That is how we win by-elections. In essence, it means that we win more seats during the general elections but we cannot protect the vote. That is the simple logic for our winning.

I would like to inform you, hon. Lucy Akello, that your by-election was an issue-based by-election. We know what the peasants of Amuru told us; land was principal to them. So, you know what they have sent you here to do. Your cloth is already cut. We shall support you in arguing the case of the people of Amuru and we hope you will win. You are going to be here for just one and a half years but the work you will do here is what will ensure that you come back in 2016. That is if you do not lose sight of issues that were raised in Amuru during the campaigns.

Finally, I would like to thank our party leaders, some of who are here, for the cooperation they have shown in working together and calling for dialogue. We would like to appeal to our colleagues across to take the path of dialogue very seriously and to respect leaders.

We have been pained of recent by the way the security agents are humiliating some senior leaders of this country. Recently, it was the former prime minister. He owns a radio station and had gone to attend a function of radio owners but was humiliated and harassed at a function, which was duly held and had been invited as one of the participants.

We would like to appeal to you people in government; please the world will not end with you. Uganda will not end with you. One day - and I am very sure that in 2016 you are going to be on this side and we shall be on that side –(Applause)- and we do not want to do what you are doing to us. And even now amongst yourselves, what you are doing is not correct. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker and once again, Lucy, you are most welcome and feel at home.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the Leader of Government Business? Please proceed.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank very much, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate our colleague, hon. Lucy Akello, on behalf of the NRM party and on my own behalf, as a woman member of Parliament. I welcome you to the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association. This is an association of women members of Parliament, all of us together. It is non-partisan per say. We are politicians but when it comes to fighting for the rights of women, we speak with one voice without bringing our parties into the fight for the women’s rights. So, I congratulate you.

I want to congratulate the Opposition, the inter-party and all who garnered support; all of them who realised that they have to work in a unified and coordinated manner to deliver a candidate in a constituency and that when they do that, the same Electoral Commission that has been declaring the rest has declared you as a winner, and we are congratulating you! 

People have always been complaining about the Electoral Commission that it cannot perform their role diligently. This time as we celebrate your victory, we are also recognising the fact that this Electoral Commission of Uganda delivers and will continue to deliver for as long as the party is organised, like you organised yourself. 

In Luweero, the NRM did not organise themselves. You had three candidates against one. How can you win? Here you were one from the Opposition and all of you spoke with one voice. You moved in a coordinated manner and we congratulate you. I would like to inform the House – (Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Nankabirwa has just stated here that in Luweero we lost because we presented three candidates and this is going on the Hansard. Mr Speaker, in Luweero, it is the Opposition that fielded one candidate, hon. Nabukenya, and she is here with us. Is hon. Nankabirwa therefore in order to continue emphasising that we lost in Luweero because we fielded three candidates and also to continue stating that what happened in Amuru was a free and fair election when she knows that RDCs, one of them Komoi Emmanuel, a civil servant supposed to serve all Ugandans, participated in these election and campaigned for the NRM candidate? Is she in order to continue stating that this was an easy election when it was rigged and we only won because we were so vigilant, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear the member saying that the Opposition lost in Luweero. I might have misheard but I did not hear it. If she said that then it was not proper. But I do not remember her saying that. Please wind up.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition said that this time they made sure that they won because they reduced on the ballot paper stuffing and the theft of declaration forms. Mr Speaker, if I may share with you; you could be having your support on the ground but if you choose wrong agents to guard your ballot box and if you choose people who can be misled, you end up losing. But that does not mean that it is the Electoral Commission. My point was on the Electoral Commission which people have been accusing that it cannot deliver a free and fair election.

So, I congratulate you. And the point of we crossing the other side and you crossing this side should not worry anybody because we are building a state based on organs. For as long as the organ of the state called Parliament is there, whether we have half of the members on the Opposition and we deliver for the country, it does not matter. So with this rate of movement where you have mentioned 64 members of Parliament out of 370 in the House, I wish you all the best. Maybe by 2050 you would have the vice-versa, God-willing but all this is okay for the NRM because we want to emphasise the principle of democracy where people are free to choose their MPs.

So, I congratulate you wholeheartedly my dear sister and I pledge total support from me and the other senior colleagues who are here so that you serve this country diligently. Welcome.	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow Wednesday, 10 December 2014, Parliament will host the finals of the 2014 National Schools Debating Championship in the Conference Hall.

Secondary schools from all over Uganda have been participating in this event and the winner will be determined tomorrow. The students will also challenge the best members of Parliament to a face-off tomorrow starting at 10.00a.m. on the topic: “Has Parliament done enough to support the youth?” That is the topic for debate tomorrow.
Parliament is here to defeat these students because for the last three years I have been participating, and these students have been giving us a bloody nose as members of Parliament.

The following schools are participating in the finals: Maryhill High School Mbarara, Mbarara High School Mbarara, St Maria Goretti Bushenyi, Christ School Bundibugyo, St Leo’s College Kyegobe Kabarole, Nyakasura School Kabalore, Ntare school Mbarara, Gayaza High School Wakiso, Namilyango College Mukono, Mengo Senior School Kampala, Kings College Buddo Wakiso, Bishop Cyprian Kihangire Day, Bishop Cyprian Kihangire Boarding, St Mary’s College Kisubi, Trinity college Nabbingo, Muyenga High School, Seroma Christian High School, Kyambogo College School, PMM Girls’ School, Jinja College, Jinja Senior Secondary School, Holy Cross Lake View, Wanyange Girls, Tororo Girls, Rock High, Gulu Central, Pope John Paul II Gulu, Arua Public, St Mary Assumpta Girls School, Idiofe Girls in Arua.

Please come and show your support to these young debaters and honourable members. I will be leading the team of members of Parliament to carry out this debate from 11.00 O’clock. I need your support so that this time we defeat the students. And many of you who have not heard the Speaker debate, that might be your opportunity to hear him debate tomorrow. So, welcome at 10.00 O’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARRESTS OF 
REFUGEES ON THE KYANGWALO-BUKINGA LAND
2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am sorry to mention that the minister is not yet in the House and I cannot tell his whereabouts.

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised an issue of national importance regarding over 5,000 people who have been settled around Kyangwalo Sub County not because they wanted to do so but as a result of a long process which began in 2013 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, this matter is on the Order Paper and the minister is not here. I am going to send a message; that is how I do it but there are other items on the Order Paper that we can handle meanwhile.

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, are you assuring me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not assuring you. I am saying I am going to communicate and let the minister come here and give the statement. The time we have, we can do other business; that is not the only business on the Order Paper.

MR BIGIRWA: I concede, Mr Speaker.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 27/1/09 TO THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

2.40
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Mr Speaker, question 27/1/09.

“(i) Would the minister explain to the House the regulations that guide fisheries enforcement officers while on duty?
(ii)How can these officers be identified to minimize cases of impersonation?
(iii)What measures has government put in place to ensure the safety of fisheries enforcement officers while on duty?”

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I circulated soft copies of this response and I put a background, which I am not going to read just for the information of the members, on the vision and other efforts which we are doing to make sure that the declining fish stocks are helped. And you will allow me to go straight to page 3 but I put that information for my colleagues to note.

Honourable members, hon. Kiwalabye Majegere wanted me to explain to this House the regulations that guide fisheries enforcement officers while on duty. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries adopted principle of co-management approach in the management of fisheries resources and under this principle other stakeholders were brought on board to work with government in the management of the fisheries resources.

The Fish Act Cap. 197 of the Laws of Uganda, section 35 confers powers on the minister responsible for fisheries to make rules and regulations for the better implementation of the Fish Act and under Section 35 of the Act, the Fishing Rules, 2010 contained in Statutory Instrument No. 33 of 2010 that were made. The Statutory Instrument No. 33 of 2010, Part V under the General Section, Rule 25 provides for authorised officers and   Rule 26 provides for the powers of an authorised officer and I attached a copy of the Fish Act and the Statutory Instrument.

In addition to the Statutory Instrument, the Directorate of Fisheries Resources has produced Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) to guide the activities of all those involved in law enforcement. I also attached the Standard Operating Procedures.

Question (ii) was, “How can these officers be identified to minimise cases of impersonation?” Mr Speaker, Rule 31 of Statutory Instrument No. 33 provides for identification of authorised officers and the Ministry of Agriculture has started issuing new authority cards for ease of identification of authorised officers and this exercise is on-going.

Part (iii) of the question was, “What measures has government put in place to ensure the safety of fisheries enforcement officers while on duty?” authorised officers known by fisheries are issued with these authority cards and the Standard Operating Procedures on enforcement and they are trained before deployment. 

In the field, operational equipment like life jackets, torches, radio calls etcetera are provided although they are not yet adequate. 

The officers are not supposed to go to the field without security officers from police. Otherwise, they can be attacked. 

Lastly, the fisheries is aware that the field is filled with imposters and this is a challenge across ministries. Quack doctors, impersonators, it is across and we are facing that challenge and through involvement of district security committees, we work together to make sure that whenever we come across imposters, we deal with them. 

There was another question also directed to me; this is question 34/1/09 -	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, honourable minister, can you sit and we see if there is a supplementary question from hon. Majegere? 

2.45
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have had many engagements with the fishing community and other stakeholders in that sector through workshops, where the minister has always been invited as a guest Speaker. In the recent ones, we raised a serious concern and I wonder whether the minister wants to react to that observation for the benefit of the wider society. Namely, that instead of deploying the enforcement officers on the waters, it would be safer to have them deployed in the market areas, landing sites and border points where at the end of the day this illegally scooped fish finds its way. Would you want to react to that observation?

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, illegalities in fishing take place in various areas. On the waters, for example, our fishing rules require for fish to land on landing sites but people normally do not bring the fish to landing sites. They transact businesses in the waters; so, you have to go in the waters to make sure that you enforce; you have to be in the markets because some immature fish finds its way in the market without even moving through the main road. Even on the roads.

So, I have been explaining to my colleagues and every stakeholder that enforcement has to be done where illegalities are taking place. We have to be in the waters to help those in the waters; we have to be in the markets - like the Mukono-Kiko Market; we have to be at the borders because some fish goes to the border markets and I call upon my colleague, Sulaiman, to really help me on that. We cannot specifically do enforcement in only one known place - a market; otherwise, illegalities on the waters will continue and fish will continue getting depleted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, next item.

QUESTION 34/1/09 
TO MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

2.47 
MR CHRISTOPHER ACIRE (FDC, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, question 34/1/09. 

“(i) Why did the construction of the Laliya Fish Dam that commenced five years ago stall?
(ii)What efforts are being made to bring this project to successful completion?”

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the work for this fish dam in Gulu District was under two different contracts: The first contract was for civil works and the second one was for fixing the hatchery equipment. The civil works were completed. I visited the site myself but the contractor for the hatchery equipment could not complete this activity because there was no power and water on site to test the equipment. That was the reason. 

The second question was, “What efforts are being made to bring this project to successful completion? The contract to reconnect power and test the hatchery equipment has been awarded to Kol Services Ltd. It was awarded at the end of this month and the contractor is mobilising to begin work on site. I hope he will expeditiously do the work. 

And the assessment of the remedial work - because when the project takes place for completion, there are other problems that come in which need rectification. So, the assessment for the remedial work to address the destroyed structures have been made and bills of quantities have been developed. The bid document to the prospective contractor to undertake the work is already issued and the bids expected to be submitted by 23rd of this month. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, any supplementary question from hon. Acire who raised the first question? There are no supplementary questions from the member who raised this question? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RATIFY THE PROTOCOL FOR 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN MONETARY UNION (EAMU)

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I move that a resolution to ratify the Protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union be adopted by this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Defence, the Minister for East African Affairs and the Minister of State for Education. Yes, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, we shall recall that the Customs Union and the Common Market Protocols were adopted in 2005 and 2010 respectively. The Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union (EAMU) represents the next stage of the East African Community integration. Therefore, a multi-discipline team of senior governments and central bank experts from all the partner states, i.e. a high level taskforce was formed in 2011 to negotiate and prepare a self-executing EAMU protocol in line with the principle set out in chapter 14, Articles 82-88 of the East African Community Treaty. These Articles provide for the cooperation in monetary and financial matters. 

After a series of extensive negotiations supported by a number of background studies, the high level taskforce produced the EAMU protocol. This was adopted by the Council of the East African Community on 16 July 2013 and approved and signed by the East African Heads of State on 30 November, 2013. His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, signed on behalf of Uganda. 

Justification
Mr Speaker, Article 30 of the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol provides that the protocol shall enter into force upon ratification and deposit of instrument of ratification with the Secretary-General by all the partner states. This is in accordance with Chapter 29, Article 151 (111) of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community. 

The East African Community Heads of State agreed that all partner states should conclude the ratification process of the EAMU protocol by July 2014. Closer economic and monetary coordination will help the East African single market to develop and flourish further and strengthen partner states for cooperation. 
Exchange rate risks and transaction costs will be eliminated making business in East Africa more cost effective and less risky. 

Price comparability and transparency will boost coast cross border trade and investment; and the size of the East African Community single market combined with a single currency will make East Africa an attractive region for foreign direct investment. 

To realise these benefits and proceed with implementation of EAMU, it must be resolved that Parliament ratifies EAMU protocol attached to this brief to aid this process - (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Last week, the Speaker ruled that the Government side comes with a statement about the status of the East African Legislative Assembly after a coup was carried out against the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. Is it procedurally right for the minister to proceed with the motion when actually we have problems in the East African Community Assembly? Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter that is before the House is on the Order Paper and the minister is moving properly on the Order Paper. Proceed.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To realise these benefits and proceed with the implementation of EAMU, it must be resolved that Parliament ratifies the EAMU protocol which is on your iPads. To aid this process, the reminder of this brief therefore provides details of the key policy, legal and institutional implications of the EAMU and the requested actions for Parliament to undertake. 

The EAMU Protocol sets out the legal, institutional and economic framework that is needed before the introduction of a common currency and lays down a roadmap for the introduction and full operation of EAMU by 2024.

Further, the protocol is in line with the principle set out in Chapter 14 Article 82/88 of the East African Treaty which provides for the cooperation in monetary and financial matters.

It is important to note that being a partner state in the EAMU will imply losing flexibility in how to manage our economy as direct control of exchange rates and monetary policy will lie in the hands of the East African Central Bank and not in the Bank of Uganda. 

According to Section 2 (b) part (iii) of the ratification of Treaties Act CAP 204, the implementation of the protocol will require amendment of the Uganda Constitution especially Article 162, part (i) which gives the Central Bank power to promote and maintain the stability of the value of the currency of Uganda and regulate the currency system in interest of economic progress of the country. In addition, this loss of money sovereignty will require a high level of coordination between partner states to ensure the effective management of our economies.

To ensure a smooth functioning Monetary Union, the East African Community countries shall attain a high degree of monetary and economic convergence and conformability leading to synchronised economic cycles and comparable inflation rates across the region.

Therefore, to achieve macroeconomic convergence, the EAMU Protocol provides for performance convergence criteria which will have to be attained and maintained from 2021 on words. These include a ceiling on headline inflation of eight percent, a ceiling on fiscal deficit including grants of three percent of GDP, a ceiling on gross public debt of 50 percent of GDP in net present value terms and reserve cover of 4.5 months of imports. 

The single currency shall be adopted if at least three partner states meet the performance convergence criteria for at least three consecutive years. The EAMU Protocol requires each partner state to develop a medium term convergence programme; Uganda is currently well positioned to meet the agreed criteria by 2021.

Furthermore, the EAMU Protocol provides for a set of non-binding indicative convergence criteria for monitoring purposes only. These serve the purpose of an early warning signal to address any imbalances that could lead to the breach of the agreed performance convergence criteria.

Mr Speaker, appropriate institution structures will be established to support the monetary union. The institution responsible for the implementation of EAMU includes the East African Monetary Institute, the East African Central Bank, an institution responsible for financial services, an institution responsible for surveillance, compliance and enforcement, and an institutional responsible for statistics.

Mr Speaker, the formal adoption of the protocol at the East African Community Heads of State Summit in November 2013, was a significant step in the establishment of the EAMU and towed further integration in the region. Cabinet has now approved the EAMU Protocol to continue with the implementation of the agreed roadmap.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested Cabinet to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to ratify the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol. Mr Speaker, I, therefore, would request and pray this House to approve the motion for the resolution of Parliament to ratify the EAMU Protocol to pave way for the said amendment of the Constitution. 

Two, take note of the key policy, legal and institution implications of the EAMU and the need to amend the Constitution in the future to allow the East African Central Bank powers to formulate monetary policy for the region to be implemented by the national central bank. 
I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that last bit of the motion that you read is not part of the bit that was submitted in the Speaker’s Office.
  
MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, we did submit this -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the last bit of what you are reading on the request to Parliament about amending the Constitution is not part of this.

MR KASAIJA: Just give me chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, because I need to process it properly.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, my senior minister on 3 September 2014 wrote to your office, “Notice of intention to move a motion for a resolution under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In accordance with Rule No. 47 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament, I hereby give notice that I intend to move the attached motion for a resolution of Parliament to ratify the Protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union.” That includes what I have just been presenting to this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not disputing what you have said. All I am saying is that the motion that you have read, the prayer that you have made to the House is not contained in the motion that was sent to Parliament. I have the letters here. The prayers that form this motion which you sent to Parliament are: that, “In accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution and section 2(b)(ii) of the Ratification Treaties Act -
1)Parliament ratifies the Protocol for Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union.
2)The minister responsible for foreign affairs signs and deposits the instrument of ratification with the Secretary-General of the East African Community.”

Now you are talking about constitutional amendment and all those other things which are not in this motion. Are you enlarging the ambit of our debate to involve constitutional amendments? That is why I am a bit concerned about the last bit of your prayer. 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your concern. I beg the House that I amend what came to you if this was not brought to your attention earlier on so that we can pass this resolution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. Please, we want to understand the ambit of the discussion so that we can process it properly. Meanwhile as we do consultation, can I have the seconder of the motion speak while I process some of the documents that are on Table? Honourable members, let us get the documentation properly then we move. I know, let us move. I am in charge of this House; let us handle it.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bagaine): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for this House to ratify the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the prayers that have now been put in the prayers were part of the recitals of the motion. It is contained in the motion but as a recital and whereas the honourable Attorney-General has certified that implementation of the year, more protocols in Uganda will  require amendment of the Constitution to allow the East African Central Bank to formulate monetary policies within the East African Community. 

It is part of the recital - recognition of a fact but it is not part of the prayer in this motion. So, please address it accordingly. The prayer to the motion that was submitted to which notice was granted to you is what I have just read.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I apologise. I should have read out the motion in full but when you directed that I justify, I went straight to the justification. Would you allow me now at this stage, if procedurally we are correct, that I read out the entire motion and all the phrases and then I come to the prayers with your permission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, even if you did that, a recital is not a prayer. Even if you read what I have just read, I have read it; it is here in the recital. It is not what you are asking the House to do. You are simply stating a fact to the House in the recital, recognition of the fact. But the motion you are moving the House to adopt is what I have also read in the last bit of the prayer: “Parliament ratifies the Protocol for Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union.
The minister responsible for foreign affairs signs and deposits the instrument of ratification with the Secretary-General of the East African Community.”
 
That is the motion that is before the House; that is a ratification motion. Whatever comes as a result of the ratification is not part of this motion but you have recognised the fact here. So, do not put it in your prayers.

MR KASAIJA: Obliged, Mr Speaker. Can I therefore amend and repeat some of my prayers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please state your prayer to the House so that so we can move forward.

MR KASAIJA: Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 2(b)(ii) of the Ratification of Treaties Act, Parliament resolved as follows:
1) Parliament ratifies the Protocol for Establishment of the East African Community monetary Union.
2) The minister responsible for foreign affairs signs and deposits the instrument of ratification with the Secretary-General of the East African Community.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the content then we debate the motion. The motion is not seconded and I have not proposed the question. Honourable minister, please second the motion.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to ratify the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol stated here by the Minister of Finance.

Mr Speaker, the Monetary Union Protocol was signed on 30 November 2013 by the five heads of state in Kampala. There was a timeline attached to the ratification of the protocol which was by July this year. Due to circumstances beyond our control, the protocol could not be ratified by that timeline.

We, however, know that the other four partner states have already ratified the protocol starting with the United Republic of Tanzania, which ratified the protocol in June, which was a record time. It was followed by the Republic of Rwanda, Burundi and this month, the Republic of Kenya.

Uganda, being at the helm of striking integration in East Africa, it is important that this honourable House ratifies this protocol and lends its support to the integration of East Africa. The ultimate aim of the Monetary Union Protocol is to achieve a single currency in East Africa. This currency will serve as further identification of East Africaness so that we no longer engage in exchanging currencies within the region. This will also assist our business people in cutting down on the cost of doing business. 

Mr Speaker, it is our prayer that this protocol is ratified so that we get on with the next stages of establishing the various institutions that had been mentioned here, that are required for the management of the monetary union.

Mr Speaker, I beg to support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion before the House, which I now propose for your debate, is for this House to ratify the Protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union and that in accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution and Section 2(b)(2) of the Ratification of Treaties Act, Parliament ratifies the protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union; and that the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs signs and deposits the instrument of ratification with the Secretary-General of the East African Community. 

That is the motion for your debate; I propose it for your debate and debate starts now. 

But let me guide that Article 123 of our Constitution provides for ratification of treaties. Article 122 deals with the issues of Treaties and Mandates of the President, etcetera. But it also gives Parliament the mandate to pass the Acts of Parliament. This Parliament passed an Act of Parliament called the Ratification of Treaties Act, which created a dual ratification regime. All treaties will be ratified by Cabinet, except treaties that have constitutional implications; those treaties that will require Uganda to amend its Constitution to conform would have to be ratified by Parliament. That is why this motion is here and not before Cabinet because as the minister has stated in the recital to the motion, it requires some changes in the Constitution and that can only be done by Parliament. That is why this motion is before this Parliament.

Debate starts now. How much time do we use for this debate? Ok, can we do three minutes each? Three minutes.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification of the Speaker? Why don’t you just debate and raise the question?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Ok, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether we are proceeding correctly; whether the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda is under any obligation to be directed by a minister of government to include the motion on the Order Paper.

Mr Speaker, this is a very important motion but when I look around the House, I see that we do not have quorum to proceed with the debate of this important motion. I keep wondering why the hurry because, why did Uganda lag behind so that other countries have already ratified the protocol. 

Now that the House is being ambushed that we must debate now and pass it, what is the hurry about it? And I thought Uganda was at the forefront of the East African Monetary Union and the East African Legislative Assembly. We have always played a forefront role. Now what happened this time that Uganda lagged behind? I want clarification on that, Mr Speaker, before I can proceed to debate the motion on the Floor. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the first part of the issue you raised, whether the minister can direct the Speaker, of course, the minister cannot direct the Speaker! The minister gave notice of motion on 8th December to the Speaker’s Office and that is how this matter came to the Order Paper. Notice of a motion is not a directive; it is a request, “Could you kindly, if possible and it is appropriate, put this matter before the House on the Order Paper.” That is what happened. So, it is not a direction. If it is a carelessly worded latter, it does not amount to a directive. The wording may not be in that sense but the purpose is, under the rule, you seek leave to be given time to present a motion and that authority was granted. 

So, let us not go into directives and things like that; you know who the boss is in the House of Parliament -(Laughter)- the issue is the matter is for debate. There is no “but” in this matter; the matter is for debate and it is formal and it is constitutional that we do it. It is our mandate to do it. If we cannot pass it, we will not pass it. If we can pass it, we will pass it.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But quorum is when you are voting not when you are debating. Please, we are debating this motion.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: So, can I proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes.

3.19
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much. I am glad you have clarified on the issue of language in the letter, which I thought was not really very important because matters to be put on the Order Paper go through the Commission. 

Anyway, Mr Speaker, everybody in the partner states agrees that we must have a monetary union and we did have it before and it is important. But when you look at what our friends have done, Uganda has also signed protocols governing the free and quick movements of goods through partner states through the Northern Corridor. 

But, Mr Speaker, when you look at what is happening in Uganda today, it is impossible to go through roads in Uganda. For example, if you are coming from the Eastern Route, on the Northern Corridor that leads to Rwanda, Burundi and Congo, it is impossible to move. From Mukono through Nateete right to the Northern Corridor - I keep wondering whether the Ministry of Works could not even think that if a by-pass road -(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, for giving way after my point of order. Is it in order for a whole honourable minister to say that it is impossible to move from Mukono to Kampala or from Kampala to Nateete, when people are moving there every day? Even as I speak now, people are moving! Is it in order to say that it is impossible?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister said that?

MR BYANDALA: Sorry, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, the shadow minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a question of fact. I have not gone along that road to establish whether it is a true statement or not. I am unable to rule on it.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister would have even waited to hear what I was going to say. The traffic jam between Mukono and Bweyogerere is too much. If the minister was interested in his work or if he knew what was going on, he should have worked on a bypass road from Mukono, through Christian University Mukono, Namanve to Namboole. 

The other alternative route -(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I very much respect my colleagues but we are talking about the East African Monetary Union. This pertains to matters of fiscal policy, our coordination on the monetary policy, exchange rate issues, the economy and others. It has nothing to do with roads – (Interjections) - no, we are talking about monetary union.

My feeling is, when listening to one colleague presenting - maybe this is where he has started from. I am not sure that we are really fully briefed on the content of the protocol that we are about to discuss. We have not fully internalised it. 

Mr Speaker, in terms of procedure, why would we not be given, as a House, one week so that we come back to discuss it from a point of competence, other than talking about railways, roads, and traffic jam? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is now property of the House. It is up to the House to take a decision on how they want to process it. The honourable member is debating competently in my opinion- (Laughter) - except that the rule of relevance also catches up. (Laughter) So, if you are talking about roads, we have to find a way of curving it in to make it relevant to the debate. Please, proceed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the relevance of roads is trade between bordering states. We cannot carry our goods and take them to Rwanda when the roads are impassable. This is what I was saying. You can never carry out trade when there is no infrastructure. The roads must be worked on so that goods can be taken across -(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: The motion is to ratify and by ratification, we are domesticating. We are endorsing what has been debated for quite a number of months if not years.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Where?

MS NANKABIRWA: In East Africa and we are talking about the East African Monetary Union. 

Anyway, the clarification is: if you do not ratify because of the problem of traffic, how will that help solve that problem? I thought by ratifying, you will have an avenue to make sure Uganda rectifies what is going wrong by domesticating what was passed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By bringing this motion on the Floor of Parliament -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude in one minute.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I was saying is that by bringing this motion on the Floor of Parliament, you need support. You need the House to help Uganda ratify it. So, it is important that the motion is brought on the Floor of Parliament for us to debate it before it is ratified. That is what goes on in Parliament.
 
Therefore, we must look at the conditions, which are favourable to our partner states. We must follow the treaty that creates the East African Legislative Assembly to the extent that we carry out what we are supposed to do. Otherwise, if we are going to cover some of these things and you want us to ratify, then we are going the wrong away.

Therefore, some of us are not going to support this motion. We must accept and carry out the standards that are required by the partner states - free movements of goods through partner states to look for market must be carried out. That is what I was raising, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us take procedure here.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can see in this report, which has been presented by the minister only five members of the committee have signed this motion and the list of the members is not even attached. That shows that even members of that committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR TAYEBWA: That means those members could not even agree with what you are now forcing us to discuss. So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating when at the same time we are asking you to let us first understand this motion? Besides, we have no quorum in the House to debate this motion correctly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please this is a motion. It is not a report of a committee. The motion has been moved, seconded and a question has been proposed. Debate has started.

3.28 
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much – (Interruptions)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. We are handling another matter on the defence and security pact but Parliament found it fit within its wisdom to refer it to a committee to have a debate on it. I am not reporting on that, but the issue is really handled exhaustively because at committee level, you can competently look at the underlying factors and these that border on constitutional matters.
 
It is expecting too much of members of Parliament to bring this matter that borders on constitutionality and expect an informed debate at this level. I would humbly beg that this matter be referred to a relevant committee for processing and reporting back to the House. The committee can have a day to look at the issues before making a report to Parliament. The committee is a small group of people who will clearly look at these issues and make recommendations. Otherwise, we are going to have a virtually an uninformed debate. I beg to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will take this procedure and then handle both.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion before us was posted onto our website two hours ago. What we are discussing touches the lives of Ugandans and those in the East African Community as a region. 

So, it would be in the interest of all of us to refer it, even if not to a committee, but at least for some days, maybe to Thursday for us to internalise this particular matter before we commit ourselves. I would be happy if I left this Chamber and somebody asked me of what value this Monetary Union is and I am able to explain the content in details. What this means is that if I begin to deliberate now, I will be cheating myself and the Ugandans to whom I am answerable.
Mr Speaker, I, therefore, beg to move that we defer consideration of this motion to Thursday of this week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Further procedure but bear in mind that the motion has already been moved - a proposal has been put before the House.
 
MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, the Minister of Defence, the hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, brought another motion here about the Peace Pact – okay today we are looking at the Monetary Union.

When you look at the content especially to do with the membership of the East African Community - if I can refer you to page 11 of this motion about the preamble, which read thus: “Whereas the Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Rwanda, the Republic of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania herein after refer to as the community and its continuity….” The procedural matter that I am raising, Mr Speaker, and why I concur with my colleagues to defer this debate, is to the effect that the motion, which the hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga presented last week did not include Tanzania. It actually excluded other member states of the East African Community. 

But here we are seeing the motion that hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga presented from Government - this very motion is also from Government. The issue is: do we have treaties? Do we have ratifications that actually should include and exclude other states within the East African Community? 

It would be pertinent, Mr Speaker, that then such a scenario would bring no clarity. It would also be important, therefore, that this matter, in my view, is first handled by a committee for us to get to know some of the deficiencies that are in it. 

I wondered last week when the hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga presented his motion; the motion excluded other East African Community member states and yet it was a Peace Pact and here we are talking about the Monetary Union, which might have similar issues.

So, Mr Speaker, I think for us to really harmonise these issues it is very important that we refer this matter to a committee. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable members, let me guide on these issues that have been raised. They raised procedural issues and I do not rule on procedural issues; I only guide.

What we are debating, we have no capacity to amend. We cannot amend a treaty but you can reject. The way the procedural issues are being raised is as if we have the authority to review some provisions of the treaty and amend. It is as if we are suggesting that because a motion does not mention a member state so it has a problem.

No, a treaty is a treaty already signed by those people who sat and negotiated it. It is finished. This is a process of ratification of that treaty, which is by law required of us to do. That is what we are trying to do here. So, if it is the wish of the House that they want to take it to committee or they want to defer debate then we come back on Thursday and debate it, and that is okay. 

But, we should know that when we go we should not start saying that this part of the treaty is bad. We should amend this or that, no we cannot do that. Why it is here is because it is already negotiated and signed by our own President and by our own people it is finished. It is only now giving it the backing of Parliament to support it as required by the procedure. That is all. 

So, it is just a procedural matter into which we are engaging a ratification process. It is different from domestication; there is a big difference. For example, if you had the wrong statute pushed into a treaty that would be a different matter.

However, the process of ratification here was not that they brought the wrong statute in this House and we adopted it. No, we have to do another law of our own in order to import the provisions of the wrong statute and some of our own modifications relating to our own circumstances so that it can now become a Ugandan law though domesticating the wrong statute. That is the difference. 

We are not domesticating the treaty. We are ratifying the treaty. We are giving it the procedural point to conclude that process. That is all we are trying to do here. Therefore, if it in the interest of the House that we defer debate to Thursday, then we will have it on Thursday.

3.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your able guidance. From what you have said, we have nothing to do about the EAC protocols but what we are saying is that we are not satisfied with the whole arrangement. We will need a review. 

When the EAC was revived, it was said that it would be a people-centred community. It would be different from the one which was for presidents though the first one ironically was much better in service delivery than the present one.

Many Ugandans do not understand - almost 20 years later this East African Community made the border people of Busia and Bugiri to understand these issues. Even some of the MPs do not understand this community enough to go and sell this community to their people.

So, we are saying that maybe it is time for us to begin reviewing the community before we move forward. Other countries –I have been reading the papers and so I do not know if it is true or not - that they are reviewing it on the basis of the issues to do with the federation. The fast tracking was pushed by Uganda and it flopped because the others did not want it to be pushed so fast. 

So, when we have issues, our Government should listen so that we move with our people behind us looking at us and not when we are so far away ahead but with the people behind. Those are the issues we are raising, Mr Speaker. It is all about the fact that we want to move to the community when we understand the benefits. 

Just a month ago, a leader of one of the countries in the East African Community was threatening another country that they would cut off the other country’s goods but with the threatened country also saying they would retaliate. But they had a mechanism of discussion to resolve those issues. Why did that president have to issue a threat on trade fights? 

So, we want to ask the government, through you, Mr Speaker, that we move slowly on this. If we send this to the committee where we can go and give our views on what we think about the community and how it should be done, that will be so good. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we can have a full week or even a month to debate issues to do with the East African Community but that is not the debate we are having now. The matter before us is about the Monitory Union Protocol. But if you want a separate debate on the status and progress of the integration, that is another matter. 

We can challenge our committee on the East African Community Affairs to prepare a report, bring it to this House and have an engagement on that subject but we cannot smuggle it into this debate. 

This motion is specifically seeking - so please, let us separate these issues. The issues raised by the honourable Leader of the Opposition are legitimate and those are the concerns. But trying to house them under this debate would be completely an improper procedure, honourable members.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the basis of your guidance and being aware that Uganda appeared in the records as probably the only partner state lagging behind - a treaty is a treaty! The President of the Republic of Uganda has already signed it. So, taking it to the committee, I want to think, would be self-defeating. 

What is the role of the committee? It is supposed to scrutinize and propose changes where need be. But if there will be no changes and we are already saying in this House that we are behind schedule - ratification ordinarily means to ratify. You are not approving; you are not signing –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I need protection from my colleagues - because I am speaking not only as a Member of Parliament, but also as a successful student of international law -(Laughter)- who has studied treaties, conventions and agreements, among others. So, I know what I am talking about.

The issue that hon. Kivumbi raised, to take this matter to a committee sounded good. And when hon. Milton Muwuma got up, his issue was to go and update ourselves. I thought that was better in terms of understanding. I also expected the Minister of Finance and the Minister of East African Community Affairs to speak a little bit about the benefits of ratification. However, they did not. Apart from restricting themselves to the texts of the motion – the Minister of East Africa came and spoke very well but he did not comfort the House with the benefits of ratifying this Monetary Union Protocol. 

In my view, you had and have guided us so well. We all want Uganda to be at the same level with the other East African Community countries. This is going to lead to a constitutional change arrangement in this country. We have all been clamouring for this; that we should be at par in East Africa. I am looking at this as great opportunity for us to now give an endorsement to this very noble cause –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Oboth. You have stated in your preamble that by ratifying, we are not approving, we are not giving a formal sanction but you also said that you are a successful student of international law. I want you to inform us of what really is the effect of what we are doing. Yes we are ratifying this protocol, but what is the implication of that? Is it of no effect at all? Is it a mere activity in the passing? Kindly clarify on the effect of what we are doing.

MR OBOTH: Thank you. The effect of any ratification is to give effect of the past action. You are given effect to the signature of signatory to the treaty. And here by so ratifying, you are actually acknowledging that it has been brought to your attention and you now know it.

You may have the option when it comes to voting - because it will be my right to vote against or for - and I thought we would wait for that opportunity to either vote against the ratification or vote for it. 

The only issue here is that the minister would have spoken in details about the benefits. But we really have our hands tied as Parliament. So, I want to implore –(Interjections)- I want to conclude without – (Interjections)- what? The benefits? I really appreciate if you already have said them out. 

But, Mr Speaker, the dilemma here is that Members are confronting this for the very first time. That should be appreciated but we need to look at the treaty itself as a proposed protocol. Otherwise, ratification is for information, if you want me to sound very simplistic. Thank you, Mr Speaker

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happened to do Latin while I was in the seminary. So, I can inform the House that the word “ratification” comes from a Latin word “ratifitar,” which means to confirm or to validate. It is as simple as that. My question would be, are we under any obligation -legal, social, or political - to validate a treaty? It is either no or yes: why?

My understanding would be that because you have to make informed decisions- but what constitutes an informed decision? To me, an informed decision is constituted by sufficient information being availed to the decision maker. In that context, therefore, what sufficient information do we need? We need the benefits of a Monetary Union and the demerits associated with it.

We too need to borrow from communities that have undergone monetary union arrangements. For example, the reasons why the European Monetary Union is actually suffering a setback - and I think there are only two reasons: The first one is about the reasons for convergence and the second reason is about indebtedness of member states.

Now under convergence, they are looking at structural and institutional convergence. That is why the sector minister was fumbling with – almost beginning to recommend that we amend the Constitution in his prayer although I still wonder, why?

Structurally and institutionally, you are looking at the indigenous – let us look at one monetary unit, equivalent to Bank of Uganda. If we had a Bank of East Africa, structurally and institutionally, it must be so convergent with the way the other banks of the other member countries operate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what issue did you exactly rise, honourable member?

MR ANYWARACH: I am coming –(Laughter)- on another note ,the issue of convergence. We are also looking at the living standards. Are they the same in the member countries? Now in terms of indebtedness, the European Union is looking at other countries which are very indebted, but are member countries; can their debts become a sovereign debt?

Therefore, let us come to our situation here. If we can look at all the measures and the mitigations - to mitigate the hazardous effect of a monetary union before our very lovely minister convinces us. In the process of convincing us, we will be informed on how to make decisions. That is why Members are actually looking like they are not willing to debate, later alone to accept.

Therefore, my understanding would be that if to rectify means to validate, and if that validation means that we should have enough information, then that information can come right away from the committee to us. The other alternative is for us to be given more time to internalise, one, the dangers of the ratification, which we must discern in order to make informed decisions. And two, also to be informed generally on what the monetary union is all about in the perspective of East African community. Thank you.

3.51
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think there is merging consensus on both sides of the House to the effect that Members need more time but to just read the protocol but not necessarily it being referred to the committee because, like you guided correctly, the committee cannot add anything on the protocol, which was already approved by the member states of the EAC.

We are duty bound to consider the ratification and we may vote yes or no. But looking at the legal regime, which we operate in, which is dualist, Parliament has to consider the ratification. 

The other issue I wanted to raise is that at the beginning of this Parliament, we established the East African community Affairs Committee. My understanding is that this committee would help us make an input into what happens in EALA and the East African Community Affairs Secretariat including getting feedback from what happens there. So, is it possible may be in future, to look at our rules and if necessary amend them to ensure that whatever business goes to EALA or whatever is discussed by the East African Community organs has an input from members of Parliament. If that were so, then at the time this protocol was being formulated, we would have had an opportunity to make our own observations and input whatever concerns we have so that before the protocol is finalised, there is an input of Ugandans. 

I think in some Parliaments, like Parliament of Tanzania, they ably debate almost all issues that eventually go to EALA. But here, it is only the Executive, the President and Cabinet that discuss those issues. We only come in as pathologists to just do post-mortem. So, maybe we need to amend our rules and ensure that our committee regularly interfaces with our Members of Parliament in the East African Legislative Assembly so that whatever issues are being discussed can actually find their way into Parliament of Uganda. 

Otherwise, for now there is nothing much we can do to the protocol other than reading and understanding it to have an informed debate –(Interjections)– yes, you can pass or reject it but you cannot amend the protocol at this stage –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Dr Baryomunsi for giving way. Ratification means validation of intention -it is all about intention. What we have now is an intention of whosoever signed -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not intention, it is decision. You do not ratify an intention. You ratify a decision. This is a decision that we are ratifying; it is not an intention.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, for you guidance, Mr Speaker. But that decision, we have issues with it as people who represent the majority of Ugandans. So, we are saying that that decision will have to be subjected to scrutiny. We must know the benefits and the cost that it comes with and how it is going to help us and the people to move forward and improve on our welfare. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Leader of Opposition, for that information. But you see there are two regimes in international law. There is what we call legal monism and legal dualism. Now the regime, which operates in Uganda, is legal dualism, where international instruments have to be domesticated in one way or the other.

And this Parliament has passed the ratification of Treaties Act, which defines domestication process. There are treaties, which are domesticated through cabinet and the Executive. There those, which require a national legislation and you have seen Bills come in this Parliament to domesticate such international instruments.

Now the treaty we are handling - the format of ratification is that a protocol comes to this House but we cannot amend it. That is why I was saying that maybe in the future, we need to streamline our rules of procedure so that protocols and other instruments or even Bills, which are being handled in the East African Community can find their way at an earlier stage for this Parliament to make an input.

Otherwise, at the moment, we cannot amend this protocol given the legal regime which obtains. I hope you have benefited from my education. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are not prepared to debate this motion. I cannot say we are not ready but I am saying we are not prepared to debate it today. But we will be prepared to debate it on Thursday. So can we defer debate on this motion to Thursday after the minister’s presentation?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Mine is just information and the ruling will be yours. I just want to inform you that -(Interjections)- no, I am just giving information. Anyway, the protocol was passed on to the Clerk to Parliament and in my understanding it should be on our iPads. 

Therefore, my prayer is that you can read this just to understand it so that when we come back on Thursday, you will know precisely what is contained. I thought I should give that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we defer this debate to Thursday and we have a comprehensive engagement on it? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Aye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Debate on this matter is deferred; it will commence on Thursday afternoon at 2p.m.  

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR BY THE PARLIAMENTARY ADHOC COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARIZATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon we had members of Buyende District Development Association. They are represented by hon. Balyejusa Sulaiman Kirunda and hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo. They had come to observe the proceedings in the House but I think they have left. Anyway, we can still recognize them for the record. Thank you.

3.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, PARLIAMENTARY ADHOC COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to continue because this is not the first time I am presenting this report.

I would like to continue with the presentation of this report because at a certain point, as we were moving, there was a requirement or need to translate a certain document, which was written in Arabic. I remember hon. Patrick Amuriat is the one who raised that issue. This was a letter written by the DPP to the authorities of United Arab Emirates. 

In fact, the first letter was in English. It is the United Arab Emirates authorities that wanted that letter to be translated into Arabic because that is the language that they can accept officially to handle or deal with states. That is why we took itto the Centre for Languages and Communication at Makerere University. They looked at the document - that document is already uploaded on our iPads. That was the only issue that was raised about this report about seven or eight months ago so we could not proceed. But here we are today ready to continue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying you had already presented the report?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we did but as I said that issue was raised. We did not present the entire report because as we began to present, the translation issues were raised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you hadn’t presented the whole report?

MR WERIKHE: Not entirely, just about two or three-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So proceed with the presentation of the report.

MR WERIKHE: Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like to lay on Table a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of the investigations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR WERIKHE: I beg to lay a copy of the report of the ad hoc committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full report of the committee.

MR WERIKHE: I also beg to lay copies of the submissions to the committee by various witnesses that appeared before it. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: I beg to lay Constitutional Application No.53 of 2011, arising out of Constitutional Petition No.47 of 2011 between the Parliamentary Commission and Severino Twinobusingye and the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: I also beg to lay a CD containing all the recordings of the proceedings during the investigations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: I beg to lay a copy of the translation from Makerere University.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I invite colleagues to go straight to page 10 of the report. This report is on the iPads. It has been there for almost a year, I should say.

In consonance with rules 144 and 180 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Parliamentary Adhoc Committee in respect of the regularisation of the oil sector and other matters incidental thereto was constituted on 27 October2011 and embarked on its business on 1November 2011. 

However, it is worth to note that the progress of the committee was severely disrupted by inter alia, the intervention of the Constitutional Court between the 12 December 2011 and 1 March 2012. 

Composition of the committee

Honourable members, I would like to appreciate all the members who participated in handling this investigation. Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would like to read in appreciation, the names of members of this committee: They are:
Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara;
Hon. Kyanjo Hussein;
Hon. Bigirwa Julius Junjura;
Hon. Tashobya Stephen;
Hon. Grace Freedom and 
Hon. Matte Joseph. 

On page 11, we have the terms of reference – see paragraph 1.3.

The committee set out to:

    1) Investigate claims and allegations of bribery in the oil sector in Uganda including allegations laid against hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Kutesa Kahamba Sam and hon. Obaloker Hilary Onek who were specifically mentioned in the parliamentary resolution;
    2) To examine the process of procurement of the companies;
    3) To scrutinise all revenues so far received by the government from the oil industry;
    4) To investigate the basis of determination of recoverable costs;
    5) To examine the extent of Government adherence to earlier parliamentary resolutions in respect of the regularisation of the oil sector;
    6) To examine any other matters related to the above;
    7) To examine the arrangements that have been put in place to address the following; environmental factors and local content impact to local communities; and
    8) To report back to the House within three months.

Methodology

That will run through to page 14. 

Challenges

In the execution of its mandate, the committee faced some technical and logistical challenges namely:
    i) Disruption of the committee’s progress by the Constitutional Court. On 12 December 2011, the Constitutional Court halted the work of the committee as a result of Constitutional Petition No.47 of 2011.

It is worth to note that at the time of interruption of its business, the committee had made substantial progress. For example, it had met with a cross section of witnesses ranging from the petitioners, those implicated in the bribery allegations and several other relevant government entities. 

This interruption inevitably impeded the otherwise impressive progress of the committee. The Constitutional Court ruled on the petition on 21 February 2012, paving way for the resumption of the committee’s investigation. The committee resumed its investigations in March 2013.

    ii) The complexity of investigating alleged corruption: bribery being such a discreet vice; and further noting that one of the terms of reference of the committee was to inquire into allegations of bribery of high ranking officials of the Government of Uganda by some oil companies; considering that the alleged transactions are said to have occurred in multiple countries, there inevitably arose the need for sophisticated criminal investigative capability, which Parliament as a legislature did not possess. The committee therefore had to rely on other relevant specialised institutions, both locally and internationally. This inevitably prolonged the timeframe within which the committee had to report to the House. 

Limitations of parliamentary investigations overseas

The committee notes that Parliament on its own could not easily and expeditiously access other countries’ institutions without going through other organs of the Executive, namely: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Uganda’s Missions Abroad and the DPP, yet some of the office bearers in these institutions had been implicated in the bribery allegations. 

It is worth to note that at the onset of the allegations of the bribery in the House in October 2011, Members were informed that the DPP, in liaison with the Uganda Police Force, had instituted investigations into the veracity of these allegations in 2010. The committee therefore deemed it fit to include the investigating organs of the countries in which the acts of bribery had been alleged to have occurred, among its key informers. 

However, the committee was unable to meet with these informants because they advised the committee to rely on the information previously given to the Executive of the Government of Uganda. Therefore, the committee had to liaise with the DPP on specific matters on this investigation. 

Although the committee had initially tried to circumvent this process, its attempt hit a dead end as international diplomatic protocol required the established procedures to be followed as this was the only way to access information from the various countries. 

This exposed the committee to the effect of bureaucratic hitches, which affected its efficiency. As such, the committee failed to gain entry in some of the countries involved, namely: Malta and the United Arab Emirates, where the transactions were alleged to have originated. The committee, therefore, relied on third party information void of meeting the very institutions concerned with this.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we appreciate the Kenyan authorities. In Kenya, the committee went directly without even going through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We did not also go through our mission, much as we informed them. We went straight to the Registrar of Companies for assistance and we got information from them directly as a Committee of Parliament. Therefore, we appreciate Kenya’s response to our needs -(Interjections - that is why we said Parliament was not sophisticated in investigative capacities. 

Completing schedules
Without prejudice to the unwavering devotion of the members to executing the mandate of the committee, the adverse effect of other multiple activities of other Sectoral and Standing Committees that were taking place during the period of investigation could not allow us complete work on schedule.

Members occasionally found themselves torn between the activities of the Adhoc committee and other committees’ obligations. A case in point was the equally important consideration of the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012 and the Petroleum Refining Gas Processing, Conversion, Transportation and Storage Bill, 2012, both handled by the Natural Resources Committee. Bearing in mind that the Chairperson of the Adhoc Committee doubled as the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee at the time of considering those affirmation Bills. There had to be a delicate balance in schedules which came at a cost in terms of time. This inevitably impacted on the velocity of the committee.

Much as this happened, I think it was useful for the committee on natural resources which benefited a lot from the ongoing activities of this investigation. We used a lot of information from this investigation to inform the Bill as you will discover later in the report.

Financial constraints were also experienced and as you may be aware, one of our most vibrant committee members, hon. Hussein Kyanjo fell sick, which further constrained our work. I would like to acknowledge his contribution.

Findings and Observation

Terms of reference 

The first term of reference was about conducting investigations into allegations of bribery including allegations made against the hon.Sam Kutesa Kahamba, hon. Onek Hillary and hon. Amama Mbabazi who had been specifically mentioned in the resolution.

Allegations against hon. Sam Kutesa Kahamba

    i) Between June and July 2010, it is alleged that the hon. Sam Kutesa Kahamba, through his company, East African Development Limited, received various amounts of money from Tullow Oil. See Annex 13, which is attached.

Mr Speaker, this needs explanation. The alleged East African Development is the one that was supposed to have had an account in London. That is how the money was supposed to have moved from Malta to that account in London in the names of East African Development Limited. Because of time I need to put this right so that we get to understand this to help us debate from an informed position. The account through which the money was supposed to be transmitted was in the names of East African Development Limited. 

When you look at page 18 is just the catalogue of the various monies transmitted on those various days or dates up to page 19, you realise that the total is actually more than what was stated here and captured in the Hansard. This total comes to 23 million Euros.

    ii) Hon. Sam Kutesa is connected to a company called SLL, which evolved from Kasese Nail and Wood. This company controls construction of the camps in the Albertine graven for the licensees in the oil sector.

    iii) One of hon. Kutesa’s relatives is managing the Government fuel storage reserves in Jinja.

    iv) The next point came later on - and I remember it is hon. Hussein Kyanjo who raised this. He had a document about the employment of hon. Kutesa’s daughter by a company called Dominion. Of course this constituted influence peddling but you will get the details later as we go on. 

There were three allegations mentioned in the Hansard but the fourth one has been included in the report as a result of our investigations. 

Allegations against hon. Hilary Onek Obaloker 

It was alleged that during the month of June and July 2010, hon. Hilary Onek received various amounts of money on his bank account at the Emirates Bank Dubai in United Arab Emirates, from Tullow Oil, as indicated at the back of the letter in Malta, as broken down – see up to page 20 of the report. The total here is 6 million Euros.

It was alleged hon. Hilary Onek used his office to facilitate recruitment of three of his relatives into one of the oil companies.

It was also alleged that hon. Onek HilaryObaloker and hon. Amama Mbabazi personally benefited from the sale of production rights to ENI SPA, an Italian oil firm, by Heritage Oil and Gas Company. Those were allegations regarding bribery of the two and that is why we had to put them one following the other.

Allegations against Rt Hon. Mbabazi Amama

    i) It was alleged that the hon. Amama Mbabazi personally benefited from the sale of production rights to ENI SPA by Heritage Oil and Gas Limited.
    ii) Further, it alleged that the hon. Amama Mbabazi facilitated a meeting between NSPA and Tullow Uganda limited in August 2009 as NSPA’s patron in Uganda.

    iii) It was also alleged that NSPA created a shell company in London called TKL Holdings through frontmen, Mark Christiana and Moses Sseruje, to funnel money to hon. Mbabazi.

    iv) Mineral Services Limited, a company purportedly belonging to hon. Amama Mbabazi’s daughter, Ms Nina Mbabazi and her husband Matthew Rukikaire Junior had unduly secured contracts for service provision to some licensees in the oil and gas sector.

    v) Hon. Amama Mbabazi is closely linked to an individual called Kabuchu, who is allegedly a former ESO operative who worked with hon. Mbabazi while he was ESO boss. He is purportedly a representative of the business and other interests of hon. Amama Mbabazi in the oil and gas sector. 

    vi) He later worked for Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and is closely linked to the company called Mineral Services Limited.

    vii) It was also alleged that hon. Amama Mbabazi at one point sent 60 people to Libya to train in oil and gas related activities. 

Findings

In ascertaining the validity of the allegations of bribery, the committee met with and held in-depth deliberations with:

    1) The petitioners: Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Gerald Karuhanga.
    2) The persons against whom oil bribery allegations were made: Hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek, hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa and hon. Amama Mbabazi.
    3) Key witnesses as indicated in Annex A.
    4) The committee also travelled to the United Kingdom as earlier indicated.
    5) The also committee travelled to Nairobi, Kenya. 
    6) 6)In addition, the committee reviewed relevant documents relating to the allegations.

We also visited directly the departments within Uganda, namely the National Registration Bureau to ascertain the registration of some of the companies that were named here.

Initial investigations by the government of Uganda into allegations of bribery involving hon. Kutesa, hon. Onek and hon. Amama Mbabazi

As I mentioned, Mr Speaker and colleagues, there was this investigation earlier on undertaken by Government. We had to look at it but it does not mean, and I want put this straight, it does not mean that we had to go by what was done by Government unless there was a coincidence. We endeavoured to actually find out some of the information by ourselves -(Interjections)-no, but this was information available because some of the people came. Mr Speaker, it is because we were looking at all possible sources and some of the people we were going to interview had participated in these earlier investigations. So there was no way we could avoid it.

Mr Speaker, for example, the committee was informed by the Inspector General of Police and the DPP of Uganda that through the Commonwealth mutual assistance programme for investigating criminal offences across Commonwealth Member States and the United Nations Convention against transnational organised internal crime, an earlier investigation had been commissioned in 2010 by the Government of Uganda and requests for help sent out the United Kingdom Central Authority, the Commander in Chief of the Dubai Police and the Director General of Malta.

The committee established that this investigation took place. However, the United Arab Emirates leg of the investigation remained unaccomplished at the time of writing this report. The findings of these investigations are hereby attached as follows: As you look at the iPad, you will see a lot of annexures.

Findings of the initial investigation
The findings of the aforementioned investigation in the respective countries with regard to the earlier investigations that were carried out in 2010-2011 were as follows:

Findings in Malta 

In Malta, the Economic Crimes Unit through Inspector Maurice Curmi requested the Bank of Valleter PLC to furnish It with all the alleged transactions for verification. According to Inspector Maurice Curmi, a thorough and lengthy search conducted by the bank staff yielded negative results.

In the words of Inspector Maurice Curmi, “Therefore, it was concluded without any doubt that the companies and persons mentioned in the letter do not hold any accounts with Bank of Valletta and the transaction receipts submitted are forgeries as no such transfer of monies had ever taken place.” Annex 1. The Maltese Bank of Valletta stated that the alleged transactions did not take place.

Findings in the United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom where a request for mutual legal assistance had also been made by the Ugandan authorities through the then Deputy Director for Counter Terrorism in the Uganda Police Force, Mr John Ddungutse, it was ascertained that:

    i) There were two banks named EFG operating in the United Kingdom namely; EFG Private Bank Limited and EFG Eurobank Ergasius.
    ii) The UK Central Authority and Maltese Police, having compelled the compliance department of both banks, found that no such accounts as mentioned in the bribery allegations existed in either bank.
    iii) EFG Private Bank Limited stated that SWIFT code EFGBG2L on the third party payment forms is their swift code but the beneficiary account number or IBAN no.GB36EFGB17800000491740 is not their IBAN number and does not match any EFGPBL bank account.
    iv) EFG Private Bank Limited does not hold any account in the name of East Africa Development Limited, as I had indicated earlier.
    v) The amounts of money allegedly transferred to these banks would have triggered their anti-money laundering processes and the transactions would have been closely scrutinised before the said monies would be allowed to enter their banking systems.
    vi) Commercial banks in the UK are aware of their obligations under the UK money laundering regulations concerning politically exposed persons, which requires careful scrutiny of bank transactions linked to government officials.

The inconclusiveness of the United Arab Emirates leg of the investigations by Government 

It is noteworthy that whereas the 2010 investigations by the government garnered results in the UK and Malta as hitherto noted, this inquiry remains inconclusive to date due to unavailability of relevant information from the authorities of the United Arab Emirates regarding the existence of bank accounts in the names of Hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek at the Emirates Bank in Dubai.

The committee was informed that attempts remain underway to secure information from UAE to enable finalisation of this initial inquiry. As will be later discussed in this report, the committee too was unable to access information from the authorities in the United Arab Emirates.

Challenges in formally accessing documentation on the findings of the initial investigation of allegation of bribery in Uganda’s oil sector

(i) The committee was informed by the DPP that official documentation on the findings of this initial investigation into allegations of bribery in Uganda’s oil sector were with his office but this information could not be shared with the committee except with clearance from the relevant countries under whose jurisdiction this investigation was conducted. 

This delayed the committee’s actions. Eventually we got the information after having had the clearance from UK and Malta. Otherwise before that, we went to the DPP’s office and he showed us documents but we could not -but later on, they officially transmitted the documents to Parliament after having got the clearance from UK and Malta.

ii) Subsequently the committee initiated contact with the UK Central Authority, Malta and United Arab Emirates to ascertain the outcome of the earlier investigation. In addition, the need arose for the committee to physically interact with key informants who were involved in this inquiry, which prompted the committee to initiate the process of travelling to the United Kingdom, Malta, United Arab Emirates and Kenya.

However, British investigative agencies, for ethical reasons, do not interact with non-investigative foreign officials outside the UK. The committee had to travel to London to meet with the UK Central Authority. While in London, much as the committee had unsuccessfully sought audience in-camera with the UK Central Authority Officer, Ms Susan Barret, only a domestic telephone interface was possible.

The chairperson, on behalf of the committee, had a telephone discussion with Ms Susan Barret of the UK Central Authority and she assured the committee that she would furnish the committee with the relevant information on earlier investigations on this matter if at all there was any new evidence from the ones earlier submitted to the DPP of Uganda. 

In spite of subsequent inquiries by the committee from Ms Barret, there was no response forthcoming, signalling that possibly there was no new evidence received on this matter. 

iv) As for Malta, the committee initiated contact with the Director General of Malta and he authorised the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Republic of Uganda to share copies of their findings with the committee - (Annex 2). 

v) The DPP of Uganda, after clearance from the UK Central Authority and the Maltese authorities, responded to the committee’s inquiries by authorising the office of the DPP to release copies of their own findings into the allegations of bribery to the committee. Accordingly, the committee received the findings of these inquires - (Annex 3).

The allegation that hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa received money through a company called East African Development Limited allegedly incorporated in Kenya

Although it was alleged that hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa received money from Tullow Oil PLC through his company called East African Development Ltd, the committee physically visited and interfaced with the Registrar of Companies in Kenya to ascertain the existence and status of incorporation of this company. The committee established that the company; East African Development Ltd, has never been incorporated in Kenya and therefore does not exist - (Annex 4).

In addition, contrary to the allegations, the correspondences from Malta indicate that the alleged transactions did not ever originate from the Bank of Valletta in Malta (Annex 5).

The allegations that hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek received money through various transactions from the Bank of Valletta to his private account in the Emirates Bank, Dubai – UAE

As earlier noted in paragraph 2.5.2 (iii), the committee was unable to elicit information from the United Arab Emirates authorities on the alleged transactions involving hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek and his alleged account at the Emirates Bank in Dubai. 

On two occasions, the committee wrote through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as well as directly through e-mail communications with Uganda Embassy officials in the United Arab Emirates but there was no response from the authorities in the United Arab Emirates. To this end, the UAE authorities did not respond to the committee’s request for information.

The allegation that hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek facilitated the recruitment of some of his relatives by one of the licensees in the oil sector

The allegation of facilitation of the recruitment of three of Hon. Hilary Obaloker Onek’s relatives did not point at any specific company or companies that provided these job opportunities. In the absence of singling out specific companies, it was difficult to come up with facts to back up this allegation. Therefore, there was no proof to this allegation.

The allegation that hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa is connected to a company SLL, which evolved from Kasese Nail and Wood and controls construction of the camps in the Albertine Graben for the licensees in the oil sector

The committee, through the Registrar of Companies, conducted a search on the aforementioned company and there was no evidence of their existence. The committee was informed by the Registrar of Companies that no such company exists in the Registry of Companies in Uganda. The nearest name to the alleged company is Kasese Nail and Wood Industry Limited, which was incorporated on 29 October 1982. Its directors are listed as Mr Neri Emmanuel Nsubuga, Carol Nsubuga, Mark Nsubuga and Simon Nsubuga (Annex 6).

The allegation that one of hon. Kutesa’s relatives is managing the government fuel storage reserves in Jinja

Hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa, when invited, informed the committee that his son-in-law participated in a tender to manage the government fuel reserves at Jinja but lost out on the account of his relations with him and as such, neither owns nor manages the said fuel reserves.

The committee ascertained that the government fuel reserves in Jinja are being managed by Hared Petroleum (U) Ltd. According to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the procurement process for refurbishment, restocking and management of Jinja storage tanks commenced in response to the Cabinet directive under Minute 8 (CT 2009). 

Three companies responded to the bid namely; Shell (U) Ltd, Hared Petroleum (U) Ltd and Kenlloyd Logistics (U) Ltd. Hon. Kutesa’s brother-in-law, Mr Albert Muganga, is the Executive Chairman of Kenlloyd Logistics (U) Ltd, which in the view of the technical evaluation committee, did not qualify to win the tender to manage the Jinja storage tanks. 

The committee did not establish any relations between hon. Kutesa and Hared company, which is managing the Jinja storage tanks (Annex 7). (Interjections) Well, we further interviewed and found that a gentleman called Musa of Somali origin is the one who actually owns that company. 

Later on, as a Committee of Natural Resources together with hon. Wadri, we also visited Jinja and we benefitted from some of this information because I happened to be chairing the Natural Resources Committee. We visited Jinja storage tanks and we even met the directors and the gentleman called Musa and his brothers are the ones who manage those storage tanks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, how long do you intend to take?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I am going to run through the next phase. For this first phase of bribery, I wanted to go through so that we all understand -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me interrupt a little as there is a matter that involves members of the public. 

Honourable members, you will recall at the beginning of our sitting today that there was a statement that was expected from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in relation to Kyangwali-Rukiga land. Citizens are affected and we expected a statement from the minister. The Right honourable Leader of Government Business has notified me that none of these ministers is there; they are all abroad. Possibly these matters were raised when they were already out of the country. So there is no response expected from them today as they are not here. 

Tomorrow is Prime Minister’s question time and I expect this matter to be raised with the Prime Minister so that some preliminary answers can be given. Also as soon as these ministers come back, we expect a formal response. I am saying this because citizens are involved and they have been in this House from the beginning. I thought I should let them know also through this communication so that they can move and we see what happens tomorrow. You can proceed.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I will move a little bit faster because the next phase is actually general observations and recommendations.  

The allegation that hon. Kutesa’s daughter obtained a job with one of the licensees through influence peddling

Hon. Kutesa’s daughter, Elizabeth Mugumya, a trained lawyer and solicitor of the Supreme Court of England and Wales, appeared before the committee together with the directors of Dominion Uganda Ltd.

The committee established that it is indeed true that hon. Kutesa’s daughter, Elizabeth Mugumya was employed by Dominion Uganda Limited. During her appearance together with the directors of Dominion Uganda Limited before the committee, she informed the members that she was headhunted by Dominion Uganda Limited while she was in the United Kingdom.

The committee established that this job for which she was headhunted was not advertised and prior to the telephone call from Dominion Uganda Limited inviting her for the job offer, she was not aware of the existence of the job opportunity. This information was corroborated by the directors of Dominion Uganda Limited. The directors of Dominion Uganda Limited informed the committee that their offer of employment to hon. Kutesa’s daughter was premised on merit and upon her recruitment, she was posted to Uganda to represent the company’s business interests in East Africa. 

Based on evidence available to it on this matter, the committee found no evidence of influence peddling in the employment of Ms Mugumya Elizabeth by Dominion Uganda Limited.

The allegation that through his frontman Edward Kabuchu and Mineral Services Limited, hon. Amama Mbabazi pursued business in the oil sector

The committee established through the Registrar of Companies in Uganda that Mineral Services Limited is a private company jointly owned by three individuals: Godfrey Roberts, Patrick Kabareeba and Edward Kabuchu, each of whom owns 300 shares(Annex 8). 

The committee established that the land on which this parking yard, which was alleged to have hosted some equipment, was part of a bigger piece of land belonging to Matthew Rukikaire Sr whose son Matthew Rukikaire Jr is the husband of hon. Amama Mbabazi’s daughter called Nina Mbabazi. 

As to the veracity of Mr Kabucho being a frontman of hon. Amama Mbabazi, the evidence available to the committee did not indicate this.

The allegation that hon. Amama Mbabazi personally benefitted from the sale of production rights to ENI; I think I will go straight to (I)

The existence of ENI SPA as a company in Uganda. The committee established that ENI SPA as a company did not exist in the registry of companies in Uganda (Annex 9). 
    i. 
Evidence of the sale production rights to ENI SPA by Heritage and Gas Limited. The committee established that ENI SPA has never been licensed for oil and gas exploration or production in Uganda. The allegation that Heritage Oil and Gas divested its oil and gas exploration rights in Uganda to ENI SPA was found to be untrue. The committee did not get any evidence of the sale of production rights in Uganda by Heritage Oil and Gas Limited to ENI SPA. 

It was Tullow Uganda Limited that acquired Heritage Oil and Gas Limited’s interest in Uganda oil and gas sector in 2010 and on 21st February 2012,completed farm down of two thirds of its interest in the Albertine Graben to Total and CNOOC.
The alleged patronage of ENI SPA in Uganda by hon. Amama Mbabazi. The committee notes that a patron is a person who supports, protects or champions someone or something such as an institution, event or cause; a sponsor or a benefactor. That is a quotation from one of the dictionaries. 

The committee did not find any evidence that indicated that hon. Amama Mbabazi was indeed a patron of ENI SPA in Uganda. Besides, as noted in paragraph 2.6.7, ENI SPA has never been incorporated in Uganda.

The facilitation of meetings between ENI SPA and Tullow Uganda Limited by hon. Amama Mbabazi in 2009. Whereas it was alleged that hon. Amama Mbabazi facilitated a meeting between Tullow Uganda Limited and ENI SPA in 2009, the committee did not secure any evidence of any such meetings. This is bearing in mind that the ultimate evidence of a meeting is the minutes, audio or video recordings of such a meeting, in the absence of which proof is not possible.
    ii. 
That hon. Amama Mbabazi at one point sent 60 people to Libya to train in oil and gas related activities. The committee established that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has been handling all the training and capacity building in the oil and gas sector. The committee was informed by the Minister of Energy that so far, over 100 Ugandans have benefitted from various training in the oil and gas matters under the auspices of the ministry and Libya was not one of the destinations to which Ugandans were sent for this training. (Refer to paragraph 4.16)

Conclusions on term of reference 1

The committee established from the correspondences between the authorities in Malta and the UK on one hand and the DDP of Uganda on the other hand that the files into the investigations in the respective countries were closed without proving that the allegations of bribery ever took place. 

In Kenya, the committee was able to establish that the company called East African Development Limited did not exist at all. 

In the United Arabs Emirates, it was not possible to establish the facts due to reasons earlier enumerated. 

Terms of reference 2: Examinations of the process of procurement of the companies involved in the oil sector. 

On page 34, that is the process, initially it used to be hunting around the world because our sector was not competitive. That is what is on page 34.

Recommendations

The committee strongly recommends that the ministry responsible for oil and gas and other relevant ministries, departments and agencies adhere to the PPDA Act and other relevant laws in sourcing for competitive oil companies. This has actually been addressed in our Act, honourable members. We now demand that getting companies to do exploration, development and production should be on a competitive basis and that is enshrined in the Act that we passed.

Procurement of local service providers by licensees. I will go straight to the recommendation. 

The committee observed that much as procurement by the licensee is directly related to the final costs, most of which are recoverable from Government of Uganda, the laxity in monitoring and evaluating the licensee’s procurement processes may lead to loss of public resources. 

Recommendations

With the advent of new legislation for the petroleum sector, the minister responsible for oil and gas should develop regulations that can compel licensees to submit their internal procurement regulations for vetting by the ministry responsible for oil and gas and the PPDA to ensure competitiveness and promotion of local service providers.

In addition, the existing procurement laws should be amended to enhance and safeguard the participation of indigenous service providers in the oil and gas sector. 

The involvement of Uganda Investment Authority in procurement of licensees; I request that we go straight to page 37, Paragraph 4.6.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that every licensee in the oil and gas sector should be accorded an investment licence too. This requires the harmonisation of the oil and gas licensing, investment licensing through the creation of a one-stop platform for this licensing. This will go a long way in mitigating red tape and boosting efficiency and effectiveness of the licensing processes. 

Uganda Investment Authority should identify these opportunities and encourage local participation by providing incentives to both local and foreign service providers in the oil and gas industry.

Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should therefore work out practical modalities with UIA for this purpose. 

Analysis of the production sharing agreement
This was also a requirement. We went through all the production sharing agreements, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, because there was a concern that the production sharing agreements have been a preserve of a few and it was kept away from even members of Parliament.

As a result of this and even the subsequent legislation we made, we now require that production sharing agreement models come here, we look at them before the Executive concludes the negotiations and agreements.

I may not need to go through all this - that is the essence of what we said. I will go therefore straight to page 45.

Management of natural and associated gas

We realise that gas flaring has been a problem and I remember honourable colleagues, we passed the Petroleum Upstream Act where we now say that as a result of this and further investigations, no flaring - that is what comes out of this and maybe I can read the committee’s recommendation on page 46.

The committee recommends that gas flaring should be premised on international based practises with due consideration of health, safety and environmental concerns. We have addressed this in the Acts. 

Training and capacity development and I will go straight to the recommendation on page 46. There should be a framework that safeguards merit and guarantees equitable access to capacity building opportunities in the oil and gas sector as well as guarantee of employment opportunities for the trained nationals. 

Page 47; paragraph 5; Analysis of the Memorandum of Understanding executed between Uganda Revenue Authority and Tullow Uganda Limited, March 2011 in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, this is a long one and I will leave it to the honourable members to read. I think the issue here was that there was a signed memorandum of understanding and it was alleged that it was not done properly. 

On page 48 (VI) considering that the PSA for Exploration Area 1 was due to expire on 30thJune 2011, this memorandum of understanding was also a precursor to the grant of a new exploration license for the Exploration Area 1 to Tullow Uganda Limited, CNOOC and Total for a period of 12 months with the fiscal terms similar to those in the PSA for the Exploration Area 1 dated 1stJuly 2004. We did mark that and maybe when we read, we shall be able to internalise and ask questions.

Page 50, paragraph 5 (1) that is the third term of reference; to scrutinise all revenues so far received by Government from the oil industry showing how much has been received from the various sources, for which areas (blocks), and where deposited and in particular, the following revenue transactions as indicated: license fees and so on.

Key findings

There were contradictions regarding the figures presented to the committee but later on, the figures were harmonised and presented to us. This one can be seen on page 51 through to page 55.

Below is the table where it states the source; Uganda Revenue Authority 2012, URA in its submission to the committee on 9thNovember 2011 gave the total amount of revenue collected so far from all the oil companies as $ 449,424,960.

We move on to page 56 under paragraph 5.5.As a result of what we observed, the committee recommends prudent management of petroleum revenues with a separate law for the management of petroleum revenues. The Petroleum Fund should also be ring-fenced against any possible abuse.

Recently, we did that and we were directly answering this recommendation in the Public Finance Accountability and Management Bill.

Paragraph 5.6, Management of Oil revenues across Government Institutions: Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Energy, URA and Ministry of Finance 

In 5.7, oil revenue accounts at the Bank of Uganda. I will go through this one, Mr Speaker, because it is important and it was one of the issues that were raised on the floor of the House at that time.

The committee was informed that Bank of Uganda maintains four categories of oil revenue related accounts namely:

    1) Uganda Revenue Authority- tax collection in dollars
    2) Government of Uganda- Oil Revenue Account in dollars.
    3) Government of Uganda- Oil Revenue Account in Uganda shillings. 
    4) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development Non Tax Revenue. 

These are the accounts that are at Bank of Uganda. We will now move on to paragraph 6. I think the rest can be read. 

Inquiry into the transfer of money paid by Tullow Oil from the Uganda Revenue Authority Collection Account to the Consolidated Fund Account, especially the delay in the movement of the money and the circumstances under which it was changed from the dollar to Uganda shillings account. 

For this term of reference, the committee met the Governor, Bank of Uganda; the Commissioner General, URA; the Minister of Finance and officials from the Ministry of Energy. The purpose was to ascertain the management of the oil and gas revenue, the oil revenue accounts at Bank of Uganda, the revenue generated from the oil sector so far and the transmission mechanism of funds accruing to the oil sector.

The basis of this was a result of the allegation that oil revenues were drawn from the Consolidated Fund account at the Bank of Uganda for a period of 14 days.

Submission by the Bank of Uganda 

The committee was informed that Bank of Uganda received a total of $449,425,000 before bank charges in a capital gains tax and the related stamp duty. 

The Bank of Uganda also received non tax revenue oil revenue as banked by Ministry of Energy and SWIFT transfers amounting to $ 4,000,456.67 

The committee was further informed that the capital gains tax and stamp duty from oil companies totalling to $ 449.4 million was deposited on a Uganda Revenue Authority collection account in Bank of Uganda in three separate transactions, which took place in August 2010 and April 2011 being deposited on the URA Tax Collection account.

These funds remained on the account until 7thJune 2011 when the entire amount was transferred to the Government Oil Revenue account in Bank of Uganda upon instructions from the Accountant General. There is a file I forgot to tender in. I will lay it on the Table. It is reflected in this file. 

The Governor informed the committee that two weeks later, on 21stJuly 2011, following discussions with His Excellency the President and the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the $ 449.4 million was sold to the Bank of Uganda and the shilling equivalent of Shs 1,162 billion was credited to a shilling denominated dedicated government account in Bank of Uganda.

The Governor further informed the committee that part of this money was used to acquire military aircraft and other classified military equipment and H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda committed that upon realisation of revenues from the oil and gas sector, Bank of Uganda would be promptly reimbursed. 

So, the transfer of the oil revenues from the URA collection account to a separate government account at Bank of Uganda was in fulfilment of the President’s promise to replenish Bank of Uganda. That is the conclusion of the movement of the money at Bank of Uganda. 
The Governor went on to ascertain that all the accounts on which the capital gains tax and stamp duty are currently held, are components of the Uganda Consolidated Fund at Bank of Uganda. At no time since these revenues were initially paid by the oil companies have they ever been removed from the Uganda Consolidated Fund in Bank of Uganda.

I think I will move on to 6.2; observations and recommendations. I will go straight to the recommendations.

The committee therefore recommends that when considering the Public Finance Bill, 2012, oil revenue management should have a separate legal regime. This will enable the streamlining of oil revenues from other revenues. Otherwise, the current arrangement of lumping both oil and non-oil revenue together may cause implementation challenges, including difficulties in monitoring oil resource utilisation. 

The nature and functioning of the Consolidated Fund needs thorough and regular auditing, including rigorous oversight to efficiently forestall any possible abuse of public funds.

Term four; investigate the basis of determination of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, we have already passed that law; have you taken care of this? 

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then say so, because we have passed it and you are going to another point. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Yes, in the Public Finance Bill we have actually said that there should be a Petroleum Revenue Fund. The Minister of Finance should first come to this House with a plan, and the approval of Parliament will be the only way forward in using that money. This has been passed.

Term of Reference No. 4: Investigate the Basis of Determination of Recoverable Costs 
All these points eventually culminate into the recommendations on page 68. 

Recommendations
The committee recommends the standardisation of the mechanism of determining recoverable costs. Through regulations, the minister responsible for oil and gas should provide for periodic reviews of recoverable costs to safeguard national interests.

As earlier noted, the inclusion of legal expenses as recoverable in the existing PSAs needed critical thought before these PSAs were signed. The committee therefore recommends that this should be revisited.

Regarding the work plans, the committee recommends that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, in consultation with various stakeholders, urgently harmonises the formats for work plans and budget formats. These should be accompanied by sanctions on any deviations.

On labour and associated costs, the committee recommends that there should be a cap on the salaries and bonuses that are recoverable. This is to avoid inflation of these expenses by oil companies.

Regarding scanned and/or certified documents, Government should come up with legislation and regulations on the use of scanned documents in public affairs, including the financial management and audit processes.

The efficacy of advisory committees in the monitoring and evaluation of recoverable costs: The committee recommends that in the auditing of recoverable costs by the Auditor-General, there should be evidence of the resolution of these advisory committees in form of approved minutes.

Term of Reference No. 5: Examination of the Extent of Adherence to Earlier Parliamentary Resolutions on the Oil and Gas Sector 

I will not go through the entire text up to page 73. Yes, some of the parliamentary recommendations or resolutions were implemented, but some had not been implemented by the time we came up with the report. However, I think by now most of them must have been implemented.

Term of Reference No. 6: Examination of Any Other Matters Related to the above and Recommendations for the Sound Management of the Oil Industry in Uganda.

Land Rights and Compensation

Go to page 74 – 

i) In handling compensation, the Resettlement Action Plan should conform to the principles of fairness in valuations, adequacy, promptness and quick resettlement. 

ii) There is need to define guidelines for prior and informed consent to land acquisition, including the guarantee of an open and transparent public hearing. During these hearings, it is imperative to provide full information in the applicable local languages on the proposed development, its potential benefits and its potential impact at the local, regional and international levels, as well as the proposed resettlement and compensation measures for the affected people. 

Special emphasis on the involvement of women residents in the public hearings and the incorporation of their perspectives on resettlement and compensation measures should be taken into account. 

iii) Further, it is important to urgently devise a policy of compensation that upholds Uganda’s national constitutional guarantees.

Local Content 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this has been taken care of in the petroleum upstream Act under section 125. I think this one was clearly enshrined there. 

Recommendations on page 76 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, it seems that since this committee was constituted, four Bills have been passed into law and some of the issues that were captured in the terms of reference of this particular ad hoc committee, like in matters incidental, were sufficiently dealt with in the four Bills, which are now Acts of Parliament. If the committee had been able to update this for the benefit of the members, it would guide the debate and also guide your presentation so that we understand where we are.

Some of the recommendations you are making are as if we still have to take a decision on them. Now, as a presiding officer, when I am processing decisions on the recommendations you have made, you should guide us on which of these have already been over taken by events and what events have overtaken them. This is so that we are clear about what we need to focus on in this report. So many things have happened. This was 2011 and this year is 2014. We cannot present as if we are still in 2011. Please -

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, most of these observations have actually been overtaken by events. Until recently, they were very useful, especially for the Public Finance Bill, but I think, by and large, most of them concerning environmental issues and so on have been captured in the upstream and midstream laws. 

At the time we were investigating, these were issues and it so happened that we even used part of this information to process the Bills that we actually passed here, and I did mention this. Indeed, most of the issues have been captured by the Bills that we passed. I do not know whether I can just mention -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what are the issues that remain outstanding for us to take a decision on?

MR WERIKHE: As I run through, I will skip some; those that I will not mention have been captured. I do not know whether the issue of volatility in Government expenditures has been captured. This is something, which we could, at a later stage – That is on page 83-84. 

We did observe that to insulate public expenditure from the volatility in oil and gas revenues and its attendant adverse ramification on macroeconomic stability, the committee strongly recommends the delinking of government expenditure from oil revenues. I think we have also captured that. This requires –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since you have guided this House, rightly, that most of the issues have been overtaken by events, is it not procedurally right for us to give the chairman time so that he goes and scans through what he is reading to this House and sorts out what this House needs and leaves out what we no longer need? We can give him another day to come back, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we are almost finished with the report. When we are concluding debate, the chairman can come and tell us the issues that remain outstanding. From what I have been hearing, the issues that are outstanding are very clear. The issues that this House needs to take decisions on are very clear. So if we could just conclude, we would then see how to progress with this matter.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was going to page 92, the conclusion. As you have rightly guided, as we conclude the debate I will mention those specific areas, which need to be addressed by the House. 

By and large, as I said, most of these issues have been captured by the Bills that we have passed in this House. Therefore, I would like to once again thank my colleagues who were members of this committee and also thank the House for having given us the permission to carry out this exercise. We look forward to your guidance on this report, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Thank you.

There is a minority report by hon. Hussein Kyanjo, but again when you look at it, all those issues have also been captured.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will allow the member who presented a minority view on this main report time to present. Thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I lay on the Table a document from Bank of Uganda, which contains the harmonised position of figures that were submitted to the committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Hon. Kyanjo.

5.13
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my chairman for presenting the main report. 

This report is prepared pursuant to rule 194 of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure, which permits a dissenting member of the committee to state in writing the reasons for his or her dissent.  

Mr Speaker, my report has 22 pages. Please, advise me because I hope to take 40 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are some of the issues also overtaken by events or are they all outstanding?

MR KYANJO: They are almost all outstanding. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then see how to summarise your report.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the issues we addressed in the minority report are as follows:
1. Failure to diagnose the pitfalls that led to the suspicions and subsequent allegations of bribery and abuse of office by senior Government officials.

2. The duality of the role of the chairperson of the committee.

3. The excessive time lag in presenting the report.

4. Total dependence of the committee on the Executive agencies rendered the investigations futile and wasteful.

5. Omission of the serious diversionary effect of the constitutional petition on the investigation process by one, Mr Twinobusingye Severino from Kanungu.

6. The role of the Attorney-General.

7. Failure of Government to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
8. Role of Bank of Uganda in the management of oil revenue.

9. Land rights and compensation of the indigenous people in the oil areas.

10. Presidential directives vis-à-vis Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets rules.

11. The issue of front men in business transactions.

12. Sourcing for jobs for family members.

Diagnosis of the Pitfalls

Mr Speaker, the Executive developed and promulgated a National Oil and Gas Policy in 2008. The committee acknowledged the tremendous job done by our public officials in drafting and promulgating the policy. In the policy, the Government of Uganda, among other things, committed itself to:
    • develop and present to Parliament laws to govern the oil and gas sector, as it was acknowledged that the hitherto legal regime was not configured to ensure the proper governance of the sector.

    • create appropriate institutions that clearly define, mandate and highlight government responsibilities covering all aspects of governance and management of the sector. 

    • initiate and complete the process of Uganda’s subscription to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).

    • ensure full participation of Ugandans, including civil society, the private sector and cultural institutions in the decision-making processes in the management of the oil and gas sector.

    • ensure transparency and accountability in the conduct of business within the sector.

It is important to recognise that by the time of the special sitting of Parliament in October 2011, a substantial part of the policy had not been implemented by the Government. However, Government had gone ahead to sign Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs) and issue out several licences for exploration activities. Even though Government acknowledged the inadequacy of the obtaining laws in catering for the contemporary issues in the sector, it went ahead to issue licences and sign PSAs under the very laws. 

Three years after passing the policy - 2008 to 2011 -the laws proposed under the policy had not been passed and the proposed new institutions had not been created. Above all, the secrecy with which transactions in the oil sector were being conducted raised an alarm both among the Members of Parliament as well as the general public. The continued transactions in the sector between the Government of Uganda and oil companies without a strong legal framework to govern the sector lent credence to the suspicions of dubious dealings.

Mr Speaker, the secrecy and general lack of transparency in the oil and gas sector, coupled with widespread allegations of corruption involving senior Cabinet ministers, provided the perfect breeding ground for mutual suspicion between the Executive and the Legislature on the one hand and the Government and citizens on the other. It is against this background that the special sitting of Parliament was petitioned for by hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Gerald Karuhanga and hon. Abdu Katuntu together with some others. 

This background information, however brief, should have been the foundational facts upon which the committee should have premised its report.

Observations

Mr Speaker, the bipartisan petition received overwhelming support from Members of Parliament, the media and the general public. The special sitting of Parliament took place on October 10thand 11th2011 and adopted wide-ranging resolutions, including a resolution to establish an ad hoc committee as follows: Paragraph 9:“…Provides that, (a) Parliament sets up an ad hoc committee to investigate claims and allegations of bribery in the oil and gas sector and reports back to Parliament within three months.” I think that was overtaken by events. 

Recommendations 

Mr Speaker, this honourable House should focus on improving the system of oil and gas management so that we plug and seal off possible avenues that could be exploited by any official or individual to the detriment of citizens of Uganda. 

In order to be able to do that, the House needs to conduct an audit of the transactions and decision-making processes that preceded the enactment of the current laws governing the sector, and all the transactions undertaken with a view of remedying the shortfalls and recovering the monies lost. 

The Duality of the Role of the Chairperson of the Committee 

Mr Speaker, as mentioned above, hon. Werikhe, who was the chairman –(Interjection)- who is the chairman - (Laughter) -of this ad hoc committee, was a former minister who served as a Cabinet minister in the Ministry of Energy. The allegations under investigation were against Cabinet ministers, the immediate former colleagues with whom certain decisions were made and with whom he bore collective responsibility for the decisions made. This raised the question of conflict of interest.

Mr Speaker, the development and good governance of oil and gas resources in Uganda is better served by a Parliament that can discharge its oversight function without fear, favour or prejudice. We believe that in the present case, the work of the ad hoc committee was negatively impacted upon by the dual functions of the committee chairperson and his association with his former Cabinet colleagues who were the subject of investigations. However well hon. Werikhe steered the committee, this background blights the outcome of his work. 

It is interesting to note that during the investigation, under the same chairperson two Bills were tabled, debated and passed with controversial clauses and in controversial circumstances. There was Bill No.1 in 2012, the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill; the second one was Bill 2012 again - the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill. 

Despite strong demands from Parliament since 2009 to bring the oil and gas Bills, the Government never responded. However, after the Parliamentary resolution of 11 October 2011, the two Bills were rushed for debate and were passed with some controversial clauses. One such clause was clause 9 (1), which stipulates that a person should not contract or operate the following crude oil facilities without the licence by the minister; and also clause 10(1) which stipulates that an application for the licence under subsection (9) shall be made to the minister in a manner prescribed by the regulations.

Mr Speaker, we cannot go back to re-open matters which have already been closed. However, it is important to know that the functions of the minister include granting and revoking licences; initiating, developing and implementing the oil and gas policy; and negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements. All the above functions of the minister confirm maintenance of the status quo, which caused concern to Members of Parliament and the general public. It is for this reason that Parliament, in its wisdom, proposed that these functions of the minister be carried out by the Authority instead of an individual. 

Mr Speaker, this House has a right to ask the chairperson of the committee to disclose how many workshops of his Committee of Natural Resources were held and funded by the Ministry of Energy - (Laughter)- during the consideration of the two Bills and during the investigations of the allegations of bribery. Our concern is that both Bills were debated and passed under the chairmanship of the same person who was also the chairperson of the oil investigation committee during the period of investigation, and who willingly accepted funding from the Ministry of Energy for numerous workshops convened to discuss the two Bills. 

We believe that effective oversight, rooted in an effective system of checks and balances, is the basic foundation for good governance of oil and gas in our country. The current assignment to the chairperson of the ad hoc committee who is the chairperson of the Committee of Natural Resources and a former Minister of State for Energy Ministry is clearly against the basic rules of disclosure of interest and conflict of interest.

Recommendations 

It is our sincere view that when an opportunity comes in future for such investigations, members of the probe committee should not directly or indirectly be involved in the sector being investigated. 

In order to have public confidence in the Legislature and its committees, members of the committee must be accorded a chance to declare any interests they may have; and in the event of non-disclosure or false disclosure, appropriate sanctions be provided for in the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

I am going to skip the Executive time lag in presenting this report to the House and I will go to 6.0.

Inadequate depth and width of the investigation 

Mr Speaker, the committee did not cover these areas adequately to guide the decisions of Parliament in this regard for the following reasons:

1) The procurement system employed by the industry still leaves the industry with the freedom to choose to buy from any sources regardless of the prices and without involving the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority.This is a direct avenue to hide costs and cheat Ugandans in profit sharing arrangements.

2) There is no mechanism for scrutinising the salaries and wages cost component to avoid hiding costs. 

3) The Committee failed to highlight very important testimonies given by hon. Hilary Onek. Mr Onek confided in the committee that the transfer of ownership from Heritage to Tullow was done illegally by bureaucrats behind his back. He further made a request to the committee to interview him in camera so that he could provide further information with regard to the transactions handled by the ministry not in compliance with the law. The committee never followed up this matter further.

4) The metamorphosis of Hardman Oil Company, which finally ended up being bought by Tullow Oil, clearly shows that the behaviour of Hardman created suspicion, and that it was evading section 44 of the Oil and Gas Policy, which requires that sale of a company’s assets to another must be accompanied by payment of capital gains tax. This Parliament must be informed whether the sale of Hardman and Heritage to Tullow had formal agreements with Governments, whether taxes were paid and whether at the time of sale, the licence was still valid.

Soon after the controversy of expired licences, before sale of the interest of Heritage hon. Hilary Onek was transferred to another ministry and the issue of hon. Hilary Onek using fake degree papers became a matter of public debate.

5) On the 11th of April 2012, the committee met Tullow Oil Uganda Limited. During his submission, the Executive Director of Tullow Oil Uganda Limited told the committee that the company never acquired properties in Uganda. After intensive interrogation, it was discovered that on page 24 of the official submission to the committee, Tullow had given a full list of assets acquired in Uganda and yet there was no evidence of payment of capital gains tax to that effect.

Members should note that although the meeting with Tullow Oil Company was a lengthy one, lasting almost four hours, and many hard questions were raised by the committee which could not be adequately answered to the satisfaction of the committee, there was a complete media blackout, both electronic and print media, unlike meetings with all other oil companies.

Recommendations

    • It is our view that the time lag made this report fail to serve its purpose because it lost relevance and was outpaced by the dynamics of the oil sector. 
    • For future investigations, Parliament should be mindful of the past and current policies and pieces of legislation which the Government has failed to implement and hold government officials accountable for losses incurred due to such failures.
    • The PPDA must be involved in scrutinising procurement processes of all companies participating in the prospecting and production in the oil and gas sector. 
    • The salaries and wages component of the cost elements must also be scrutinised.

Reliance on Secondary Information from Executive Agencies
The committee relied on secondary information provided by, among others, government agencies. Some of the most crucial pieces of information were in the hands of Government. The methodology adopted by the committee in the circumstances at that time was overly reliant on the secondary information. The final report cannot, therefore, be different from what the Executive came out with. It is a mere endorsement of what Government had earlier stated on the allegations. 

It must be recalled that the ministers under investigation did not heed to the parliamentary resolution to step down or aside and they remained in their offices. They were in effective control, by virtue of their offices, of the key government institutions which the committee was to rely on for both its work and for evidence.

The committee required cooperation from such ministries and agencies including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Directorate of Public Prosecution and the Uganda Police Force among others. The office of the Prime Minister handles important matters including travel authorisation and clearance of certain government matters. Minister Hilary Onek as the Minister of Internal Affairs then was politically supervising all the Police agencies. Hon. Sam Kutesa as Minister of Foreign Affairs was in charge of all foreign agencies that needed to provide information to the committee. 

The above situation highlighted how limiting parliamentary investigations can be in the circumstances that the person being investigated not only remains in office but is in effective control of the office which the committee is to rely on for its investigations. This undermines the credibility of parliamentary investigations and in the very least frustrates the work of the committee.

Observations

As the committee correctly observes in its report, its work was constrained, undermined and deliberately delayed by the conduct of these agencies. It is therefore important that the following observations be put on record to guide future inquests of this nature. 

The former Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, did not step down as expected and yet he was the subject of the inquest. The proposition that Parliament had become a judge and the executor in this case does not hold water because the purpose of such an inquiry is to establish -(Interruption)- The action of resigning or stepping aside from office when one is a subject of an investigation is an established good practice in emerging democracies around the world.

The rationale for such resignation is not an admission of guilt but rather an honourable conduct of a public official who has faith in the system he or she serves and has no interest in influencing the conduct of such an inquiry. Acting outside the box -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you preparing to close?

MR KYANJO: I am halfway, Mr Speaker. Acting outside the box of good practice is tantamount to arrogance and an attempt to block the process of investigation by the subject of the investigation.

Secondly, it is important to note that the government agencies that claimed to have carried out investigations prior to the establishment of the probe committee by Parliament were either unwilling to share information and reports in their possession or clearly behaved in an obstructionist manner. The committee observed that the Uganda Police, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs conducted themselves in an unsupportive manner in this case.

Mr Speaker, how would any security agency believe a story like that of the Bank of Valletta plc, where a staff of the bank is reported to have carried out a thorough and lengthy search of its own bank to establish cases of forgeries and money laundering? There is nowhere in the world where a parliament of a country cannot access information from its own state agencies unless such a parliament is not considered an integral part of the state. 

By denying Parliament access to such information and reports claiming that they needed permission from other governments, they undermined Uganda’s sovereignty. Consequently, the fact that the committee had to rely on the evidence and information from agencies and public officials, some of whom remained directly under the supervision and subordination of the same officials that were being investigated, renders the committee’s conclusions and recommendations on bribery allegations incomplete at best or misleading at worst.

Recommendations

    • Parliament should resolve to enact appropriate legislation and amend its Rules of Procedure requiring any public officials who maybe a subject of an official parliamentary investigation or a commission of inquiry instituted by Government to step aside from their positions until they have been cleared by such an inquiry or until the inquiry is concluded.

    • Good judgement cannot be passed based on secondary information, hence parliamentary committees and investigations must be clothed with the powers to compel production of documents and to order discoveries of documents. Failure to provide such documents should be punished.

The Negative Impact of the Constitutional Petition and Role of the Attorney-General

The committee observed in the main report that the work of the committee was interrupted by a constitutional petition filed by Severino Twinobusingye, who described himself as a voter from Kanungu and claimed that he was aggrieved by the resolution of Parliament demanding the then Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Patrick Amama Mbabazi, steps aside for the duration of the inquiry. However, the Committee failed to highlight the diversionary effect of this petition to the entire investigation process. 

Secondly, the committee did not address itself to the fact that at the time of filing the petition, the petitioner was an employee of the Electoral Commission. He resigned soon after filing the petition. This same Severino was mentored and supported through school by hon. Amama Mbabazi according to the Monitor newspaper in a special interview on 11 March, 2013. This is the same man whose wedding was graced by hon. Amama Mbabazi in September 2013 and he was applauded for supporting the NRM party in courts of law.

In a subsequent application, - Constitutional Petition No.53 of 2011 - the Parliamentary Commission sought to jointo defend the institution of Parliament in a matter that was strongly contested. However, the Attorney-General strenuously objected to the application to join the Parliamentary Commission as an interested party and yet the Attorney-General is their legal advisor. He instead willingly conceded to the prayer of petitioner Severino Twinobusingye. 

Allegations that Edward Kabushu is a Frontman of Hon. Amama Mbabazi

Although the committee acknowledges that there is a link between Mineral Services Ltd and Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi’s daughter, Nina Rukikaire Mbabazi, the committee erred in remaining silent on the connection between Edward Kabushu being a frontman of Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. Our investigations confirmed that Mr Kabushu actually worked for External Security Organisation (ESO), a body that was once headed by Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. As stated in the main report, Mr Kabushu owns 300 shares in Mineral Services Ltd which runs the parking yard at Kira in Wakiso District.

Observation  

It is our considered opinion that these pieces of information should never have been excluded from the main report because it was an integral part of the petitioners’ concerns.

Recommendations 
There is need to amend the Leadership Code Act so that matters of wealth declaration cover not only the individual but also others directly or indirectly associated with the leader to avoid the phenomenon of frontmen.

The Role of the Attorney-General in the Investigation Process
It is astounding that the committee in its report did not address the apparent hostility of the Attorney-General to the Parliamentary Commission’s application to defend the petition. In our view, this House should not bury its head in the sand like the proverbial ostrich and deny the fact that the office of the Attorney-General is consistently being abused to the detriment of our democracy and to undermine the institution of Parliament.

The office of the Attorney-General should take advantage of the guarantees and protection provided under the Constitution to serve the people and the Republic of Uganda without fear or favour. However, on many occasions, including with this petition, for some strange reason the Attorney-General did not act as legal adviser to Parliament as expected, on a matter of grave importance to the people of Uganda and its destiny.

The Attorney-General rejected the attempt by Parliament to defend itself, mounted the case on his own and when he appeared in court, conceded to all but one ground of the application. The result of which is now a hefty Shs 13 billion in costs to be borne by the taxpayers. This matter was twice brought to the attention of Parliament as a matter of national importance.

It is important to re-emphasise here that strong, independent and credible institutions both in form and substance are the only guarantees that Uganda has as a nation against a potential oil curse. A situation where the Executive is fused with the Legislature and persons employed in the office of the Attorney-General conduct themselves as if they were private counsels of certain persons in the ruling party or certain individuals, threatens the very existence of Uganda as a sovereign nation.

Recommendations     

    •  Parliament should consider an appropriate legal framework to strengthen and protect the independence of the office of the Attorney-General.
    • The office of the Attorney-General must work independently from the Executive to ensure that it works for the people of Uganda and defends all institutions of the state in the discharge of their duties, within the meaning and context of the doctrine of separation of powers as enshrined in the Constitution.
    • There must be a clear demarcation between the functional roles of government officials who at the same time also serve as party officials.
    • The fused role of the Prime Minister with that of the Secretary General of the ruling party is becoming counterproductive and a liability to the NRM party. That was then but these days I do not know.

The Role of Bank of Uganda in Ensuring Effective Governance of Oil Revenues

While the committee observed the crucial role played by Bank of Uganda in the management of oil revenue, the committee, however, omitted from its main report the important confession made by the Governor of Bank of Uganda during the meeting with the committee. The Governor informed the committee that he received a verbal instruction from His Excellency President Museveni to release US$740 million for the purchase of military aircrafts and other classified military equipment. However, the same Governor contradicted his statement when he met the committee two weeks later, by claiming that US$449.4 million was sold to Bank of Uganda for the same purpose.

It is our sincere view that both Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance should clarify how much tax revenue and non-tax revenue from oil industry was received and how the disbursement was done. Otherwise, the public remains suspicious of how the oil revenue is being expended.

The action by the Governor to use oil money based on verbal instruction was in contravention of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The evidence before the committee clearly shows that the Bank of Uganda is expected to play an important role in ensuring transparency and accountability in the management and governance of revenues from oil and gas resources. However, it is important to note that the legislation establishing the Bank of Uganda, the appointment and security of tenure of the Governor and the Board, its functions, etc., is premised on the 1995 Constitution as amended. At the time of promulgating and enacting this Constitution, of which hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a participant, the prospects of oil and potential inflows of oil revenues were not anticipated.

Either by omission or commission, the information provided by the Bank of Uganda on oil revenues to date has been inaccurate, inconsistent or incomplete. Most importantly, however, it was apparent that the Governor felt insecure to provide the information required regarding the movement of the money paid by Tullow Oil. It is amazing that the information from the Deputy Governor, Mr Louis Kasekende, contradicted that of the Governor, Mr Tumusiime Mutebile. Mr Speaker and members, whose report should we believe among the two officials from Bank of Uganda working in the same office in such a situation?

Observation
Mr Speaker, we believe that the question of mandate, autonomy and independence of the Bank of Uganda as an important player in the management of revenues has not been given adequate attention in the report. We also believe that this House may be unprepared to have an evidence-based debate on the role of Bank of Uganda in the management of oil revenues unless a thorough study has been undertaken to provide a basis for articulating the role of the central bank.

Recommendations

The current laws governing Bank of Uganda, with particular emphasis to its autonomy and independence and an expansion of the mandate to ensure effective governance of oil revenues, must be reviewed and clearly defined_

MR SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to comment as to whether the law we passed on public finance has taken care of that or not?

MR KYANJO: I think it has taken care of it.

Transparency and Accountability in the Oil and Gas Sector
The need to ensure full transparency and accountability in the oil and gas sector, including the management and governance of revenues, is clearly spelt out in the National Oil and Gas Policy, 2008.In that policy, Government committed itself to subscribe to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. It was four years then since that commitment was made. 

In its 11 October 2011 resolution, the House resolved that Government, as a matter of urgency, joins the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. Unfortunately, a report to that effect, confirming such entry, has not been submitted to Parliament. Nothing has been presented to this House and no evidence was presented to the committee to suggest that this resolution of Parliament is being honoured.

Observation

Mr Speaker, the power of Parliament is being eroded by the inaction of the Executive as we, members of this august House, watch and sometimes clap in support. While we agree with the general recommendation of the committee on this subject, we hold the opinion that a further recommendation on the implementation by Government should have a timeframe within which it reports back to Parliament. We pray that this minority report shall avail the opportunity to Parliament to enforce implementation of the recommendations sited above.

Secondly, while we agree with the committee’s recommendation with regard to open and transparent appointment of public servants in key positions, we believe that this House has to lead by example by opening up its own appointment processes to public scrutiny like other countries such as Kenya. We all watched with amazement how Kenyans publicly interrogated the prospective Chief Justice, including asking him why he, the Chief Justice, wears earrings.

Recommendations

    • Government should immediately commence the process of subscribing to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and a report on the progress be made to Parliament on a quarterly basis. Parliament demands that the report be presented before the end of 2013 - that was overtaken by events.

    • Parliament should immediately amend its Rules of Procedure governing vetting of appointments, to make the process more open and transparent and allow citizens present testimonies regarding the integrity and conduct of the persons proposed for important leadership positions. 

    • Parliament should ensure that a separate piece of legislation is enacted as a matter of urgency for the management and governance of oil revenues. It is timely for Parliament to address this matter while debating the omnibus Bill under the proposed public finance legislation. This was not overtaken by events -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am going to suggest that since it is your minority report, give us the highlights and the recommendations you are making. If you are going to go through that whole text, you are going to take very long.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I have four pages remaining.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is too long. Please, give us the highlights of the remaining bit.

MR KYANJO: Okay, Sir.

Recommendations

    • Parliament should pursue a constitutional amendment to place oil and gas, minerals, water and foreign reserves, resources within the scope of the resources protected under the public trust doctrine and to reaffirm the position that the state manages such resources as a trustee for the benefit of the citizens and the people of Uganda.

    • Parliament should demand from the Ministry of Lands and natural resources a comprehensive list of persons or companies who have purchased land in areas where oil and mineral deposits have been discovered in the last five years. On this matter, we ask the people of Bunyoro, Acholi, West Nile, Karamoja, Lango and Teso to co-operate because their areas are already known to have a wealth of mineral resources.

    • Parliament should further demand for a list of indigenous persons who have been compensated where oil is either being mined or prospected.

    • Parliament should be provided with evidence of Ugandans who are working in oil companies operating in Uganda and a list of local service providers who have contractual obligations to serve the oil companies. 

The President’s Directives on Matters of Technical Nature 

Observation

It is the duty of all us leaders to protect the President, who is the fountain of honour, from manipulative influence from interested maverick and opportunistic lobbyists.

Recommendations

    • The President be advised to respect the views of the technical personnel in the procurement process for cost effectiveness.

    • The President further be advised to adhere to the Constitutional provision which stipulates that all public spending be approved by Parliament in accordance with the laws and also to follow procurement rules.

    • The President be advised to avoid issuing verbal directives as they are prone to misinterpretation/abuse by those who implement them, and they do not give room to hold anyone accountable hence facilitating corruption.

Sourcing for Jobs for Relatives

Observation

Dominion Oil Company, which offered Kutesa’s daughter a job as a company secretary, is a private company and no aspect of its operation is directly under the sphere of control of hon. Kutesa as a minister.

Recommendations

    • Parliament must be furnished with the list of all Ugandans employed in the sector in order to assess the local capacity and contribution to the sector.

    • Ugandans should consider themselves fortunate to have fellow Ugandans employed in multinational companies.

    • All leaders in their various capacities have a moral obligation and responsibility to provide for their families. Finding jobs for relatives or involving them in any business transactions in an area that does not directly or indirectly fall under the supervision of the leader should not legally constitute influence peddling or abuse of office. 

    • It is incumbent upon members to formulate guidelines and protocols, which will define the boundaries of interaction where recruitment of a relative to an organisation would constitute influence peddling and abuse of office.

Conclusion

The work of the ad hoc committee and its report to this House presents yet again an opportunity for Members of Parliament to discharge their oversight function with regard to the development and exploitation of our nation’s oil and gas resources. In doing this, we should remain conscious of our oath to represent our constituents and our country without fear or favour. 

We also urge you, honourable members, that oil and gas, like other natural resources like Mabira Forest and minerals, is non-partisan; it is not yellow, red, blue, green or orange. It has no ideological boundaries. Therefore, as we consider the report of the committee, we implore you to look beyond partisanship and give particular attention to the issues that guarantee national commonality.

The recommendations we have in this minority report transcend tribal, political and ethnic interest. A cross-fertilisation of these recommendations and the bipartisan views of the honourable members during the debate in October 2011 in this House is what we need to build a Uganda united by mission and purpose. Posterity will judge us as being on the right side of history as we make fundamental decisions that determine the destiny of this country.

If God is on our side, as our motto declares –“For God and My Country” - nothing is impossible. We must all resolve that oil shall be a blessing to Uganda and not a curse. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member, for presenting that minority report. I appreciate your situation and that is why I allowed you the time to present the report.

Honourable members, we have received the main report and the minority report and the time now is as you know it. Let me say this: this Parliament will go on recess on the 18th of this month and there are issues that we have to handle - business to follow. All this business is on the Order Paper, the issues are many and we need to be done before we go for recess.

Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, there are nine statements from the ministers pending. I ask that all those statements should come tomorrow and we finish with them. They should not be pending. Some of them came from issues of national importance; the longer they take, the more irrelevant the answers will be when they are finally presented. So, I am urging you to make these statements tomorrow immediately after Prime Minister’s question time. 

These statements include: the presidential directive on the Benet people; the power outage in Gulu Town; the policy on blood transfusion; floods in Moyo District; the Mubuku Youth Rehabilitation Institute; the operations of NAADS; the issue of the law enforcement officers of KCCA; and the sale of existing ivory stock. These statements should be finished tomorrow to pave way for other discussions when we go into the course of next week. We have other things to do.

Also, looking at petitions, I think the committees should review their petitions. Find out those ones that have been overtaken by events and come and report that they have been overtaken by events, instead of keeping them in the committee.  Find those ones that need to be directed to the ministers so that we direct them now instead of waiting all this time and then you come to the House and say, “we direct this to the ministers to handle”. 

Please, review the petitions that are before you. The citizens that approach this House have confidence that you will help them solve these matters quickly but some of them have taken very long. So, review them so that we give the general direction to ministers to handle some of the petitions directly with the concerned citizens, so that we move forward from there. The rules allow that; so let us deal with those.

The same applies to questions. I am urging members whose questions have not been answered, please fire them at the Prime Minister tomorrow during the Prime Minister’s question time. This is because some of the questions have been long outstanding and nobody is responding to them. This is not fair to the members who have asked these questions. If you have a question that is pending and it has not been answered for a long time, let us use the Prime Minister’s question time so that we can deal with as many of them as possible.

Instead of just generating political debate on other issues, let us focus on those questions that mean a lot to our people and ask the Prime Minister tomorrow in that one hour. He will help guide us on some of the issues that remain burning among our people. 

Honourable members, with this communication, I now adjourn this House to tomorrow at 2.00 pm and it is 2.00 pm.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 December 2014 at 2.00p.m.)

