Wednesday, 5 December 2012  
  
Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. First, I want to inform you that the address by the President, which we had announced for tomorrow, is postponed to next week. So, we shall have our normal sitting in the afternoon of tomorrow. 

In the public gallery, we have a delegation from the Local Government of Busia. They are here on a working visit to see how Parliament transacts its business. You are welcome! (Applause)

Then as you are aware, we have gathered to pay tribute to a distinguished Ugandan, in the person of the late hon. Deo Atenyi Zabasaija, who was a Member of the NRC. He was here until 1996. Thank you very much.

(Entry of the late hon. Deo Atenyi Zabasaija.)

National Anthem (Three verses)

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ATENYI DEO ZABASAIJA, FORMER MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL FOR BUHAGUZI COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

3.31
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (RT) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda notes with deep sorrow the death of the hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija, which occurred on 30 November 2012;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija was born in 1942 in Kikube Village, Hoima District in Bunyoro sub-region;

AWARE that hon. Zabasaija attended secondary school in St Aloysius Junior Secondary School and Makerere College, and held a Bachelor’s Degree in Literature of Makerere University as well as a Master’s Degree in Economics from Helsinki University, School of Economics in Finland;

RECOGNISING that hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija ably represented the people of Buhaguzi County, Hoima District in the National Resistance Council and as a delegate to the Constituent Assembly, where he is remembered for his contribution to the debate and eventual promulgation of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that the late hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija served his country diligently and with distinction in various fields, including as: Secretary General to the National Resistance Council Committee in the President’s Office and in Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 1992 to 1996; Chairman of Kitara Co-operative Union Ltd from 1994 to 1998; Member of Board of Directors, Uganda Commercial Bank; Chairman of Uganda National Cultural Centre and National Theatre from 1988 to 1989; Secretary-General of Kampala Chamber of Commerce and Industry; President-General Bunyoro Youth Association from 1975 to 1982; President, Uganda Association of Christian Mosaics 1982-1984; President, Makerere College Old Students’ Association, among others;

APPRECIATING that the late hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija will be greatly remembered for his eloquent articulation of national issues, and passion for the good and democratic governance of Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Buhaguzi County in Bunyoro and the entire country upon the loss of hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija for the good and democratic governance of this country.”

May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the Leader of the Opposition comes, I want to introduce some friends of the late hon. Atenyi Deo Zabasaija: Hon. John Ntimba who worked with him in the NRC; hon. Anthony Butele (Ten-Point Programme) also worked with him; hon. Beatrice Nyakayisiki, our immediate past Member for Hoima, and Mr Kyakadongo. 

In the public gallery, we also have pupils and teachers of Nyaka Primary School in Kanungu District represented by hon. Dr Baryomunsi and hon. Elizabeth Karungi. We also have pupils and teachers of Butamba Primary School in Rukungiri represented by hon. Mbaguta. You are welcome. (Applause)
			
3.21
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here on behalf of the Opposition, the people of Gulu and on my own behalf to send my condolences to the people of the late Deo and the people of Bunyoro. 

The late hon. Atenyi Deo was one of the Members of the National Resistance Council, who put the Constituent Assembly in place. This breed of leaders, gentlemen and ladies, were thinking right for this country. These were men and women of integrity who had the nation at heart. They worked hard to put in place the right law - the Constitution of Uganda, which over time, some of the articles were changed to suit certain peoples’ interests. It is unfortunate! I am sure that the late hon. Deo Zabasaija has been a sad person seeing the level of degeneration of our country, Uganda.

Hon. Deo Zabasaija and his colleagues dreamt of a better Uganda for all Ugandans. The principles he dreamt and worked for have been washed away even before his passing on. It is very saddening indeed. No sane person can be happy seeing how public resources, which are meant to help poor Ugandans, are being plundered by a few elite with no remorse at all. The hospitals all over the country are in a sorry state. Most Ugandans sleep hungry, our old pensioners passed on without getting their pension, while one person was enriching himself.

All this and much more are very terrible for this country! What is more depressing is that Government is well aware of this situation. We have written reports, staged demonstrations, but what do we get in return? Teargas, while thieves are rewarded with more Government posts and Government vehicles. It is sad! 

As J.F. Kennedy said in 1963, “Our problems are manmade; therefore, they can be solved by man.” The problems of Uganda are manmade by selfish people, but as long as our spirit remains unbroken, there will be no defeat because the spirit is the strongest force there is and we shall fight on until all Ugandans have a better place to live in. 

The late, who is lying here before us, was humane; he was a peace builder, he loved harmonising positions; and was a man of integrity. How about you and me? 

Tomorrow, when Parliament of Uganda pays tribute to some of us, what will they say if we do not do our best for the people of Uganda? They did their best in putting in place the Constitution, which was so good and is still good, but with some articles changed. So, if those changes were for the good of Uganda and for all Ugandans, that would be very much acceptable; but if the changes are to suit the interests of just a few individuals, then Uganda and even the spirit of the late will not be happy. He has gone a sad man because what they worked for did not yield results.

Dear, Members of Parliament let us emulate them and let us also work for Ugandans. May his soul rest in peace!

THE SPEAKER: You still want to come and justify? He is the mover. Let him complete his motion.

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Sorry, Madam Speaker. It is a bit of an overlap, but normally, after the motion, as the mover, I should talk more about the motion. So, belatedly, I am doing so. 

Again, our brother Zabasaija was born on the 25 February 1942, and he died on the 30 November 2012. Among other places he worked, he worked in the East African Posts and Telecommunications Training School in Kenya, and he studied at Kabalega Senior Secondary School. He was Secretary-General National Resistance Council; he was Chairman, Bunyoro Kitara Education Committee; and he was also Uganda Parliamentary Delegate to ACP/EC Parliament Assembly. 

He was a treasurer of Mercy Children’s Home and Abakristu of Hoima Catholic Diocese. He was also head of prefects, Makerere College School. He was head prefect in St Aloysius Junior Secondary School and he was prefect at Kabalega Senior Secondary School.

On a personal basis, he was a founder and director of Bingi Trading Company Limited, dealing in imports and exports in Uganda, Kenya, Mauritius and Congo. He also held Bingi Investment Foundation Limited dealing in wood and world-class furniture within Uganda. He was also holding Bingi Technical Services, Civil Works and Mixed farming in Kikube, Hoima.

With regard to family life, he was married to Enid Kabuleta Zabasaija and left 11 children of whom 10 are alive and one is deceased, and seven grandchildren. We pray that the Almighty strengthens the family members as for God’s way is perfect. The world of God is flawless and is a shield for all who take refuge in him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.30
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Buhaguzi County, I want to express my sincere condolences to the family, more especially the wife Enid Zabasaija, the children, relatives and friends, the people of Buhaguzi and the entire Bunyoro sub-region for the loss of a gallant and dear son, Deo Zabasaija Atenyi. 

A lot has already been said about him, and I would like first of all, to begin by saying that the people of Bunyoro and Buhaguzi in particular are mourning their son because of the contributions he made while still alive. I would like to thank Parliament for joining us in mourning. 

I want to thank the Government of Uganda and most especially the President of Uganda, His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Museveni, for according our son a decent burial. I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for convening this special session in honour of our son. We thank you and also the Members for turning up to pay tribute to our own. 

Many senior people in senior positions in our region have died and one I can quote is my own uncle, the late George Magezi Kacunlika. He was a senior man, he worked as a minister in the past government and he worked tirelessly to put what we have as our Independence today. But he died unnoticed and we did not have a chance of this nature to have one of our own recognised like Atenyi Deo Zabasaija. 

So, we have every respect to thank Government and you, Madam Speaker, for according our own - and I want to thank in a special way our minister for Bunyoro and I think this is a clear manifestation that we really needed this ministry. He has done enough mobilisation to ensure this time round our own is also recognised. So, we want to thank Government and the institution of Parliament and you Members of Parliament, for working closely with us in this respect.

I want to speak briefly about who Deo Zabasaija is. He was a leader when I was a little boy. By the time he was in NRC, I was still in primary school, but I want to say he was a very calm man. He was very patient, humble, stable and a very good listener and patriotic - I can see the Minister of Education still wondering if that is true? In 1988, you can check my records here in Parliament; I had not even reached P.6. 

So, I want to thank him because he is one of those who encouraged me to join leadership. He was a very good man and very smart. You could look at him and really look at a leader. He inspired me a lot into joining leadership. 

Deo Zabasaija, I want to thank you because part of your responsibilities while you were on earth was to leave the next generation. He married and produced 11 children, but now we have 10. He has brought up a very good family and, Madam Speaker, he has a very beautiful house in our constituency, and I want to thank him for that because many of us come to Kampala, stay around, enjoy good life and forget that one day when we die, we shall be taken for burial - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR BIGIRWA: I do not think there is any other Member who would talk more about a representative. He has brought up a good family and I think those of us who are going for burial will realise what I am saying. It is a challenge to all of us that as we are here in Kampala, we need to do something at home. Otherwise, our bodies will get shamed when we are there. 

So, I want to thank Deo Zabasaija for doing a very wonderful job in that area. 

He played his politics very well as a Member of NRC. He worked very well in legislation and did his oversight role very well. But most important, he was a man who wanted unity. At that time, Bunyoro’s politics was characterised by a lot of division, which reached levels of formation of camps. But I want to say, in all the camps we had in Bunyoro, he was not in any. He lived solely, and he was a unifying factor for all of us and those who are from there can testify. 

He liked education so much no wonder he was the Chairman of Bunyoro Education Committee. He made a lot of fundraisings for our schools in Buhaguzi notably Muteme Secondary School today, Birafumbi Secondary School - all those were community schools, but the honourable did a great job and they are now elevated and Government is aiding them. -(Member timed out.)

3.36
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to late hon. Deo Zabasaija Atenyi. I first met hon. Deo Zabasaija Atenyi in 1994, when I was elected to the National Resistance Council as a youth representative, and I remember vividly he used to sit on your left hand side on the third row. 

Hon. Deo Zabasaija hailed from Bunyoro and I remember him very well as a social and approachable person. He was not selfish with knowledge. When we were sworn-in as youth representatives, hon. Deo Zabasaija invited us and counseled us because we had entered a new phase and we were still young. I remember him giving us advice especially on the “rains” which we were going to receive, and he told us, “You young people, you have entered this Parliament, you have seen the ‘rains’ and more ‘clouds’ are forming. You will need to handle the ‘rains’ with necessity and make sure that you plan for yourselves.” 

Hon. Deo Zabasaija was an enterprising person. Even when he left Parliament, he went out and started a furniture workshop and training centre and his interest was more in training the young people. I visited his workshop and I found there more than 20 young people being trained on how to make good furniture and by then, Uganda had not yet started importing furniture from China. Actually, his furniture was almost the best in the whole of Kampala City. 

Deo Zabasaija Atenyi, as my colleague has stated, loved his area, constituency and his region. I remember he championed the mobilisation of the old boys and Ugandans who loved to renovate and to rehabilitate the old schools. He was at the centre of mobilising for fundraising of Kabalega Senior Secondary School, which is in Masindi. This is one of the oldest boys’ schools in the country and I remember we got so many guests. Those were Deo’s efforts. 

Deo Zabasaija will be remembered for his punctuality in the House. Madam Speaker, you remember very well that whenever we would be having a session, he would enter this House 10 minutes before the session began and he would sit and wait. We shall remember these qualities, but we shall miss him. 

I do remember Deo Zabasaija during the debate on the White Paper on Education - the Prof. Senteza Kajubi report. Deo Zabasaija was at the centre of moving for the vocationalisation of education, and I think that is where he even picked the interest of setting up a training centre for the youth. We shall miss him -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, as we mourn the late hon. Deo Zabasaija I want to ask the government, Bunyoro region and the district local governments signed and passed resolutions that they want regional tier. We will remember Deo Zabasaija if the government comes up with the regional governments’ law so that Bunyoro region can be in position to bargain, especially on loyalties when we are actually engulfed in this oil debate. 

May the Almighty God rest the soul of hon. Deo Zabasaija in eternal peace and may the government please Deo’s spirit by putting in place the regional tier government. Thank you. 

3.41
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bugangaizi East County and on my own behalf, I would like to first extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija. I would also like to thank the Government of Uganda for having accorded him this befitting send-off by according him a state function.

I first met Deo Zabasaija in 1985. That time, he had not come to Parliament. I met him through our family friend called Dr Charles Karamagi. We were doing a small function for our friend Charles Karamagi. During that time, this is what I found in the late hon. Deo. He was a very reserved person, slow to speak, but very good at listening. You would think that Deo has maybe not taken note of what has been said; but he would come up in his wisdom with the right advice. 

We had a difficult project together with him but at the end of it, we triumphed because of his input. He was an achiever, a man who never failed. Whatever he put his hands on would surely go through. 

During that time, I learnt two things about him. He was full of humility. He would cut across the board; be it young, be it old; be it poor, be it rich. He was very distinguished in his own way, but he respected everybody he interacted with. How I wish many of us leaders could take on that kind of humility so that we are able to interface with the communities that mandate us to come here; so that we are able to interface and reach out to many people who would really need our touch and advice. -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS BAKEINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last attribute I admired about him was that he was a unifying factor. There is a project that was very difficult, but Deo moved up and down and mediated irrespective of his level. He was a man! How I wish we could all be peacemakers and role models so that people around us could benefit from our hidden talent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
MR BALTAZAR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late Deo Zabasaija Atenyi lying before us here.

As you have heard, hon. Deo was a Member of NRC and served his people very diligently. I worked closely with hon. Zabasaija in 1989, when we were in the mood of contesting for NRC. In the months of January and February 1989, he contested for Buhaguzi and I contested for Bugangaizi. From Hoima town, I go through Buhaguzi to Bugangaizi. During the criss-crossing, we would meet. Interesting enough, even his opponent, Prof. Kakonge, was my friend. What is interesting is that each one of them – you know during that time, it was an electoral college and each one had a calculation, and were each assured of winning. At the end of the elections, Deo had won. His opponent, after counting the votes collapsed, and he had to go and evacuate the collapsed person for medical care. This shows how he was a good person. 

As other people have said, Deo was a humble man, but very intelligent. He exhibited this in his discussions. 

You all know that Bunyoro was under subjugation for a long time, including not allowing bright Banyoro to go for education in good schools. So, hon. Zabasaija is among the few people who made it when the embargo was more or less lifted. Because, for someone coming from a peasant family to attend good schools was unheard of apart unless one was coming from maybe the royal families in Bunyoro. So, he is among the few who made it from our peasant families to attend good schools, excel and graduate with degrees. 

Deo has passed on at a time when Bunyoro is having big challenges, oil being one of them. We would have benefited a lot from his wise counsel because we need elders who can stand firm and articulate what Bunyoro wants. We shall miss him and I want to pass my condolences to the family, friends and relatives and indeed Ugandans.

May the soul of Deo rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kasaija comes, I want to introduce in the Distinguished Gallery a delegation from the National Assembly of Botswana: Mrs Nkabo Nefhilwe, the head of delegation; Mr Mpho Rodgers Nthomamisi from the Human Resource Department; Mr Redman Josiah, head of the Hansard Department; and Mr Wilfred Mooketsi from the Research Department. You are all welcome! (Applause)

3.50
MR MATIA KASAIJA (NRM, Buyanja County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I wish you could give me a little bit more time so that I can speak about this man whom I have known since 1968, and I will tell you what sort of man is in front of us. I beg that you give me six –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, five minutes.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and the people I represent in this Parliament, the people of Buyanja County in Kibaale District, Bunyoro sub-region and my family, I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of our great friend, Zabasaija, especially to the wife and the children. 

I have known this man in front of us here since 1968. Immediately I left university, I was living in Ntinda in a tiny house of the City Council of Kampala, with Mr Justus Bagambe, one of his friends, who is not here with us. I hope we shall be with him tomorrow. 

If my recollection is correct, after we left Makerere, I went to University College Nairobi and Deo went to Makerere University. Deo never looked for a job because way back in 1969, he had already founded a company called Bingi Trading Company and he had started trading by that time. He never believed in being employed and I think he was never employed by anyone throughout his life, until he joined the NRC and was a CA Delegate.  He believed that we should be self-employed and we should create wealth. I am appealing to the youth to imitate the man lying before us. 

He graduated from being a trader and even built a foundation. One time, he had even wanted to found a bank, but Amin stopped him in 1972, and the economy collapsed. But despite the economy having difficulties, Zabasaija remained self-employed. He had a workshop in industrial area and he was able to make first-class furniture. At that time, he was the only black man making first-class furniture, which you could sell even on the international market. 

As a businessman, he was very frugal, very calculative and I never saw him waste money on drink. He used to save every single coin that he would earn and he used it only to look after his family and very close relatives. 

As a politician, in 1988, I was then working at the NRM Secretariat and I was commissioned to go around Bunyoro sub-region to see the people who were interested in standing as Members of NRC. As I was driving from Masindi, at a place called – I have forgotten the name of the place - I met Deo. I asked him, “Atenyi, would you be interested in standing for Member of NRC?” he asked, “Is there such an opportunity?” I said the opportunity was there. And as you heard, hon. Kasirivu said, he competed and won very decisively. 

He was very articulate on issues that he believed in. People say politicians tell lies. I am not sure about that; but I think Deo never told a lie; maybe his people from the constituency can tell us. If he said, “We shall do this”, that is what he would do. He represented his people very effectively, as we have heard; he run through his term as Member of NRC and then as Member of the Constituency Assembly. 

After the election of the NRC Members, he offered us a free office on Johnson Street, where his trading company was based, for meeting and making consultations on various issues. He was one of those who received the new Members of NRC and counselled them on how to live in Kampala. As you remember, most of them had just emerged out of war and most people were coming from rural areas and from the bush. So, he counselled the NRC Members from Bunyoro on how to live in Kampala, on limited resources, and those who were there, I think benefited from his advice.

We have lost a very outstanding man, especially in the Bunyoro sub-region; a man who would mix with the youth, the elderly and the middle aged. This has already been said, but I think I have to repeat it. Deo was a very calm man. I never saw him lose temper at any single moment for the many years I knew him. I am sure his wife would testify. They may have quarrelled in the bedroom with his wife, but I never heard Deo raise his voice; even if you annoyed him or did something bad to him. He would never raise his voice, but would say slowly, “We take our time; okay, Akiiki, I have appreciated your views, but I want to tell you, you are wrong somewhere”.  That was the voice of hon. Deo Zabasaija, every time you disagreed with him. How I wish Members of Parliament who were in this House last Thursday could learn from him. Please, listen to each other honourable members, even if we have different views; listen to each other. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to be referring to this, but I think I should say it when we are paying our last respects to our friend. We should listen to each other, even if my point of view is different from yours, and even if I am saying something stupid, you never know, you could pick one or two things. 

But the characteristic we have developed in this House of heckling people we do not agree with, I disagree with entirely. And, I hope, Madam Speaker, that you will direct us and use the authority bestowed upon your Chair to guide this House so that we can all listen to each other and remain honourable Members of Parliament.  But after what happened last Thursday, I must say, I do not think we deserve to be called honourable Members of Parliament.

Deo Atenyi, You have done your job. To the children, I have more to say when we are together tomorrow. Please, children, do not let you father down; do not put to waste the assets he has left behind and please, build on his name. Atenyi, may the good Lord rest your soul in eternal peace. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, and honourable members, I too would like to send my condolences to the bereaved family, especially the widow and the children; to the people of Bunyoro and to the whole country for the passing on of Deo Zabasaija. 

I thought I could narrate my experiences with the late during our student days, because we were contemporaries at Makerere University, particularly in University Hall, where we were together. I remember two distinct characteristics of his. One, he was an issues man. You know student-life; even in those days, there were those who were serious; there were those who took life easy; and there were those just went out there to enjoy themselves; but not Mr Zabasaija. 

He never engaged in any unnecessary arguments in “maneno” “maneno”; “wolokoso”; “payukaring”. He would just simply walk away if groups gathered around the halls of residence or outside the lecture rooms. 

I am not surprised, therefore, that later in life, he took his vocation seriously, working to organise chambers of commerce, organising youths and then making major contributions to organising society to better their lives.

The second legacy was his entrepreneurial skills, which many honourable members have talked of. At university, Deo was already supplying provisions to the halls of residence, to the bookshops, and so forth. He was never excited with money. Many of us looked with eagerness to “boom”. Students used to get “boom”; a lot of money in allowances – transport allowance, accommodation allowance on top of the feeding and accommodation in the halls of residence. Deo was never excited about that; naturally, because he was making his own money, a lot of money when he was still a student on campus. And, I believe he must have started this vocation even before he joined the university.

So, wealth through the creation of money was not something that excited him. He wanted to earn his money legitimately, honestly and transparently. 

As we bid farewell to this man, whom we all agree was very calm and very humble, I think we should remember him for being focused on issues that concern everybody and himself, and for his entrepreneurial skills. 

As hon. Matia Kasaijja said, he never worked for Government; he employed himself. When today’s young men graduate, they look to Government for jobs. But in early 1972, this man worked out to establish his own furniture trading company and so forth. I hope this is the way we can now guide our young men. Our education system should drive towards that direction of job creators. And, with the Ministry of Education’s recent skilling programme, I hope we achieve this so that we can produce more of the Deo Zabasaijas in our society instead of job-seekers. 

So, we say farewell to you for the example you set for us; and for the uprightness of the life you led throughout your existence. Fare thee well. I thank you.

4.05
MRS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. I want to start by thanking Government and Parliament for according this time to pay tribute to the fallen gallant son of this land. 

I want to also thank God for the life of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija. I had no opportunity of knowing the late personally, but I have no doubts basing on the submissions made so far, that he made great contributions to this nation, and he was a great man. 

My submission will mainly be directed to the bereaved family. Death is not a strange thing amidst us. We come across it time and again. Unfortunately, no one can get used to it. Each time it robs us of our dear ones, we are heartbroken; we are filled with tears; we mourn and weep. At times, we are even forced to question God. But I want to comfort and console the bereaved family by saying that it is only God who has power over life; power to give it and power to take it.

So, it is my prayer that as you go through this difficult time, you look unto Him and I am sure the Almighty God who is merciful and loving, will comfort you. He will give you the strength to bridge the gap that the late has left in the family.

May the Almighty God, the good Lord, rest the soul of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.08
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Deo Zabasaija.

The one time that I saw hon. Deo Zabasaija was when he visited Buhweju with the late hon. Bantariza. When they were on site where they had a meeting, I got a peculiar liking for this dead man here. 

When other MPs that the late hon. Bantariza came with took their seats, the late Deo Zabasaija kept moving around, probably admiring the terrain of Buhweju and getting to know more about its plight and problems, because later on, I learnt that when he greeted the people, he lamented about the bad roads, which we still have today. 

The late Deo Zabasaija was so passionate in his message when he talked to the people. He talked a lot about the role of education and I got to know him more than any other MP who visited Buhweju that day, and that is why I felt I have an obligation to pay tribute to him. 

In our eulogies, when we are speaking about dead people, like we are doing today, you hear some people throwing some barbs and stings at others about corruption. It is very important that we make speeches that are very true about us. The late Deo Zabasaija, I believe, is earning a truthful speech or eulogy about himself. 

One time, about the year 2000, one honourable member we still have in this House made a speech in Kabarole, when we were burying the late Prof. Akiki Mujaju. He said that he did not die, but he was running away from something fraudulent. Probably, Deo Zabasaija maybe collapsed prematurely because of the current corruption. May we fight so that we save some lives; because someone pertinent; someone concerned, someone intrigued by the level of corruption may collapse a week before he should collapse having heard what is happening today.

So, may we, even those people who are speaking, those who throw barbs at others, live to be true; because we leave a lot of credibility gaps in our lives and in what we say. I believe that the late hon. Deo Zabasaija has lived his life and has earned himself a truthful eulogy from honourable members. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.10
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank Parliament for organising this special sitting to pay tribute to the late hon. Deo Zabasaija Atenyi. 

On behalf of the people of Hoima, and on my own behalf, I bring condolences to the bereaved family, to the wife, children, relatives, in-laws and friends. And I want to bring condolences to the whole nation of Uganda because it is a loss to all of us; to the people of Bunyoro sub-region; to the people of Hoima, Buhaguzi and Kitagasa village in particular. We have lost a great leader, as Members have expressed. He has mentored manypeople, and any others have gone through his hands 


The late Zabasaija was a great leader in Bunyoro. He spearheaded education; he worked closely with my father and the two opened many schools in Buhaguzi County, when my father was the chief of the county. Above all, he was one of the founders of St Andrea Kaahwa’s College, which is a great school in Bunyoro. It is among one of the best performing schools. For example, in last year’s O’level exams; it was the sixth in the whole country. And at A’ level, it came the 35th. It is a very good school, and  he spearheaded the opening of the school.

As many people have eulogised, the late was a humble, calm, principled and hardworking man, and a builder; not of houses, but of institutions, organisations and companies. In his life, he was a delegate, but when it came to the second time - and by that time, I was old enough – he lost that seat to Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza. He remained calm. He did not create any problems. Instead, he concentrated on his businesses.

But today, what are we looking at? wwhen Members of Parliament lose their seats, they plan to antagonise those they have lost to. You may want to learn that there are people who now call themselves shadow Members of Parliament. I call upon Members to emulate his example. For example, he demonstrated by opening up a workshop because he knew that politics is not the last or only thing one can do. Let us not stick to Parliament all the time. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.14
MRS VICKY RUSOKE-BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand as the Chairperson of the Catholic Chaplaincy. On behalf of all the members of the Catholic Fraternity in Parliament, I wish to deliver our condolences to the bereaved family.

Honourable members, as you very well know, there is always time for everything, as stated in the Book of Ecclesiastes. We should accept that this is his time. He has done his work and followed God, which is the most important thing. You know that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. Frankly speaking, that could be the reason he was outstanding in all he did.

I want to also send my condolences to the people of Hoima Diocese upon the loss of a very great arm. In the Catholic faith, we know that the priests and women of God are few. So, we usually give a hand, in one way or the other, especially in helping to build truth and harmony. We also counsel, guide and spread the word of God through the lay apostolate movement. 

Therefore, when I hear that he was a leader of the laity in the Catholic Church, it is enough to say that he was a volunteer, a counsellor, a committed Christian, humble and exemplary. I, therefore, know that the people of Hoima, Buhaguzi and Katagasa village will miss him. May his soul rest in peace. May the Angels welcome you to the place you deserve next to the Almighty God. Rest in peace, till we meet again.

4.16
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Deo Zabasaija Atenyi. Like my other colleagues have said, I did not interact with the late directly. However, I listened in attentively, and got to learn some lessons, and I thought, if given the opportunity, I would mention them.

In that regard, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker and the institution of Parliament for this honourable send off. I recall one time, while we were paying tribute to some other Member here, and I said that when I die, I should be given this kind of send off. And as long as I am still living, I will keep saying it. For those of you who still do not know that you will one day die, you better know it now. (Interjections) I am not intimidating anyone. There is someone heckling me here.

Madam Speaker, every time I cite Proverbs 27:1. It says, “Never boast about tomorrow. You don’t know what will happen between now and then.” Often times, we tend to think we are the end of everything, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, but when you see a gallant son like this one die, it should be a lesson to you. I was a teacher of divinity and I used to tell students that one will only know unending life when they lose someone dear to them. People will only know that death is very near when they lose someone they know. That should be a lesson to all of us.

The late has been described as a person who was humble, diligent and exemplary. There are three lessons I have learnt. The late had 11 children, now 10; what are you going to emulate from him? I usually speak about these things passionately because I lost my father long ago. I have toiled all through my life to be what I am today. There are cases where people have had their fathers who work very hard, but after those fathers die, that marks the end of everything. I want to call upon you to emulate what your late father did. You are very lucky; you have been able to grow up with him alive. You are very lucky because he has left a very good house for you. Please, do not waste what he has done for you.

I have interacted with very many people in the Public Accounts Committee sessions. Madam Speaker, you will be shocked to know the kind of people we have for the next generation. Most people do not want to work yet they want to have good money. They do not want to save, but at the same time want to get rich quickly. That is why most of them are stealing. I think the reason is that we have a generation that has learnt nothing and forgotten nothing. They know that one can only accumulate money by stealing.

The generation of the late here did not steal anything. Honourable ministers and Members of Parliament, these people did not steal anything. If they had done so, we would not find anything here –(Interjections)– Yes, because if one person goes to a ministry and they steal Shs 50 billion, will the next person find anything left? That is the lesson we need to learn. Honourable Members of Parliament, it is true that today we are Members of Parliament but tomorrow, we may be common people. So, what lessons do we have to learn? 

I want to thank hon. Julius Junjura; sometimes, Madam Speaker, I feel like shading tears when honourable members from the North are eulogising here. They usually say that they are known for not being thieves. In Bunyoro, the people there are known for being honest. The people in Bunyoro are honest and humble - you can talk about them, hon. Julius Junjura, hon. Marble Bakeine - but some of us are only known to come from areas where there are thieves. That makes me wonder whether that is what we drink, eat, emulate. What will your region be known for? What will you be known for, such that when the time comes for them to eulogise you, there is something good to talk about you?

Gallant son of this country, we thank you for you have done your part. We bring condolences from the people of Ankole despite what we are known for. (Laughter) May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace.

4.20
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the People of Terego and West Nile region to pay my heartfelt condolences to the late Deo Zabasaija. I got to know the late when he was the Sabakristu in Hoima Diocese. That time I worked as the secretary-general of the Catholic Association of Professionals under the chairmanship of Bishop Deogratius Byabazaire of Hoima Diocese, a young brother to hon. Muganwa Kajura.

The late was a person who crossed all walks of life in terms of associations. He was of versatile character, a man who would relate with the young as he would relate with the aged and his age group, all in harmony and respect. This is a man who we used to make fun of when we were still in those associations. We used to refer to him as the acting bishop. Why did we use to call him the acting bishop? It was because he more or less shared the same name with the Ordinary of the Hoima Diocese. He was called Deo, which in full is Deogratius, thanks be to God. Whereas the Ordinary of the Diocese of Hoima was Deogratius Byabazaire he was called Deo Zabasaija. So, we used to say that he was the acting bishop of Hoima Diocese whenever the Bishop was not around.
 
The same late Deo Zabasaija was also closely associated with me when he served as the chairman of Masindi Children’s Home. At that time, all orphanages in this country were under the Ministry of Rehabilitation, where I served. He diligently served at the time under the chairmanship of the late Fr Kasangaki, who was the chairman of Uganda Community Based Organisations for Child Welfare (UCOBAC). 

I say all this because I want you to ask yourself, “How many politicians, how many rich businesswomen and men, are flourishing very well with material wellbeing and are able to reach out and give to the poor the way he committed himself to serve the poor vulnerable groups in our community?” How many rich men and politicians are able to make peace with their creator by adhering to their religious teachings and being able to offer time and resources for institutions of their faith? What the late Deo Zabasaija has done is, indeed, a challenge to all of us. 

Madam Speaker, today we are here being told of how the late Deo, after leaving the university, did not seek public office. Ask yourself, for those of you who have been in this House, how many of us have left Parliament and have lived on for five to six years? Every other time we are here asking the Speaker what the meteorological report is like. When is it raining in this House? You know, when they talk of the meteorological report and about raining, they are talking about when our salaries are going to be paid and when emoluments are coming. This is a fact. 

Many of us, immediately we live this institution, do not live long because we have given all our lives; we are now dependent. Even if it were like in other countries, that Parliament is done away with - No wonder, during the Constitution amendment exercise and even during the Constitution formulation exercise, the idea of giving absolute power to a person at will to say, “Let Parliament close and go home”, was vehemently rejected. This is because we know, as people in this House, that without being here, being told that you go home and stay there for two to three months and then come back, life will be no more. (Laughter)

Look at a person like Deo Zabasaija who from student life – and yet at that time circumstances were not like they are today. That time, even up to my time as late as 1981, before you would sit your last paper in the university, job adverts would have already been put out on the notice boards. You would choose whichever job you wanted to go for. But with all that enabling environment and favourable conditions, he was able to say, “I want to be self reliant”. How many of our daughters and sons are able to do that today? Today, every youth wants to join a ministry where there is a project. Every youth wants to join an organisation where they can come home with money every day. That is the root cause and the genesis of theft in this country. 

I am emphasising all this because this is a person whom I personally knew and we worked together. I vividly recall the attributes in him in as far as transparency and honesty is concerned.
 
Madam Speaker, in my culture when a person dies, before and immediately after burial the relatives assemble, the way we have assembled here, to address the reasons that person has died. Philosophically speaking, human beings fear death and yet again, philosophically speaking, the only thing that is certain in the world is death. Death is the most certain thing. Even Prof. Kabwegyere here should know that death is certain. That is why they say, “as sure as death”. When I say this, it is not with a bad motive. He was my long time friend and an inspiration when he was still in DP and that is why I am making reference to him. (Laughter) 

The point I am making here, Madam Speaker, is that we as an institution of Parliament have the lives of the 35 million Ugandans in our hands in terms of proper planning for their lives. There is a parliamentary dictum that says, “Parliament can do anything other than change a man into a woman.” That is the only thing under the speakership of a Speaker, like Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, that we cannot do. 

We have the powers to come up with positive policies, to come up with laws that enable this country to move forward. We have the powers to make sure that this country is a country where everybody lives in harmony, where everybody lives thinking about what will happen in future, thinking not only about ourselves but the future generation. What is this that we have done? (Member timed out.)

4.28
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I rise to join my colleagues to pass on my condolences to the family of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija and also the entire Bunyoro region. I have listened to my colleague, hon. Kyamadidi, and the rest of the speakers but personally, I grew up an orphan because my father died when I was being breastfed and so, I never lived to know him. So, I know what it means to be an orphan. When I see someone dead, I really share the grief with the bereaved. So, I am taking this opportunity to share my grief with the family of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija.

Secondly, I also happened to grow up in the church. In the church when somebody dies before they are baptised, the reverend does not participate in the burial, but here we are setting a precedent, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the people who knew the late Deo Zabasaija say he was a person who has been honest, of high integrity and we are, therefore, setting a precedent this afternoon that the body of a man of integrity is being laid here. 

I now raise one question which comes to mind. Today, we are witnessing a man of high integrity but what will happen tomorrow when a person who has been labelled to be corrupt is brought and laid here? That is one fundamental question that has come to my mind. What if the body of a person who has been labelled to have stolen money from Government is brought and laid here after a person of high integrity has been laid here? That is a fundamental question that has come to my mind. What precedent are we setting?

I have been watching and listening to the politics of this country. I loved to associate with the late hon. James Wapakhabulo when he was steering this House and, fundamentally, I have loved to participate in your House, Madam Speaker, which you are steering today. I can tell you that you have set a very strong precedent that the people who will come after you will face problems if they do not match your standard. (Applause) So, what precedent are we setting today? The late hon. Deo Zabasaija is setting a precedent; the bodies that will be laid here after his will face challenges if they are not people of integrity.

Secondly, I want to say that during the period in which the late Deo Zabasaija served, 1989 to 1996, there were no major scandals of corruption, there was no vote rigging. In fact, during their time, people used to line behind the candidates and they would be counted and whoever got the highest number won the election. I am happy that he has not died tainted with dirt. He has died very clean and I am happy for that.

Finally, one fundamental thing, which I share with the late Deo, is that we all come from the oil producing region. I want to say that the late has died at a time when we are legislating on oil. There is a Bill before Parliament for which Deo, I think, contributed fundamentally when they were promulgating the 1995 Constitution. The laws that we are making today all originate and are based on the 1995 Constitution. Can I seek the indulgence of this House that we should not shame the late Deo even when he has died, because they legislated very well and they were not very selfish in their own way? 

In our language and culture, the dead are not dead. It is our belief that even when they are dead, they can still come back and watch what happens. The late Deo legislated on presidential term limits and he has died when he has not tampered or participated in tampering with the Constitution. So, he has died a very fundamental and clean man.

At this juncture, I want to remember two other colleagues who participated with the late Deo in the Constituent Assembly in promulgating the 1995 Constitution. In Kasese, we had the late hon. Jerome Mbura-Muhindo and in Bundibugyo, there was the late hon. Jackson Bambalira. These colleagues were with hon. Zabasaija - (Member timed out.)

4.34
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand up here on behalf of my people of Bukomansimbi County to extend my condolences first of all to the widow, the children and the people of Bunyoro on the loss of this gallant son, hon. Deo Atenyi Zabasaija.

I remember hon. Zabasaija. He was a principled person when he was the chairperson of Bunyoro Growers Cooperative Union. I came to know him when I had just joined the Union Export Services when I was exporting cotton on behalf of Bunyoro Growers Cooperative Union. As a principled person, he stood his ground when some people in Bunyoro Growers Cooperative Union wanted to sell the land that belonged to the cooperative union. This is the land which lies between Kafu and Masindi.

The late hon. Zabasaija left Bunyoro Growers Cooperative Union without a debt. Many unions had been indebted but as a chairperson of the union, he left the place with no debt. So, he was a good person and everybody should emulate his example.

It is a pity that the late Zabasaija has gone before we have concluded the oil Bill as he would have been fundamental in contributing towards this Bill before the oil is exploited. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.37
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to be able to pass on my condolences on behalf of the people of Kabale and the Bakiga possibly in Bunyoro area, to the family of the late Deo Zabasaija and our colleagues here from the region, upon losing a son that you described as a good, true and unifying factor in issues of Bunyoro.

I thought that I should rise up and say that as leaders, especially in Bunyoro, our seniors, like hon. Bintu, hon. Kasirivu and hon. Bakeine, should help us find a lasting solution to the issues affecting the co-existence between the Bakiga/Bafuruki and the Banyoro. If we are saying that the deceased was a unifying factor who did not belong to any camp, can you help us understand deeper what the problem is so that we can co-exist and see people living happily in Bunyoro? It is not their choice that they are there but because of natural problems that are not of their own making.

Since the death of hon. Zabasaija, we tried to meet hon. Kaahwa who was trying to mobilise us to be with them as they mourn the deceased. I asked her, “What do you really see in this gentleman because some of us did not have an opportunity to know him?” She kept insisting that the late was not antagonistic. She added that when this man left the scene, he really went and has never antagonised any of his successors. This, I think, was partly because he was prepared. Like hon. Bintu said, he tried to mentor them and tell them to prepare. He was prepared for life after here. 

I believe that as Members, we should take this as a critical point and plan for our exit so that we do not burden the President and the authorities to begin creating districts because we feel we cannot live without politics. I believe that if as leaders we are prepared and not willing to stress anyone about life after here, this is going to save the country a lot of wastage of resources that accrue from creation of unnecessary districts. May his soul rest in peace till we find him where he is.

4.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As someone from Lango and on behalf of Lango sub region, Uganda People’s Congress and UWOPA, I send my deep condolences to the family and to the widow. 

Madam Speaker, listening to the motion moved by the Prime Minister and all the Members’ contributions, I wish to state that the late had a stake in this country. In many countries, if you have a stake in the country, you can speak vividly when you have achieved and you have assets. However, the problem of this country is that most people want to accumulate wealth which they have not worked for. I think the legacy of the late is that today we honour him for giving an example of how one can accumulate wealth but through honesty and hard work. He has shown that when you want to accumulate wealth, you have to work for it. 

Government has contributed to his burial, but we have seen caskets come to this House but not with they type of stands that I saw outside where his body was lying. I do not think the decoration was entirely Government’s contribution because those are not the types of caskets we always see here. We just buried hon. Odit and he was brought here but we did not see such a shiny casket. It means that the family by its own means put in something to give a decent send-off to him.

I want to appeal to this country that if you wrongly accumulate your wealth - We are now seeing many people of Northern Uganda die because billions of shillings have been stolen. This is because somebody was cooking up mechanisms of stealing money that should have helped the people who are resettling in Northern Uganda. I think we should see and copy the example that if somebody is honest, he can be wealthy and can be laid to rest with decency. 

Like my brother said, I would be very uncomfortable to see somebody brought here yet they had dirty corrupt tendencies and we speak and try to cover up in respect. There are names we have seen, and surely you should know that because you have been in this Parliament, you will come here. When we are here, I think this is the time that we should also not use this House to eulogise corrupt people and make them think that it is okay, they will still be sent off in a good way. - (Interjection) - We shall run away.

Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to the leadership of Bunyoro on the clan system. Before we had certain key laws in place and even when there are laws that protect a widow after the death of their spouse, there are still some people out there who would want to deprive a widow of the property left. People will start coming with the intention of depriving the widow. I appeal to the clan and Bunyoro leaders that let the clan not try to grab what the widow and her spouse worked for. 

Madam Speaker, under the law, the widow is now the one responsible for the late’s estate. If the late has left a will that will take care of the family and children, – but I see that most of the children are now adults - the management of the estate should be left to the widow. I appeal to the clan to protect the widow, and not only this particular widow but all other widows. I hope those who will manage the estate will follow the legal framework to protect the widow. 

Madam Speaker, I send condolences to the people of Bunyoro and the people of Uganda for the loss. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.46
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join everybody to send messages of condolence to the family, the region and the country on the loss of this great man. 

I think this occasion has three meanings. One is the meaning of life or the value of life when a person is still alive. How is that life lived? How is it shared with other people? Here, I think there is evidence to show that Zabasaija has been a man, a father, a husband and a public figure who has worked with very many people and has made a contribution. For that reason, his body is here for us to recognise that contribution. I think that is the first meaning of this occasion. We are here to extol the life of a Ugandan who has demonstrated that goodness is good and can be pursued and achieved. 

Having 10 children and looking after them is not an easy job. Thank God He gave him that ability to start working early and he built confidence in himself. Very often we fail to do many things because we lack confidence in ourselves. Therefore, a message to the children, which extends to other people, is: use that huge potential in you and you will survive and do well. To the children, who have had this man as your mentor, certainly do better than him. If you equal him, that will not be enough; you will not have advanced. So you must excel and go beyond him.

The second importance here is Parliament starting this tradition of recognising Ugandans and giving them this honour. This is why I love the message of my friend from Kasese and indeed hon. Kyamadidi. My view is as follows: Do your bit and leave the rest. Be judged for what you have done but do not bother about it; just do your best. Socrates was on the streets of Athens one time during the day, holding a lamp. When he was asked why he was doing that, he said, “I am looking for an honest man.” So my friend, you may say, “Let no bad person come here” but you just be good and come here; leave the bad ones to themselves. 

Achieve your goodness on earth. The moment you judge others – (Interjection) - like hecklers; I did not heckle anybody when he or she was talking. When you judge, you open yourself to a possibility of being judged. So if anybody says, “When they bring bad people here, we shall run away”, I would advise that do not run away from yourself in the first place because you should be a standard measure for others. 

Lastly, can we make this tradition even richer? Madam Speaker, is it possible that Parliament could find money because many of these people who have been brought here, probably did not write their autobiographies. When you hear these statements made about the people we have brought here, you find there is a richness which is has not been brought out enough for society. Could it be possible, like we have pictures of former presidents and former Speakers up there, to have a fund established so that for those who manage to get here, there is a follow-up and some profiles of their lives can be put in an archive? (Applause) 

A picture is put there but also their profile, their virtues and the things that justified their being brought here should be put there. I think this would be the continuity that we are looking for. Goodness will then continue because goodness in words and goodness in statements is not enough; it is continuity. It is today and tomorrow and then after. When things go through those periods - today, tomorrow and the day after - then good is established. I thank those people who say when these people were in Parliament they did a good job. Do a good job now and you will also be remembered. (Member timed out)

4.53
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to join my colleagues, the family and the Bunyoro community. I come from Bundibugyo, but before we were broken into smaller regions, we were all western region and we still belong to the western region. 

We have really lost a very great man. I can say I have lost a great man because I saw him once in his life when he came to my district and my school came to sing. I was a choir member. We came to sing for them - a team of Members from the NRC - and I cited a poem. I saw him very well and indeed the words which have been said by my colleagues show exactly what he was - a humble man, a cool man and a father. 

I would like to say that I celebrate his life because he contributed a lot. We are now celebrating what he did when he was still alive. In the Constitution which they made, he contributed to my being here. They put in place Article 32 and 33 where there is affirmative action. I am now enjoying this affirmative action in Parliament because I am a woman Member of Parliament. This is the very great “thank you” I would like to give to him. If men had stood up and said “no” to women at that time, we would not be here as woman Members of Parliament. The disabled, the youth and the UPDF should also give credit to the late.

When he came, he proposed a programme to meet the pygmies. At that time, the pygmies wanted accommodation and there was an organisation called ADRA which had put up some small houses roofed with iron sheets. When it rained and the pygmies were in the houses, the pygmies ran away. So the Members of Parliament who came went to mobilise the pygmies and to sensitise them about the use of houses and all that, and he was part of them. I remember very well. Of course, this is not the case now because they are now enlightened and they no longer live in grass thatched houses; they are now in houses roofed with iron sheets. 

There is a place called Kyeterekera in Bunyoro. The Members of Parliament at that time agreed to host the refugees coming from our place through Bundibugyo from Congo. We had found where to put them. The district looked for land, they could not get it but the Members of Parliament from Bunyoro agreed to host them and that place is still there. Members from Bunyoro will bear witness; the refugees felt comfortable there.

I would like to thank him for the work done for this country. He did not segregate. He would not says, “this one is from my area and this one is not”, which is what happens now. Some officers are not like, even politicians, ministers -(Member timed out_)

4.58
MR ERNEST KIIZA (NRM, Masindi Municipality, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Deo Zabasaija. I want to join the rest of the people in conveying my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family on behalf of the entire sub-region. I want to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and relatives and the entire nation for the loss of this great man, Deo Zabasaija. 

Many great things have been said about Deo. Among those is that he was a self-made person, he was a nationalist, he was an entrepreneur, he was a humble person, he was an educationist, he was a good parent and a great father. All those, I will not repeat; I will only concentrate on appreciation. I would like, first of all, to thank God for the life of Deo. As you have heard, he was certainly a great person. He was a good person. That life was given to him by God and God has now decided to take him. So, I thank God for the life of Deo. 

I want to thank His Excellency the President for recognising the contribution of Deo Zabasaija to the development of this country. The President and the entire Government have contributed 100 per cent towards the burial expenses of the late Deo Zabasaija. So, I want to thank the President and the entire Government of the Republic of Uganda. I also want to thank the President for attending the funeral service which was held at Christ the King Church on Monday. He personally attended and we, the people of Bunyoro, are very grateful for that great gesture. 

Rt. Hon. Speaker, I want to thank you most sincerely for convening this session at such short notice. Thank you very much. I would like to thank the Chief Whip. I called the Chief Whip at midnight on Friday and informed her about the loss of Deo. By morning, she had spoken to the President and by evening, the President had taken a decision that we should have a state burial for the late Deo Zabasaija. Madam Chief Whip, I want to thank you, in absentia, for coordinating this function.

I want to thank the Members of Parliament who have been here this afternoon and given very good eulogies about the late Deo Zabasaija. Thank you very much. 

I want to thank the relatives I see who have been with us since Friday, and I am sure they will be with us tomorrow as we see Deo Zabasaija off in Hoima. Thank you very much. May the soul of  Deo Zabasaija rest in eternal peace.

5.03
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I think it is in order that on behalf of the government, I thank everybody who has contributed and who has attended this occasion and also pray to God that he gives strength to the family and many others who are grieved.

As believers, we all know there is life after death. All of us, Christians or Muslims, when you die there is life after this. There is also judgment. When you are alive, you are judged in many ways on earth. When you die, there is another judgment which does not involve witnesses from those living. So, I appeal to colleagues not to judge people who come here. 

When my life in this world is over, you will see how I have worked and in one way or the other, every human being has a good side and a bad side. (Interjections) I believe that being on the other side of the government does not mean you are holier. To say that people will be judged when brought here is too far a task you are setting up for yourselves. What of you, who will judge you? So, let us not judge future deaths. Those who die will lie here. We know who is paying tribute now but we do not know who will pay tribute then. All of us shall go. Colleagues believe that you will come and see what is happening; so, our brother is around us seeing what is happening. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I just want to respond to what Prof. Kabwegyere said on the issue of the archives. It is something we started but I want to let you know that one of the biggest losses which we had as a country during Idi Amin’s time was the vandalism of all the records from the National Assembly. Even when we were organising the Golden Jubilee celebrations, we had to go to Makerere to get the records. Everything here was taken away and just burnt. 

It is our intention to have all the names, from the LEGCO up to today, placed in a hall of honour. It is a bit hard because of the absence of records but it is something we plan to do. The Parliamentary Commission wants that to be our contribution to the history of this country, having all the names of the distinguished Ugandans who have been in this House, and therefore, start a new tradition.

I want to thank you very much for coming. I send the condolences of Parliament to Mrs Zabasaija and the children. We pray that God gives him eternal rest but also enables you to bear with the loss and move on with your life. Thank you very much. 

The National Anthem 

(Exit of the late hon. Deo Atenyi Zabasaija)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for coming to this special session and for the glowing tribute you have paid to our departed friend. I now adjourn the House to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 6 December 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
