Wednesday, 11 December 2013

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to welcome you to the sitting and to appeal to you to apply yourselves today so that we can deal with the Higher Education Financing Bill and complete it by 6 o’clock this evening. I thank you.

Sorry, I was supposed to amend the Oder Paper. Hon. Alaso wanted to lay some two documents. Hon. Alaso, lay the documents first – there are two reports.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for granting me this opportunity to lay on Table two reports. 

The first one is a report of the Parliamentarians for Global Action on the Regional Parliamentary Workshop on the Arms Trade Treaty; The Role of Parliamentarians. This meeting took place in Dar-es-Salam, Tanzania and the gist of the recommendation is to encourage our countries, particularly Uganda, to sign up on the Small Arms Trade Treaty. I beg to lay.

The Second report that I would like to lay on Table is the Report on the World Congress Against the Death Penalty that was held in Madrid, Spain between June 12 and 15, 2013. 

The gist of the recommendation is to encourage nation states to reform their laws to amend them and remove provisions in regard to death penalty. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

2.58
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here in my capacity as the Shadow Minister for Water and Environment. Yesterday, following the allegation that bribes were given to some MPs to pass the umeme report and after some discussion, you directed that the matter be sent to the rules committee.

On the 4th of this month, the Red Pepper reported that some MPs picked bribes to pass the GMO Bill. That is a matter of public concern, whether it is true or not because it erodes the image of Parliament. 

I was humbly proposing that similar to what you ruled over yesterday, the same allegation should be sent to the rules committee in defence of the image of this Parliament, so we know where the truth is.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, similarly, I instruct the rules committee to examine those allegations. I remember that something was mentioned here on the Floor, when the Bill was tabled for a second reading. So, please, investigate it and report to this House.

3.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Today, 11 December, 2013 on page 6 of New Vision, the Government newspaper, I see here that “Mandela was a champion of human dignity – MPs” which means all MPs. Then below, I see one minister called Rose Namayanja says that “Cabinet surprised by Mandela tribute” and then in bold words, she says, “How can the Leader of the Opposition move a Government Motion?” 

I am rising up to ask, was Mandela part of Government of Uganda property? I want to know and understand.  Which Motion is this which she says that it is only the Government of Uganda to own the Motion? 

Madam Speaker, I want your help because it looks that there are better people who should be able to do everything for the people of Uganda than others and that is why I rising up.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, it has been our tradition that when Motions are moved, both sides of the House speak. Indeed, the Government Chief Whip had written to me to say that they wanted this Motion moved on Tuesday and accordingly, I put it on the Order Paper. But when I arrived here, there was no one to move and the Seconder is normally the Leader of the Opposition and that is why he moved the Motion in the ordinary way.

So, I do not think that the Motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in that vein, I want to issue a warning – (Interjections) - no, it is a serious matter. Yes, a warning, that the people of Uganda are not owned by the Front Bench here and they should stop this habit of assuming that they own this country. They should stop it. Yes, in any case, if we are all Members of Parliament, we should do our work. I am issuing a warning to the Executive. (Interjections) Hon. Namayanja -  because she was speaking on behalf of the Cabinet and this is a press release. 

And worst of it, I am also surprised that even when the President went to South Africa, he forgot to go with them. (Laughter) If they assumed that they were more important than us, why didn’t they go with the President for the burial? So, that demonstrates that we should really be careful when we are talking to our colleagues. This Parliament is for all of us. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, because the report was presented and we had three Members that had contributed and then, there were a number who had indicated their desire to speak – so, I see hon. Musasizi, hon. Mawanda, hon. Kyanjo, hon. Wafula Oguttu. Three minutes, please. Let us start with those – it is about higher education and financing the education of the children of Uganda. 

3.03
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

I would like to appreciate all the efforts that have come up with this work so far. The objective of this Bill is to establish a scheme in Uganda to finance students to pursue higher education, to establish the Higher Education Students Finance Board, to establish a fund to finance the scheme among others.

In the budget of this year that was read in June, Shs 6 billion was declared to finance this initiative. 

For the last two years, the Ministry of Education has been receiving Shs 30 billion from State House aimed at facilitating scholarships in State House. My issue is; I am questioning the reality in Shs 6 billion to finance the loan scheme for Uganda. If Shs 30 billion per annum alone is facilitating the students under the State House Scholarship Scheme, what is Shs 6 billion for the scholarships for this entire country?  

So, as we move forward and as we enact this law, we need to consider the realities in what we are doing such that in future, when we are identifying funds for funding scholarships under this arrangement, it should be reasonable money that can reach the entire country and not just Shs 6 billion to keep    and give hope to Ugandans when actually, in reality, you are not going to see any impact. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

3.06
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the very good report. 

I would also like to thank colleagues who have contributed to this Bill. As my colleague has alluded, this Bill is aiming at improving or funding higher education in various institutions. 

I am also concerned that the funding set aside for this scheme is very little and as he has said, Shs 30 billion was set aside for a very small portion of scholarships in State House. And more so, Kampala International University, which is one of the universities in Uganda is running its private loan scheme of Shs 3.6 billion per annum. So, if the Government is talking about Shs 5 billion to finance higher education for the whole country, then the Government is not serious. It needs to look around for more funding to enable this project, which is a very good one as we all agree but we need to again look at the funding component.  

Secondly, is the infrastructure. As we talk about funding higher institutions, are these universities or higher institutions of learning in position to receive the number of students to be able to attain the education?

Recently, Government passed a law to make Computer Science compulsory but in some schools like one secondary school in my constituency, which had 17 students sitting for Senior Six but they were using two computers. So, if you are going to pass this law, is there enough infrastructure in the institutions to accommodate the students that will be admitted under this scheme?

Thirdly, is how accessible are these loans? Let us hope that it will not be like the Youth Fund where people are moving around up and down seeking for these loans and they are not able to access them. What is the criterion? Is it very clear for the beneficiaries to be able to know that you can move in and be able to access the loan? 

I think this is a loan that we should put in place to ensure that it improves the quality of the degrees that our students are getting. Let us not fund History, Geography and Religious Education. We should look at professional courses that can be able to develop our country.  

Lastly, is the question of recovery. If you give out these loans to students - we are aware there is a problem of unemployment. People will leave institutions and go out and will not be able to get jobs, how will they pay back these loans?  

Have we put a mechanism in place to ensure that these students after accessing these loans are able to get jobs and pay back? They access these loans and at the end of the day, these loans turn out to be a problem. And I also, hope they are not going to give harsh conditions like letting their parents be guarantors and that kind of thing. Otherwise, if you make it very hard, much as it is a good policy, then it will turn out to be bad for the beneficiaries. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omwonya, you had indicated intention to speak then hon. Kyanjo, hon. Wafula Oguttu and hon. Lubega. I am starting with those who indicated last week, that they wanted to speak.  

3.10
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the committee for the good work done. 

Actually, this Bill was long overdue. Other countries within East Africa started this scheme long ago - students of countries like Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda have really benefited enormously from this scheme. 

The justification for this Bill is to streamline financing of higher education to enable our students who qualify to perceive higher education to go to university and other higher institutions. 

Up to now, the situation has been that of severe inequality following those from rich families. The loan scheme should be accessed by all qualified students admitted to institutions of higher education.  

Two, I would also propose that even students who are studying outside in other universities should benefit from this scheme except that the parents might have to top up on whatever is being given by the scheme.  

I would also like to propose that Government sponsorship and even State House scholarships should be phased out. My brother there has lamented on the amount put for this scheme, which is about Shs 5 or 6 billion. That is not enough but I am sure that if these other sponsorships are phased out and the money added to the scheme, then that will really help our students.

Thirdly, a lot of care should be taken when categorising subjects considered feasible for economic development of the country in accessing the loan scheme. All subjects in one way or another are critical to this country including Religious Education because this subject imparts moral values among our people and also to fight corruption – (Member timed out.) 

3.13
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Motion although I have some areas of disagreement with it. 

On Page 5 of the report, number 10 says that, “although it is common practice for loans to have a guarantor, the committee is against inclusion of the guarantor in the Bill because some students may fail to get guarantors thus failing to access the loan.” I object to this idea. Every student must get a guarantor, even if this guarantor is an LCI chairman because you are going to look at three areas, which must be included in this report- employment, bondage and the guarantor. 

Under employment, when you come to the idea of giving students loans, you must create employment and there must not be excuses. These are teachers; they must be posted in all areas of Uganda so that you have to keep these students under close watch and give them the time for repayment.But there must be a guarantor. About employment also, Government must look for ways of creating employment so that students who have been sponsored by these loans can be posted in these posts, which will be created by Government.

And lastly, they must be bonded for a reasonable period of time, which can be agreed on by this Parliament. That is my position, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope we can make the difference between a referee and the guarantor because under the law, if I guarantee your loan and you fail to pay, I pay. You are telling LCIs to pay loans for children in my village if they default? Referee yes. But guarantor?

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, maybe, I do not understand the terms very well but I feel very strongly about this type of thing.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, you are talking about a referee. Maybe LCI can say,“The man lives in my village.” But to act as a guarantor?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in Uganda right now, you cannot tell how many children have left the university, who are unemployed. And you do not know the people who are in formal and informal employment. I am sure the reason we are going to give these loans is that when you get a job, you should start paying. It will therefore be the duty of Government to start getting people of Uganda jobs. That is one thing. 

But the only person who will know that you have got a job, I am sure, is the person in your village because of lack of statistics and data. Until, maybe, we make it that wherever you are is known, that will be the best –(Interjections)– yes, that is not the difference. I think for information purposes, the guarantor should – when we are making the law and looking at the guarantor, the guarantor should not be for the purpose of paying but for purposes of information and that is the reason we will look at because a referee will say,“I know you; you are a good person,” and he will go.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I said. Let us differentiate between someone giving you a reference and the guarantor. The guarantor is a very serious issue by the way. It is very serious. Maybe, the Minister and the Chair will explain but my understanding is that if I guarantee your loan and you default, I pay. It is quite serious. So, the LCIs might not want to put their hand on your application. (Hon. Members rose_)But what he is going to say is what I have said.

3.18
MR MEDARD LUBEGASSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Certainly, not different. Madam Speaker, I am entirely in agreement with the Chair. And also to add, if you make such a provision, then you must also make provision in the case of death of the guarantor. And the distinction, I think, ought to be drawn between the commercial loans that we have witnessed before by the banks and this scheme by Government. My biggest fear is- forgetting about the LCs and the Government officials who are referees- the individual private person may find extreme difficulty in guaranteeing this. That is no.1.Because it means that if the guarantor dies- assuming I guarantee somebody’s loan and I die, they will go for my personal estate and I am worried that including that clause may be counterproductive.


3.18
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for this report but I have issues with the Bill.Maybe,another Bill will soon come but I think the country needs a comprehensive review of funding of our education, right from primary school. We are all aware that we have very big issues with UPE. We need to review UPE funding because as it is now, it is not helping the country as much as it should. So, we need to review how to fund primary, secondary and higher education. 

Most of the schools now in Uganda are private schools. Kampala alone has over 3,000 schools, yetGovernment has less than 200. So, it means education is in private schools but the Ugandan children going to these schools- and I think that a Ugandan child who goes to a private school should qualify for a scholarship as much as one who goes to a Government school. So, the scheme we are setting up should take that into account. A parent should choose to take his or her child to any school, whether private or public, but also they should qualify to have access to this scheme. 

The money I have seen here, therefore, is very little money. I do not know how they are going to arrive at who should qualify for this money. Maybe, they are going to give just 1,000 and then it will cause unnecessary problems for MPs. So, we should be having a comprehensive report out of here, something which is going to be accessed by the whole country. 

It is also not clear what is going to happen to the 4,000 children who have been getting bursaries. These are largely children of the rich people. Most of us who are seated here who are ready to pay, the government pays for your children at university.  I think this must stop. We can pay fees for our children or we can borrow for them and I think we should start another scheme.Apart from the loan, we should have another scheme for bursaries for poor children. I would not be speaking to you here if I never got a bursary. I lost my parents when I was in P.2 and I was basically educated on bursaries because for as long as you did well at school, you got a bursary and I got a bursary from Bukedi District, which no longer gives bursaries. So, I think that the Minister should be thinking about a bursary scheme. (Member timed out.)

3.22
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I am up to support this scheme. I would like to say that in the Eighth Parliament, I even approached the then Minister ofEducation, Mrs Bitamazire, about giving loans. Why did I go for loans other than these scholarships in State House? State House is supposed to be for all of us; not for just the party or cadres. Some students from my district also benefitted fromState House Scholarshipsbut the criterion for these youth to benefit from the State House Scholarships was very tricky and not transparent at all. We want something, which is transparent, which will treat all Ugandans as Ugandans; put them on the same platform and those who will meet the criteria should be given; not that you must first have your yellow card. This is wrong. 

We want to see a board,which is very independent and one that cuts across the political divide. Why do I say so? We may actually have very good intentions but tomorrow, it will be politicised. They put their cadres and for you to have this, you must first have this. I am a member of the Appointments Committee and this brings me to say that when the President is nominating some people, he should also consult with even those in the Opposition because the Opposition also pays tax. You people think that we do not pay tax; I can see my friend, hon. Rebecca Otengo, laughing as if she was one time not in the Opposition and facing the same situation. (Laughter)(Interjections) Yes, you discovered but if you discovered, let us be fair to Ugandans who pay taxes. Ugandans must be put on the same platform. Yes, you discovered but I do not know how you discovered it. 

Let us respect Ugandans irrespective of their political ideology. We cannot all think the same. So, when I think differently, respect my view of thinking and do not deny me something that has come out of public resources, which we have put together.(Member timed out.) 

3.25
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (NRM, Kasanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who think this scheme may be frustrated if we are not careful because majority of these students are coming from the rural areas. Others are orphans who may find it a problem to find fees. Apart from the government itself -because majority of them are being sponsored by Government right from primary - we need to know who the beneficiaries will be. What courses are they going to take because some courses are not reliable for jobs? We need courses, which can create jobs for our students. 

We also want to know how much they are likely to pay and for how long. We do not want people to enter a scheme, which cannot pay them. How do we know whether they are going to take years and years and they become slaves? So, my argument is that we need to be very careful because the people we are going to assist are orphans, they are needy children and the only parent could be the jobs, which jobs will be paying back to the government. And remember, the government has done very well by bringing them right from primary. I think there should be consideration for those who cannot pay because the government has done it very well. We do not want to frustrate children.

Secondly, as we go with the scheme, we need to have another scheme to cater for those who left school early - the dropouts. You are aware that the Youth Fund has not worked at all. In my area, it has not done anything. Do we have another scheme to assist others who have not benefited, those who have not managed to go to university? And they are a big number. That is my argument. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.38
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to that ofother Members to thank the Chair and members of this committee for the report. I wanted to talk about observation 9 on page 5, which reads “Currently, each university carries out its own admission for private students, which leads to multiple and substandard admissions. A national clearing house for admissions to higher education institutions should be developed.” 

Madam Speaker, this is a good observation although it lacks a recommendation to back it up. What is happening is that we have heard about very embarrassing situations where some of our universities are awarding degrees and other awards which have been challenged by other people especially outsiders and even internally. I recommend that we should not have a clearing house but standards should be laid down by the Ministry of Education showing levels for admissions in universities. Since it is already the practise that you find the lecturers teaching in Makerere University or Nkumba and elsewhere, I think we should have the same examination system so that our students sit the same exams. It has been done in Law School, I think where those universities that have decided to include the Faculty of Law sit the same exams with those in Makerere University so that we have a standard, so that we can produce people with quality education. 

3.32
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the Motion and I would like to propose that this scheme really should cover all Ugandans without any discrimination and I would like to further propose that if possible, this scheme should really emphasise science and technological skills. Therefore, the support for skilling Ugandans is very vital in this scheme and it should be emphasised. 

I would have preferred further benchmarking to some countries that have perfected this system because we are not trying to reinvent the wheel. This system has worked elsewhere in the world. I would have preferred that these committee members or the Ministry of Education should have looked at other countries and how they have done this programme. Otherwise, it is very good and I believe that even a journey of 1,000 kilometres starts with one step. Therefore, even if the funds are minimal, I hope it will be rolling on every financial year. 

I have a question about the nature of education. Our education seems to put emphasis on roles and not expanding the minds deep in the hearts of our children. Our education is centred on what I call job centric focus -educating our children to be job creators instead of job seekers. I have heard this being said over and over but I do not see it being emphasised. So, if the scheme can support those skills that create employment like other countries have done – if you go to Europe, in Germany, they emphasise diplomas and certificates; you do not find many people with degrees and PHDs. People there mostly have diplomas and that is why countries like Germany have excelled. 

So, I would like to see this being emphasised and I call upon all my colleagues to support this scheme. However, I believe that if these people benchmarked more, the guarantor should be the Government because it is Government that owns Ugandans; how about individuals who may fail? I believe that if Government becomes the guarantor and bonds the beneficiaries, that would be a better system. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.34
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South,Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I want to start with the issue of reconciling the observations on page 4. They state that all recognised and accredited institutions of higher learning are to benefit from this. Then on no.9, page 5, they say that a national clearing house for admissions in higher institutions of learning – we need to harmonise these in relation to what is happening now. The students who have just sat senior six are being given JAB forms; instead of Joint Admissions Board, it is Public University Joint Admissions Board. 

If we are to admit students including those institutions that are already accredited and recognised, we should open it and allow even the private ones to benefit from the services of this body; then we shall be speaking the same language because there are no foreign students; all are Ugandan students. 

On guarantor ship, I should give a testimony on the experience we went through when we guaranteed our youth to get motorcycles in the Eighth Parliament. I fell a victim; I was taken to court having guaranteed 56 youth to get motor cycles. When they got the motor cycles, they sad, the MP was thanking us for the votes; so they absconded from paying back their loan. It was my first time to stand in the dock to defend myself. The other people said, “we cannot lose this money; you people who guaranteed should pay.” I was given a bill that I could not pay and I ended up in the dock. What transpired later, I should not tell the House.You should know that such experiences scare us from committing individuals to guarantee students. 

Like Colonel is saying, either Government or the beneficiaries themselves should be the guarantors of their loans. We should put up a strict form for the students to sign before they enrol for this scheme.

Madam Speaker, I think this is relief to all of us because we have been struggling to fund students from our constituencies. When this loan scheme comes into force, it will be relief to all of us. I salute Government and say that we should support it and also urge Government to give more resources and funding so that it can be here to stay and serve its purpose. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.37
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Chair of the committee and the committee members for the report. I stand to support the Motion. However, I have a few observations. 

When the MP of Gulu was contributing, there was mention that scholarships are given to only people of NRM. But I am also seated on this side yet I have never benefited. So, I felt offended. I feel this is the right time for us to ensure that the scholarships can benefit all Ugandans regardless of the region or party they come from. Provided one is a Ugandan, they must benefit. 

Secondly, when you talk of by-electoral scholarships, I also have some reservations. If the officials in the line ministries investigated, they would find that it is the relatives of those officers handling those finances benefitting. If we could investigate the people benefiting from the scholarships in Foreign Affairs, you would find that it is the relatives of those officers and those in Ministry of Education. That means that people who are not represented in those ministries are not benefitting. That has forced us to get to an extent of begging people in those ministries to allow our people to benefit. But all has been in vain. We have begged, but still our people have not benefitted. Therefore, this is the time for us to include this clause in this Bill and a law that would cater for all our people in the country. 

Madam Speaker, I also wonder how we are going to handle this loan; I do not know whether this is a commercial loan; whether it is a loan without interest or whether it is a grant. If somebody gets it and then takes ten years without getting employment; does that mean the interest rate will continue to accumulate? Or should we take it that as long as this person is not employed, there will be no interest? We should consider such issues so that we can tell our people the right things. On the issue of admissions – (Member timed out.)

3.41
MS ANNE AURU (NRM,	Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I have this to say. I support the committee’s position on guarantors. We have students who are very brilliant and there are also those who are total orphans. I do not think anybody would like to be a guarantor for somebody like that. That would mean supporting that person yourself. You know that if that person fails to get employment, the burden will be squarely laid on you. So, we should give opportunity to such categories of students – I support the position of the committee that such people should have no guarantors. 

Secondly, on the issue of what category of students should benefit, I suggest that we consider both science and arts students. May be the variation should be in the percentage of beneficiaries. We may give 30 percent for arts and 70 percent for science students. Both categories are important and we need them in the development of our economy.

I also support the committee’s idea that the Ministry of Education should be the ones to manage the loan and the scholarship because I have an experience. In my two terms in Parliament, only five students benefited from State House scholarships – (Interjections) – those five students were not fully sponsored; their fees were paid only for the first one year. The burden was left to them; some of them are still struggling to pay up to now. 

So, if this is brought under the management of the Ministry of Education, there will be transparency and equal treatment for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.43
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO	(Independent,Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Government for bringing this Bill and the committee for taking a critical look at it. 

My comments Madam Speaker are on the committee’s observation on inefficient loan collection especially the infrastructure and I wanted to find out from the Minister of Education who is just running out, anyway, he is here, Higher Education is around.

THE SPEAKER: He is a minister of state.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, the infrastructure, in most cases, governments that have failed these loans, do not have good infrastructure and in Uganda,  when you look at a country with a poor data system, how are we sure that actually when this loan is taken by these students it is going to be recovered? 

And in addition to that, students who take loans, we expect them to recover them at a certain time after they have got employed. With this informal employment system in Uganda where we know that actually majority of students are even encouraged to go in the informal sector through youth livelihood fund and everything, how are you going to ensure that actually, this loan is repaid? 

 I want to concur with my colleague who said that both sciences and arts are equally important in this country because we are making a law for Uganda. Are we going to continue amending the law if we restrict ourselves to say that we support critical subjects, critical courses and we leave out the other courses, if it was like that, we would not see all these – (interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that it would be discrimination, contrary to the Constitution, to talk about preferred courses and secondly, the so-called critical courses, are not defined by law.

And you are talking about making a law, without clear demarcations as to what amounts to the critical courses.

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you for that information and I wanted to find out also, when is this course to be operationalised? Because when it was announced, it was to be operationalisedthis financial year and many students have been on our neck, I understand the intake is going on.

So, how are they going to – especially those who are already going to the university and higher institutions, how are they going to benefit from this loan and yet, it was announced that there are going to benefit from this students’ scheme loan? 

Madam Speaker, if I do not pay back this loan, what will happen to me? If I take the loan well knowing that I will pay it, I fail to get a job, I am on the street, what will happen to me? Who will pay that loan for me? 

Thank you.

MR FUNGARRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have three problems with the report under the following. One, the amount of money has been stated her. Now, what is the cost of education in a year, in Uganda? Is it going to be fixed? What about if the needs changes yearly? Are you going to amend this law every time, every year? 

So, for me, I say, let it be a principle, that money be given without stating the amount; that is number one. The amount should come – it is a budgetary matter, the government has been budgeting every year, this year, we are giving this much, if we get oil, we increase the amount.

The question of guarantors is another problem of discrimination. First of all, what are the qualities of guarantors? Are you going to ask for land titles from a person in Obwongi, where there are no land titles there? Automatically, you are saying Obongi you are out because even the richest person in Obongi does not have a land title. (Interjections) Yes, if you include land titles, land belongs to everybody, not you, you cannot have a title, so, that is the question of discrimination.

Even bank statements, there must be a limit for the bank, that any person of this magnitude or amount of money can qualify, another one cannot, Madam Speaker. We should not legislate to promote discrimination.

Therefore, I propose the following as the way forward; Government should provide the guarantee for everybody, government should open the system of higher education for everybody to be free, but on the condition, may be, Madam Speaker, like your time, when you went to university, in Uganda, education was free for everybody.

Now, this time you go to university Government paying for you, but you know that after qualifying, you will pay. Government will not fail to follow you where you will be, even if you take 20 years without getting a job, government will know because if we are getting IDs, we shall know our citizens are here, and they will pay.

Number three, if you get these studies in the form of loans and you fail to get a job, let those who have got the job pay for those who have not got yet.(Interjections) yes, it is possible, Madam Speaker, it is possible, it can work.

For the one who has never got, we contribute through taxes, for example. There used to be something called graduated tax. It has been scrapped, but people of Uganda have not stopped paying taxes, through value added tax.

If for everybody who qualified from university gets a job, the small percentage to pay for the loan – (member timed out.)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have got to differentiate two issues, a loan and a scholarship. I cannot imagine that Government would just put in Shs6 billion and they call that a loan scheme. That cannot at all manage loans.

I will talk about scholarships first. I happen to have been a member of the Central Scholarship Board for four years and I saw how scholarships were given out in this country. I am glad that after we made a lot of noise, the scholarship scheme from the Presidents’ Office, State House scholarship scheme has now been transferred to the Ministry of Education.

State House was giving out 8, 245 scholarships, that is about Shs30 billion, and now you are talking about Shs 6 billion for the entire country. Are you just taking Ugandans for a ride? 

When we talk of scholarships, we must do it on a quota system, Madam Speaker, simply because if we are just going to give scholarships to people who are going to apply it means that all these scholarships are going to one side and this is what I saw when I was on the Central Scholarship Board. 

Scholarships must be given on a quota system and if you say you are going to give scholarships according to how people have performed in schools scholarships will go one side.

Therefore, scholarships must be on quota system. I come to loans, Madam Speaker. The government must put there money and every Ugandan who goes to the university must qualify for a loan.

There is no need to ask people to give guarantees. It is the government, for you having qualified to go to university, that is already a qualification for you to get a loan from government.

And Government must guarantee, and the committee and the Ministry of Education, must do research and see how countries have been giving loans. When you give a loan, you must make sure, the Minister of Education,  this is very good for you and I want you to listen. 

When Government gives a loan, you must make sure that the students you have given loans will get employment and they will be able to pay back the loans. It is the government to guarantee to give a loan to everybody who has gone to the university and you must make sure that these students get jobs.

Today, as I speak, 84 percent have no jobs. Therefore, you are not going to crucify these people who have got loans to pay back the loans when they have no employment.

They must be given jobs. If these children who got loans have no employment, then government must write off these loans after ten years. This is what happens in other countries.

And those who get these loans must not be charged any interest at all. These loans they pay back when they get employment, this is what should be done on the scheme of loans and the scholarships.

So, every Ugandan must be entitled to a loan, who qualifies to go to university and Government must give a guarantee. (Member timed out.)

3.54
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report but I want to make the following observations. First all, on pages 5 and 6, the committee is giving us a report from countries, which they benchmarked and they said that the most failed loan schemes throughout the world have failed for one or more of the following reasons, and one of the reasons is ineffective loan collection structures and recovery systems. 

On page 7, the committee is also talking about the problem our country has, that although this scheme is intended for Ugandans, the country at the moment lacks a comprehensive database system and a national identification system, which could be used for tracking and tracing beneficiaries. It is likely that if we implement this scheme now, even non-Ugandans might benefit from it because Uganda does not know her people.

That being the case, then we have a proposal that we should not have guarantors. I am of the view that as much as we would not go for the guarantors who would be required to pay the loans in case the beneficiaries fail, there is need to have a system to identify our people maybe using the LC system or through schools so that people can be traced. However, if we start giving out money and call this a loan scheme when you do not know who is taking the money, where he lives, whether he is a Ugandan or not, then it will be very hard to recover this money and we shall run into a similar problem as those countries where this scheme has failed.

The problem with our country is that we implement good things hurriedly without planning. Like in this case, we allocated money in the budget in June and at this time, we are talking about the law. It appears that we first appropriated funds as Parliament and then after allocating funds we find ourselves in a situation where we say, “How do we move with this money?” and now, we come back to make the law. These borders on criminality on our side as Parliament because how could we have appropriated money in the first place without an enabling law?

What I want to suggest, therefore, is that we need thorough planning for this scheme- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition. And can the Minister get ready to respond?

3.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I have forgotten. I used to know that scholarships were basically for intelligent children or students, but nowadays in Uganda scholarships are “for whom do you know.” So, in that regard, I want scholarships to be there and the scholarships can be in the Ministry of Education to help intelligent students to go wherever they want to go like for masters. 

But for loans, the loan scheme must be for everybody and there should be no board. In fact, there is no need for a board- (Interjections) - yes, I want to explain why there should be no board. I have sat my senior six in Mwiri, I have passed, I have gone to Makerere, the person who should recommend me should be Makerere because they will be the ones who have agreed that they have admitted me and not a board, which will bring more costs, which could have been used for more students. So, I think we must be realistic in this country when we are planning.

If you read the law, the Minister has powers like no man’s business. He is the one who can determine if you are the one to get boarding fees. He is the one who can determine how much you can get from where you are coming. I think this business of giving a lot of powers to the minister is breeding corruption. We should come out and say, “The loan we are giving the students will be x amount of money,” and if you give x amount of money then every student will know, “When I qualify for a loan, it will be x amount of money,” and not to go and look for the minister to give you a letter to change your amounts of money.

Madam Speaker, if you divide the money which is in the Bill, for me I have not- any way, first of all, it is wrong to put money in the Bill. I do not know why you want us to put money there. We must pass a Bill saying, “We are going to give loans to students who go to higher institutions of learning.” Because if you get Shs5 billion and they take an average of Shs million per student that means you are going to pay for 1,000 students. Now, what is that? There will be a lot of problems. The MPs will have a problem.

Let me give an example that there are 300 MPs who have students- others may not be having. If each of them has 20 people, that is already 6,000. So, where do you get the scholarships for the balance of 5,000 when it is 1,000? 

So, Madam Speaker, that is where I started from, that there is money in State House for scholarships, which is about Shs30 billion. If we passed it to become part of the loans it would be able to serve more students instead of a few. I am sure the people who go to State House it is because they cannot afford but now we are telling them that you will afford after getting a job- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, one thing I was trying to bring up is that the money we are talking about is about the students of- scholarship money goes to the ministry. I know education can be managed cheaply. Even this Shs5 billion can be enough for all students in Uganda if the Government of Uganda decided to invest in the following: fixed costs. What are fixed costs? Like salaries, buildings, managing the university. The remaining money, which is a variable cost, could be paid by parents and that is why they should get loans. 

This, for me, I believe is the best thing for us because this will be the best time for Government to create jobs for all Ugandans. This also would be the time to get data about all children about people who are qualifying every day from the university to get jobs. 

Recently, we did a survey on Kampala Road near Diamond Trust. We said, “Can we block this place- here and here- and count those people who are in that area?” We counted 100 people and of those, six had studied diplomas; two had stopped somewhere in lower level; 92 were graduates. Out of the 92 who were graduates, only three were employed. And how were they employed? They are the ones who go to commercial banks and are given appointment letters, “when you bring a customer, you will get a percentage.” That meant they were also unemployed because at the end of the day, if they have not got a customer they will have nothing. 

The remaining 89 had nothing. If you looked at their shoes, they were really in a bad state. If you look at their condition- and they were not sure of their next meal. That is the state we are in. When you ask these people, their parents sold all their land to educate them and now, they are on the streets suffering. We believe when we give loans, the government will be forced to create employment for them so that they are able to pay. If we do not make the government have an obligation, people of Uganda will end up suffering. I know at an appropriate time, we shall move those amendments. 

Loans all over the world for students do not carry interest. And if you want to charge interest, then what does that mean? 

In any case, the Government of Uganda never got money from the people who are in power. The money was got from the people of Uganda and the people they are developing are the people of Uganda and they are developing them for Uganda. So, there is no need for us to have interest on this money. What is the purpose of interest? The business of Government is not trade. Interest means you want profits. So, what profits do you make when you have invested in your people, especially education – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I will invite the minister to respond to the issues raised before we go to committee stage but in the meantime, I want to announce that tomorrow, we are hosting the National Schools Debate Championship on the theme” “National Cohesion.” 37 secondary schools have been at Trinity College Nabbingo engaging in that contest. The quarter finals are taking place today and the final debate will be hosted here at Parliament between 10.30 a.m. and 12.00 p.m. If the members of Parliament would like to engage the children, those who want to debate with them should go to the Conference Hall A from 10.30 a.m. to 12.00 p.m. and take on the young people. Otherwise they will be here the whole day doing their thing in the people’s House. 

4.05
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members of this House who have made an input to the committee report and to the Bill. I hope that they will allow me also to make clarifications without interruptions because I have been sitting patiently and quietly listening to all of them, so that we can save time.

The first clarification that I would like to make is that there was a concern that the government should initiate another scheme for low-level students who may wish to pursue certificates or who dropped out of school for one reason or the other. Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to make is that Government is currently implementing the Skilling Uganda Programme which hopes to strengthen all our technical and vocational education institutions and which has a very big window for dropout children to come and take on informal training and we hope that this takes care of those learners in Uganda who are of that category of concerns to Members of Parliament.

Secondly, there was a concern that there should be a unit cost and because of changing economic situations and inflation, it is not very easy for us to find the unit cost. Our view is that the board that the Bill seeks to establish will from time to time review the unit costs of these programmes relating to what obtains exactly in these institutions of learning and also in the economy.

Madam Speaker, there was also a concern of lack of identity cards; how shall we know who is Ugandan in order to benefit from the loan? (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to respond to the issues, which have already been raised. You will speak during committee stage. 

MS ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I wish to note that Government is currently implementing a programme of issuing national identity cards to all Ugandan children and with the completion of this programme, the interests of identifying who is Ugandan and who is not will be taken care of. But I would like to beg Members to allow us to use the available mechanisms that we can use now when this law comes into force very soon so that we can spend the money that we already have in the ministry – Shs6 billion - next semester for those students who will successfully apply and qualify for these loans and scholarships. I also request Members of this House to support the Ministry of Internal Affairs in one way or the other so that the completion of that project of national identity cards is logically implemented. 

Madam Speaker, there was a concern that this loan should target only the needy students. The clarification is that the loan is not meant to be discriminatory and when we go into committee stage, you will realise that interests of such needy students are taken care of because the board is allowed to take into consideration regional balance, gender, social economic need of these people who apply for the loans and also equity. So, we hope that this clause takes care of the needy students which the House is concerned about. 

There was also a concern on the mechanisms in place to recover the loans. In the Bill, it is clearly stated that firstly, it is the responsibility of the loanee – the person who has received the loan - to ensure that he updates the board and also the government on his employment status or where he has moved in case he has moved out of the country but we have mechanisms including penalties clearly spelt out in the Bill and we also have mechanisms that we shall use to track those that go out of the country using our foreign missions abroad. But Madam Speaker, we are looking forward to maximum cooperation from the people who will receive the loans and maximum cooperation from those that will employ them, even when we have provisions of the law that we penalise them just in case they do not respond to the requirement of the law. 

There was an issue of the Shs6 billion. Yes, it is there in our account of the Ministry of Education and Sports, for this financial year to implement the loan scheme. We have not touched that money because this law has not been passed and has not been assented to. My prayer is that we move expeditiously into passing this Bill into law so that it is assented to and next semester, we are able to spend this Shs6 billion which we have to start giving to students who have been waiting for the Students Loan Scheme for a very long time.

On the issue of computers in schools, we have a policy and we had the hope that we should start examining students of A-level on computer but because we have not yet covered all schools, we hope that this next financial year, we shall cover all schools by the Uganda Communications Commission through the Ministry of ICT giving all those remaining schools the computers and we have already given them the list of schools, both private and public, who do not have computers. 

Matters of the guarantor have been a concern of almost every Member of Parliament here and the clarification that I wish to make is that the issue of the guarantor was done away with because we also realised that the guarantors would fear to guarantee these needy students and yet these students need the money. So, the issues of the guarantors should not make us lose sleep. It was done away with. We will not have that as a provision.

On matters of bonding of those who are fully paid for because the Bill takes care of both scholarships and also loans or bursaries, those who will be fully paid for will be bonded. Matters of the State House scholarships have also come from almost every Member of Parliament here and the clarification that I would like to make is that, in principle, H.E the President of Uganda directed that all the money that he has been spending on giving Ugandan children education through State House scholarships; from Kotido to Arua; from Kabale to Kisoro; from Masaka to Katakwi; from Mbale to Kamuli – the Shs 30 billion should transitionally be reverted to the Ministry of Education and Sports for the implementation of this students loan scheme. But this was in principle and not because anyone was shouting. 

Secondly, the 4,000 scholarships which we have been giving to students in higher institutions of learning will also be taken care of now under this scheme and also the bilateral scholarships, which the ministry has been offering students through the Central Scholarship Committee will transparently be managed under this law. 

So, this law is going to stand the test of time and I believe that Members will be here to witness by 2040 – I believe then we shall have the capacity to pay for everybody who qualifies for higher education. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the interest, which the Leader of the Opposition was so much interested in, and which we are proposing in this law is not commercial interest. The interest which we desire to achieve from this law is to take care of inflation so that when the borrower pays back the loan, in case of inflation or any change in the economy that very money can manage to pay for another student on the same program. 

So, it is not a commercial loan on commercial interest; it is interest to take care of the sustainability of the fund. For instance, if hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi borrows to do engineering, by the time he finishes the course and he is paying back the money, that money should be able to pay for another engineer – (Interruptions) I have finished making my clarifications – (Interjections) – I am not fearing him as he is saying, because he is my friend, after all. 

So, those are the few concerns which I noted and I have a feeling that I have adequately taken care of them. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I know that there are many Members who want to speak, but we need to finish this Bill. I have been putting pressure on the committee to complete it quickly because there are children in this country who are being fleeced already that they can access this money when there is even no law. So, I think we need to take it out of the way. 

And when we finish the law, hon. Minister, please, give it the necessary clarity so that Ugandan children are no longer cheated; there are thieves all over the place looking for these young people. 

Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BILL, 2013

Clause 1

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause one, “Interpretation”, the committee proposes that we –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we leave that and do it last? There may be Members making other amendments. 

Clause 2
MS SSSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes insertion of a new part two by transforming Clause 15 of part four to appear immediately after part one to read as follows: 
“2) Higher Education Students Financing Scheme: establishment of higher education students’ financing scheme
i) 	There is established a scheme to be known as ‘the higher education students financing scheme.’
ii) 	The scheme shall consist of loans and scholarships provided to eligible students to pursue higher education. 
iii) 	The scheme shall be managed by a board. “

Madam Chairperson, the justification is that there is need to establish the scheme before the establishment of the board for proper flow of the provisions of the Bill. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would have had no problem with that but the moment the chairperson talks about a board; I am against the board. I refuse the board because it will only accrue unnecessary costs. We are saying that every Ugandan qualifies for the loan. If that is true, then what is the purpose of the board? What we need to say is that there will be a financing scheme –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Nandala, who will administer the scheme?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is a good question. The Ministry of Education has been managing scholarships; in fact, the staff of that ministry, whom we pay should manage that scheme. Let me give an example; if you get somebody from Mbale to be a board member, whenever he comes, you will pay him Shs 1,000,000 for transport, you pay him accommodation, you pay sitting allowance. By the end of the day, he would have eaten money that would pay for five students. So, let us be realistic; the staff of the Ministry of Education should handle this scheme. 

THE CHAIPERSON: Hon. Minister, what kind of board do you envisage?

MS ALUPO: Madam Chair, I would like to appreciate the concern of hon. Nandala. But to me, the board is very important in the running of this scheme. The Central Scholarship Committee has been giving scholarships bilaterally and you see that a lot of noise has been made. 

Now, the idea of having a board is that the money for these scholarships is not only from Government. The board will be given powers to advocate for other partners who may wish to strengthen what Government has; the board will be overseeing what the secretariat of the loan scheme is doing. So, in my view, all we needed to do was limiting the number of board members to seven. But I strongly recommend that this Parliament does appreciate that we need the board to manage the establishment and sustainability of the scheme. Maybe, you may also wish to look at the members who were proposed to be on the board; they are already described. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I thank the Minister for attempting to clarify on this. But if that is going to be the function of the board, then we are creating a very unique board – a board that moves around to solicit for funders had never been witnessed in this country. This is technical work; you are talking about evaluation of applications, for example, you are talking about making proposals on criteria etcetera. And the Ministry of Education and Sports – for a long time even before I was born – has had people who carry out the technical evaluation of, among others, applications – how you qualify for this or the other. 

They are more technical than the board we are seeking to establish. You have boards in place like NSSF, URA and others but they do not do technical work. But here, we are seeking to establish a board, which is going to do technical work, which would definitely be carrying out daily functions. This is exactly what the Minister is talking about – a daily function, which would be carried out by the secretariat, which we are also seeking to establish.

I would agree with the Leader of the Opposition that for the purposes of cutting down costs let us have – because what is the position of this board going to be in the ministry structure? This is because we already have people who can do this and we do not need a board in place.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Isn’t it the practice, known and well established that where there is an Act of Parliament establishing a scheme or authority or a body like this, there would also be an equivalent – I just want guidance – equivalent body as being proposed here to govern, administer and to make sure that they make reports as by Act of Parliament which we are trying to make? Are we going to depart from the norm for reasons that this is going to be more expensive? Why is it that we have had several boards? I think the reason that this scheme is very important it is the very reason we should have a board that is able to administer it.

Madam Chair, I would want to agree with the committee in the insertion of a new part – but if it would be necessary that the words “There is established a scheme…” to be changed to “There shall be a scheme to be known…” Unless someone wants to educate me otherwise, I have made a case for the retention of the board and – (Interjections) I am fully educated on this one, you know that. 

MS SSINABULYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee carried out benchmarking visits to a number of countries that are implementing this kind of scheme and in all those countries we went to – and even those we did not go to but we studied, all schemes are managed by a board. And I think if Uganda does not have a board, then this enormous work will not be carried out properly if it is left to the Ministry of Education and Sports. So, I strongly stand by the provisions of the Bill that we maintain a board in the Bill.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Chair, I stand to support my Minister that we have a board in place. It is very important for Members to recall that we did a lot of consultation and visited very many countries that are operating successful loan schemes and all of them have a board running them. And Madam Chair, as you may have heard, people’s fear is to do with transparency. And the only way you can ensure transparency is to have a body that will manage – that will do the planning, the supervision – even directing whatever resources that will be under this scheme. 

Whereas it is true that there has been a Central Scholarship Committee in the Ministry but that was handling a very small piece of work. And yet, this is going to be a huge piece of work that requires a body where people come together representing different institutions, and the issue of a body that will ensure transparency so that it can even be asked. There have been a lot of complaints about the current Central Scholarship Committee and I think the solution to that problem is a board. The way that board has been structured will provide for the interest of almost everybody and it will ensure transparency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, it is this House which has been asking Government to arrange for a loan scheme to rescue children who are not able to get on the direct sponsorships, on the quota – it is we who have been demanding for it. So, I think let us allow it to come into office and then we can later evaluate it. 

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Madam Chair, being mindful of our history, this composition of the board – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not yet reached there – we are still on Clause 2. (Laughter)
Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by the committee chair. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, even before we go to Clause 3, we need to pronounce ourselves on the original Clause 2, which is the “establishment of the Higher Education Financing Board”. Then, we shall go to clause 3.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Your proposal was to replace the present – (Interjections) – I am reading the headnote, which says in part (ii) “Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme”.

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposed to insert a new part (ii) – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it cannot be part (ii); it could be maybe part (b).

MS SSINABULYA: And then we can have a new Clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Are you getting rid of the board?

MS SSINABULYA: No. Madam Chair, the committee proposed that in the flow of the Bill, we should start with the establishment of the financing scheme and then in the law, it becomes Clause 3.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have parts (ii) and (iii)? Or are they still under one part?

MS SSINABULYA: They are under part (ii).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you are the ones who are confusing us because you said that we should create part (ii) under this heading: “Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme.” Establishment of a scheme etcetera. You said nothing about the board. How do you want it to go? Let us hear from hon. Oboth. 

MR OBOTH: I believe I have understood the committee chair. I think and I know for sure that there is simply needed to put this proposal ahead of the existing Clause 2. So, by them saying “insertion of a new part (ii)” I think that is what caused the confusion. There is no insertion of new part (ii) but just that Clause 2 existing will be Clause 3 and then the one proposed will be Clause 2 –if I have understood you well. And that is the only way it could be, that now, we would have Clause 2 as proposed in the amendment, “Establishment of higher education students financing scheme” and then Clause 3 would be the establishment of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us ask the draft people to make that necessary change to be 2 and 3 but under part 2. They are all under part 2.

I put the question that the present Clause 2 does stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

MS SSINABULYA: Clause 3: composition and tenure of the board: the committee proposes to amend sub-clause 1(b) by inserting the words, “nominated by the National Council for Higher Education,” at the end of the provision. The justification is to provide for the nominating body.

(b) Re-draft sub-clause 1(c) to read, “A representative of management of institutions of higher education nominated by the Vice-Chancellors’ forum.” The justification is to avoid ambiguity.

(c) 	Insert two new provisions immediately after sub-clause 1(b) to read, “(h) a representative of workers nominated by a recognised workers’ organisation.” The justification is to cater for workers’ interests.

And the new clause (i) “A representative of persons with disabilities nominated by a recognised national umbrella body of persons with disabilities.” The justification is to cater for the interests of persons with disabilities.

(d) 	Delete sub-clause 3(1)(h). The justification is that the private sector is represented under employers in sub-clause (1)(f).

(e) 	Re-draft sub-clause 1(i) to read as, “The Executive Director shall be an ex-officio member of the board and shall be secretary to the board.” The justification is to correct a grammatical error.

(f) 	Re-draft sub-clause (4) to read as, “At least one third of membership of the board shall compose of women.” The justification is to provide for gender balance and for consistence with Article 32 and 33 of the Constitution.

(g) 	Amend sub-clause (5) by substituting “only once” with “only one more term”. The justification is for clarity and for consistency. Madam Chair, I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us start with 3(1)(c) on the body to nominate the representative of the universities. Any comment?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, whereas I agree with the committee Chairperson, I think by inserting the words “nominated by the National Council for Higher Education” there is unnecessary repetition that is imported into 1(b) because if you did that, 1(b) would then read as follows: “a representative of the National Council for Higher Education nominated by the National Council for Higher Education.” I am sure it would have been much better if we gave the Chief Executive of the National Council for Higher Education or even a board- if there is a board of the National Council for Higher Education- the authority to do this nomination. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have objection to that- the nominee being made by the body itself?

MR AMURIAT: Because now, this is so wide. You are not specific. Who would then do that function in the National Council for Higher Education if you just said National Council for Higher Education? “Somebody from National Council for Higher Education” is noble, that is right; but then who would do the nomination? It cannot be the – 

MS ALUPO: Madam Chairperson, I support the proposal by the committee and in that light, there are other provisions in the law in the ministry, which are drafted the way the committee is proposing, and that means the Executive Director of National Council for Higher Education. But the way the lawyers draft, that is what the committee is proposing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He was seeking to amend 3(1)(b) by making it specific that the National Council for Higher Education will be the one to nominate its representative. Is that the practice? 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, I am not very comfortable with this proposal to amend because we have dealt with similar bodies and presentations before. If you say, “A representative of URA,” you do not go ahead and say, “a representative nominated by URA,” or “a representative of Ministry of Education nominated – we do not have such a thing because the institution is an authority itself. Once you represent the institution, then the chief executive, using internal mechanisms in that institution, nominates the person. 

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Chair, I would like that we consider this statement the way it is- the way the committee has proposed. The fact that the National Council for Higher Education is an institution and the National Council For Higher Education comprises members from different education sectors means it is not important at this stage for us to exactly name whether the Executive Director because the person’s name is brought to the council meeting. So, I think it is important that we leave this statement the way it is.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, I think our main interest here was that we wanted to avoid the same person from the National Council for Higher Education being the representative throughout that time. Democracy must be practised. Of course, I cannot be a representative of the National Council for Higher Education when I am not working there. But as a board, they must sit and determine who is coming to the board. It is just democracy. That will reduce on-

THE CHAIPERSON: I do not see what you are arguing about. The committee says they have proposed to add the words “nominated by the National Council for Higher Education.” So, what is the problem?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, I think let us examine the need- where we are coming from. Why are we bringing in the National Council for Higher Education? It is for technical reasons. And I also want to draw comparisons with other laws. We have, for example, the executive of the Uganda Law Society and the representative from the Attorney-General’s Chambers; we say “Solicitor-General or a nominee.”

And I think the reason Members are insisting on this is that National Council for Higher Education is bringing in a technical input. It is for that reason that I find it desirable to mention that we bring in, for example, the Executive Director or a nominee. We still achieve the same thing but we also do it more specifically to bring in that technical input. 

I suggest, Madam Chair, that we be clear on this because if you take it to the board, for example, of the National Council for Higher Education, they may send us somebody who may not technically be useful to this particular board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, why do you imagine that everybody is not reliable? Do you expect them to just pick the gardener and say, “We are sending you to this board?”

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, if Members look at the different sub-clauses of clause 3, for example, when you look at 3(f), they talk about a representative of employers nominated by a recognised employers’ umbrella association. So, the committee wanted to ensure that on the membership or the composition of the board, all organs who are represented should nominate their own representatives other than maybe the minister nominating on their behalf. So, it was just in line with other sub clauses of the same clause and Madam Chairperson, it would be the council to nominate. So, maybe when we talk about – because the amendment was nominated by the National Council for Higher Education, we can maybe say, “nominated by the National Council for Higher Education.”

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, actually, nomination by the National Council for Higher Education solves the problem of technicalities. The National Council for Higher Education cannot nominate someone who is incompetent but if we leave it open for the director to decide, he might choose himself to be there and any weakness coming would not be contested. So, the moment you go for nomination, you are getting the right person to be represented on the board. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you supporting the committee?

MR SSEWUNGU: I am supporting it. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, my background is from an institution of higher learning. I was teaching at Mbarara University of Science and Technology. I have stood honestly to support the chairperson of the Committee on Education on what she is talking about, that once we leave it open the way hon. Mulongo wants it – and hon. Mulongo was also a member of the council of Mbarara University and I am surprised to see that this English is failing him – (Laughter) – the thing is, once we say “nominated by the National Council for Higher Education,” it means that the council know within themselves the person who is weak and who is strong. They will not give us somebody who is very hopeless. So, I am of the view that we leave it the way the chairperson has brought it here as somebody nominated by the National Council for Higher Education.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to just give you an example. When they say we nominate members of the Pan African Parliament, that Parliament shall nominate the members, we look at our rules which are established. So, why do you imagine that there are no rules in the National Council for Higher Education? Do you really think the National Council for Higher Education is just there, that they just wake up and – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clarification. The problem is English.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The problem is English?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I will explain why. Madam Chairperson, National Council for Higher Education includes staff. It is a council. So, that is why I am trying to come up here and I think if you are to do it, it should be the National Council for Higher Education –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Nandala- Mafabi, would you imagine a body writing to Parliament to say, nominate a Member of Parliament and then a member of staff goes for that meeting? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think it is a question of understanding the context properly because when you say, “A representative of the National Council For Higher Education,” it says it all and I want to agree with hon. Mulongo because nomination entails that there is another process but this is in itself sufficient because even for members of PAP – (Interjections)- but the main charter or treaty must be saying representatives from the respective legislative bodies and then, the rules of procedure for nomination and election prescribe that arrangement; that a particular Parliament will nominate, will do this and that but once that process becomes complete, then that member becomes a representative of that national legislature. This, to me – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, are you taking issue with the amendment by the chair?

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I seek clarification from the Attorney-General. This is from the Pan African Parliament and they say that Parliament will send representatives and they go further to say that the representatives will be Members of Parliament. If they left it hanging, we could send our clerk here or the Sergeant-At-Arms to the Pan African Parliament. What we are trying to say is that if you are talking of the National Council of Higher Education, at what range are you talking about it? Is it the staff or is it the board? 

So, what we want you to help us here to understand is, who are you nominating from the National Council for Higher Education?

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, allow me to keep on adding more knowledge on the matter of the National Council for Higher Education. The NCHE has the supreme governing body like any other institution and that supreme governing body is the council. Now, if we make this amendment the way the committee is proposing, when the ministry is communicating to the National Council for Higher Education, the proposal or the request or the requirement will be tabled before that supreme governing body which is full of professors, senior academicians and they will debate and identify the most suitable person who can come and make an input from the bureaucrats of National Council for Higher Education who are headed by the Executive Secretary, NCHE. So, it will be up to them to identify the most suitable person but what I was saying, Madam Chairperson, is that in the laws that we have in the ministry especially the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, there is a provision for a representative of the National Council for Higher Education and it is the NCHE to nominate and they nominate that person through their council. So, that is the clarification I wanted to add.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So,do we then need the amendment by the committee? Do we still need the committee’s amendment or is it superfluous? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the learned Attorney-General has guided and I was waiting for that guidance that actually in effect, you cannot draft by asking a government institution like the National Council for Higher Education or the Ministry of Finance to nominate because of the bureaucracies there but when you say a representative from the Ministry of Finance or minister responsible for finance, you are actually asking the accounting officer there to get a competent person. So, I find the proposal by the committee very redundant and I would not support it. 

I would support that the proposal as it is here is left active. (Interjections) The issue, Madam Chairperson, if I could conclude before being intimated - I am saying that look at the other style of drafting adopted by the drafts person here where nomination is referred to is where there is an umbrella association, organisation or whatever. Why should we subject an institution of Government to nomination? These would read and would be fine just to have a representative of the National Council for Higher Education and would sound good and would be perfect.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Ithink I understand what the Chair’s problem is. I think she wants to prevent the minister from sitting in her office and appointing somebody to the national council without the national council’s – yes, I think that is the mischief the chair wanted to cure.

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, that was the fear of the committee and that is why the committee proposed that for each representation, the council of the body which is being represented should not nominate its own preventative.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not even think that your worry should arise because if the minister did it; that would not be a representative of the national council for higher education; certainly not. It is the National Council for Higher Education that is supposed to do the nomination. Once that is done, that person becomes, in this law, a representative of that body. Those responsible for sending this person must look at the Act. 

Look at the functions of this board; look at the powers and mandate and the relevance of the person they have to send. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are contradicting yourselves. If the body is supposed to nominate; then why are you arguing against the amendment?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am saying, I do not want to use the term, “Nomination”, because nomination entails another process, which is going to take place. Let me give you an example. The Judicial Service Commission nominates judges, sends the list to the President and the President appoints and sends the names to Parliament for approval. All these words mean something –

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what word do you want us to use?

MR RUHINDI: I want it the way it is in (b); it is perfect. 

MR SSEGGONA: I think the Attorney-General would have advised us better if he had looked at Clauses 3 and 4. It does not stop at nomination; the process continues to appointment. 
3) “The chairperson and members of the board shall be appointed by the minister.”
4) “The minister while appointing the members of the board shall take into account gender balance”.

I invite the Attorney-General to draw a comparison – look at the board of NSSF. It has representatives from different stakeholders. What they do is, they nominate and the minister chooses. When you talk about nomination and appointment, by implication, the minister even has the right to refuse to appoint a person you have nominated. 

But one other thing you need to look at is the composition. We have, for example, looked at the nominations from different bodies or organs over which as Government we have no control. Take the example of a representative from the institutions of higher education; we do not have control on the quality of persons they are going to send. From the ministry responsible for education, we have control; we can guarantee the quality and training. 

National Council for Higher Education, which I respect as a body corporate, is necessarily a technical board. The technical head of that institution is the Executive Director. This is the person best suited to tell us the competent people in that organisation. Forget about the council which the minister talked about. This is the council, which is constituted by different people and remember we have not spelt the qualifications of the members of this board – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean you do not wantthe council to have any say in the appointment?

MR SSEGGONA: By the Executive Director nominating somebody, then the council has had a say.

THE CHAIPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to propose that we stand over this while you think of the best formulation. Let us go to Clause 4.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we cannot handle Clause 4 because we have stood over Clause 3. Three is on the functions; supposing some of the functions do not tie in well with the composition?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot tie functions to the composition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you look through, they are bringing in workers. May be, when we have approved this, then we can also prescribe why the workers are needed on the board. 

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend Clause 4(1)d) by dividing the provision into two to read as follows:
“d) To formulate mechanisms to determine eligible students under the scheme.”
“e) To set the criteria and conditions governing the management of the fund including rate of interest and recovery mechanisms.”The justification is for clarity. 

Then sub clause (d), “Insert a new sub clause immediately after 1(g) to read as follows: to establish and maintain corroboration and network with other persons, bodies or organisations within or outside Uganda as the board may consider appropriate for the furtherance of the purpose of the scheme. The justification for this proposal is for the board to create links with key stakeholders; and c): amend sub clause 2 by inserting the word, “Calendar” immediately before the word, “Year”. The justification is for clarity. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have experience. If there is any civil servant here or former civil servant who was staying in a Government house, there was a policy set that all civil servants would pay interest rates on the house. But the rate they gave them was not on commercial rates. 

Now, these are loans being given by Government to students and you are telling us that you are forming this body to determine interest rates – it is going to be dangerous. The function of the board should not be the interest rates. The function of the board should be just the policy rather than determining the rates. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the Leader of the Opposition. I think the issue of the interest rates is best determined by Government and simply give direction to this board that will be set up. In that regard, we could stop: “State the criteria and conditions governing the management of the fund”, and stop there. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, that is why we had a problem with this thing called interest. We are not putting conflict in the law itself; they are putting these members in a position of conflict. 

First, they are the ones administering the fund; they want to accumulate as much as they can and part of this fund is going to help them in getting allowances. On the other hand, while I suffer the temptation of agreeing with my brother, hon. Bahati, that we leave it to Government, even then we would have to put it in this law. But I also do not foresee a situation where Government would have to come up annually to determine interest rates in the Gazette. And what is going to govern whether Government or this board in determining the interest rate at the end of the day? 

I think we are better off doing away with the whole concept of interest. This is because Government provides a service and this is one of the services; do we charge interest on all services that we offer? It is just that the basket is small but ordinarily, we would not even be talking of giving loans to students. As a government, we have a duty to educate Ugandans. (Interjections) I will take it from hon. Karungi. (Laughter)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, hon. colleague. The information I want to give you is that if this interest rate is put in place, the jobs are not available. So, somebody who completes his or her degree course will add on the stress of maybe looking for this money to pay back. This will put them in a cocoon of fear all the time and it will make them uncomfortable and fail to appreciate Government’s services. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want you to go back to the memorandum and the object of the Bill. Under 2, it says, “The Bill, therefore, seeks to introduce a loan scheme to enable students pursue higher education in accredited and recognised institutions of higher education.” Are you introducing a grant? I think let us be clear.

MR SSEGGONA: It is a loan, which is interest-free; it remains a loan because it is payable. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. First of all, I have to note that some loans are interest-free. For example, where I was working, I had the privilege of getting interest-free loans. So, it is on record that some loans are interest-free.

Secondly, I agree with Members that since we are looking at this as a way of helping students, which cannot afford the expensive cost of education, why should we charge interest? As Parliament, we are responsible for appropriation – because I know the justification for the interest could be that it is for operational costs for the board. (Interjections) I will give you a chance after making this point. But Madam Chair, we would incorporate that during our appropriation such that we allocate funds for use by this board other than including interest. 

Madam Chair, before I give my colleague a chance, on the amendment by hon. Bahati – that is (e), provided we still set the criteria and conditions governing the management, among the conditions we are including is interest and yet, his spirit was not to include interest. But once you mention conditions, we are again including interest.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Chair, whereas this is a scheme and not a grant, I want to propose that the issue of interest be left out at this stage because I imagine that the board, which is going to implement whatever we are discussing, will have a modus operandi on how they are going to run this scheme. If we mention the issue of interest here – because this is likely to keep changing from time to time or we may totally not need interest because our aim of establishing this scheme is to help the needy students. If we raise the issue of interest, some of these students are likely to complete their degree courses and find that there are no jobs; how will such a person be able to pay back the money?

So, I think we should leave out the issue of interest at this stage and I am sure that this board will come up with ideas that we shall be reviewing. 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, hon. colleague, for giving way. Madam Chair, in discussing the issue of interest we also have to understand certain factors; first of all, this is a loan which will not be paid immediately; it is supposed to be paid after sometime. And we have done benchmarking visits and in no single country, have we found interest-free loans. The most important thing here would be what percentage should it be. This is because it is supposed to be a minimal interest rate to enable – so that is the information I wanted to give my colleague.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me hear from the Minister of Finance.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the intention of the interest was basically to protect the value of the money. But we all know the instances where inflation can hit as high as 20 to 30 percent. And then the question is: If the intention of having that interest was to protect the value of the money, are we going to charge 30 percent or not? (Interjections) Let me first finish. 

Let us say, for argument’s sake, that inflation is currently about 7-8 percent, are we going to say that the interest that is going to be charged is 8 percent? We have consulted and our view is that if there has to be some interest, it should be prescribed by the Minister and not the board.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, who has the duty to control inflation in this country? So, how do you penalise a student in terms of interest for your inefficiency in controlling inflation? That is the first thing – that is assuming interest is based on inflationary consideration.

The second one is that we understand that this is a long-term loan, depending on whether and when somebody gets a job. And of necessity, it is going to accumulate interest and the amounts will become astronomical for these young people – possibly unemployed or underemployed. And hon. Ajedra is a minister; is he in order, therefore, to insinuate that the government will fail to control inflation and therefore, inflict this penalty on the students?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the Minister originally had not proposed interest. Can you give us the rationale for your interest?

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, Clause 17 of the Bill proposes that every student loan shall be repayable with interest. It is not a committee provision; it was the Minister’s provision under Clause 17(2), which says, “The interest shall be determined by the Minister in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance and upon the recommendation of the board.” So, our amendment was in line with Clause 17. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we shall do it under 17. We should not delete it beforehand. When we reach 17, we will deal with it.

MR SSEGGONA: Before we leave three, I think there is a drafting problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are on four.

MR SSEGGONA: Chair, with your permission, there is a drafting problem, which I have discovered. I would have preferred from a technical perspective to have this ministerial appointment incorporated in two rather than four, where it is because a person reading two does not come out clearly who does the appointment. Definitely, it will not change the substance but when you look at three and four of Clause 3, I would have suggested that – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on Clause 4, please. You are taking us back.

MR SSEGGONA: I only raised it –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no.

MR SSEGGONA: Most obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on Clause 4. Yes, hon. Mulongo and then – all these are behind me. Hon. Mulongo and then hon. Nsubuga.

MR MULONGO: My understanding by the committee chairperson’s proposal was to split the functions of the board 1 (d) into two so that the first one reads, “formula to mechanisms of determining eligible students under the scheme” and the other one would read “about the criteria to govern the management of the fund…..”

Madam Chair, I thought the provision as originally stated in the Bill is much better because we are talking of mechanisms because the catchwords here are “the mechanisms” and “other criteria”. So, “other criteria” is not necessarily a major point departing from mechanisms. We are just talking about the mechanisms and other criteria, which in other words is an elaborate mechanism for determining the legibility of students and so and so forth. 

So, I would rather that this remains one and not split into two, which they claimed was to do it –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it the way you want it so that we know where you are.

MR MULONGO: 4 (d); I am proposing that it remains as is in the Bill and not split into two as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

MR SSEGGONA: Actually, I object to the whole thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Formulate mechanisms for determining eligible students under the scheme and other critique to govern the management of the funds.  

MR SSEGGONA: Chair, I object to the whole of (d) because in my understanding, if you talk about the mechanisms for determining eligible students, you are basically talking about a statutory instrument. It is a policy issue to determine who qualifies. 

My view is that this should be the power of the minister to make regulations and specify this as it is presented in Clause 39. 

The other reason I make objection is that you are tasking the board to determine a criteria, which it is going to enforce and that puts them in a conflict of interest. 

My view is that the Minister makes or determines the criteria by a statutory instrument or regulation and then the board is there to implement policy, which is a Government policy. Otherwise, we are giving him too many powers, which are policy powers in this. 

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. For those of you who went to school in the 1960s and 1970s – (Interjections) - (Laughter) - you remember that when we finished O-level, at A- Level and University, we never paid any school fees or tuition. 

Now, in this case this Parliament, if we are debating on the issue of loans because of the economy getting rather squeezed, we cannot put the issue of interest into this. 

First of all, what is the source of funding for this scheme?  It is this Parliament, which is going to appropriate funds for this scheme. So, if you are going to appropriate funds, we cannot talk about interest because this is not a scheme where we are  going to get money to make profits. We are not making profits – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the issue of interest we shall address under Clause 17. What we are doing now is to determine whether we need 4 (d) or not. There is a proposal that there is too much power for the board and it should be left to the minister. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I think what I was saying is this; on matters pertaining to interest, it is the Ministry of Finance that will advise. It is not the board and not even the Minister of Education.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will be under Clause 17. Now we are dealing with 4 (d). 

MR AJEDRA: In 4 (d), we have consulted and said the board does not have the power to determine the interest and that should be removed from the board. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no.

MR AJEDRA: It should be deleted in other words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The present (d).

MR AJEDRA: Yes, the present (d) including interest should be taken out because it is not for the board to determine the interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have not read the full provision. It says, “to formulate mechanisms for determining eligible students under the scheme and other criteria.” That is what the Members are saying, that this is the work of the Minister and it should not be with the board and that is what we are addressing now. 

MR AJEDRA: Not the interests?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: The interest is there but it is only a small part of it. We are addressing the entire clause.

MS ALASO: Thank you. I want to submit to and agree with your argument that 4 (d) is strictly a policy matter. You recall for a long time, we have been asking here that we need the policy to inform this particular Bill and if the chairperson had probably told us a little more, I want to assume that they benchmarked loan schemes - some that are interest free and some that charge interest.

If you look at, for instance, the loan scheme in New Zealand, it charges interest. If you look at the one in Botswana and Pakistan, they are interest free.  In the one of New Zealand, there is a provision for a write off of interest. At some point, when they observe that you did not get a placement in time, your interest can be written off.

Madam Chair, therefore, if you look at (d) in the present formulation, this is strictly a matter that goes back to policy. That policy once agreed to by the stakeholders and the ministry is what this board will be implementing.  We are not anticipating that the board will originate the policy for managing the loan scheme. 
Actually in other areas, the aspect of interest we are talking about, you find that there is a governance structure, which includes the Governor of a Central Bank and implementing banks to determine the interest. So, if it is okay, I think we would go with the proposal that this particular provision (d) be deleted because it is not the mandate of the board but a policy matter and Government must give direction to that board.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the proposal is that Clause 4(d) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 (d) deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, now, the balance of 4 - anything else from the rest of 4? - the old 4 – but there was a small part under – the new 4 (d). But we have said that we have taken away that power and they cannot determine who is eligible. I think that is for the minister. We have deleted the old (d) and the new (d). 

MS SSINABULYA: We have accepted, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now under (e), I do not know whether you want to get rid of the recovery mechanisms. Are you interested? Hon.Amuriat?

MR AMURIAT: Under the current (e), there is a proposal to establish a loan protection fund for loans granted to students. I do appreciate that under Clause 29, the manner in which these loan fees would contribute towards the funds is explained. But I come from the angle of my colleagues who think that whereas this facility is supposed to be a service to the students- both interest and loan protection fees are a levy on the students and therefore, in light of that, Madam Chairperson, I wish to propose for a complete deletion of Clause 4(e) and subsequent to that, a deletion of Clause 29 of this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 29 is not yet here. 

MR AMURIAT: Well, we are going to get to that, Madam Chairperson, because the fund is built out of the fees and I do not know which comes first. If you would like to defer this to a later time, then probably, we should have at the back of our minds that there is a proposal that I have moved to delete Clause 4(e). Anything that seems to be a levy on poor students is an inconvenience and ceases to be a service to these people.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether I have not understood the provision. I thought it was some kind of an insurance fund. That is the way I understand it. Let the Minister explain. He is the owner of the Bill.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Chairperson, I think it is important to remember that this money that will be given out has got to be recovered and given to another student. But there could be situations where say a student dies before he completes the programme or something happens and he is unable to pay. This is the kind of money put in to protect or to – it is a kind of security- (Interjections) - it is got from the student. It is an insurance kind of cover.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought it was coming from elsewhere. I thought it was like insurance. 

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, schedule 6 of the Bill talks about the loan protection fees. It says that the amount of the loan protection fees shall not exceed one percent of the loan amount. This means that, for example, if a student got a loan worth Shs5 million, the loan protection fee would be Shs50,000 and the committee was agreeable that this was not a very big amount.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, when we were studying, didn’t we pay caution money? We were paying caution money in case you break a table or you tear a book.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, the spirit of establishing this scheme is agreeable and very good and supported by all of us. But at the same time, we need not make the cost of education in Uganda very high. Here is a situation where you are talking about a loan protection fund which will be determined by a certain body or a certain person in Government. You are talking about a loan which we said we would talk about when we get there. So, why we are much eager to have this scheme is to help the needy people. We need not really make life difficult for people to attain education- (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank my colleague for giving way.

MR MUSASIZI: No, one percent is still a lot.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to draw a distinction between the way we studied and how this person is going to study. We studied on a government scholarship. This person is not studying on a government scholarship. He is acquiring a loan to finance himself. He is actually self-sponsored.

Secondly, you cannot create an insurance scheme by implication. If the government intended to create an insurance scheme by doing this, they ought to have stated so and we would have insurance consideration in legislating on this. The intention of Government was not to create insurance.

Finally, the last piece of information I would like to give to my colleague is that we are not establishing it by legislation. Going by this Clause 4(e) we are now empowering the board to create this fund and manage it by themselves. How are they going to manage it? We have not established the criteria. Insurance, if you are talking about protection, we would even be talking about paying annually but this one is a one off. What kind of insurance is this and it is a prerequisite? If you want this loan we have established, a criteria you must have some minimum amount of money, you pay it and then you access the loan. This is not Government doing this-

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think this is relief to many parents who cannot pay for higher education for their children. But I would not want to envisage a lacuna on our part for not protecting this fund for sustainability. I think as we are looking at this, we want our poor and needy students to access higher education but we do not want it to fall into the trap of other funds like Entandikwa where people know that after all, you get it, it is okay, you cannot repay it. We have seen it in some of these SACCOs. Even SACCOs charge a motivational fee where somebody has an interest because we cannot envisage a period where after 10 years, it is not sustainable. You say, “The money has been devalued,” and we see another Parliament say they are scrapping it all together. So, I think we should be responsible enough to protect this fund for posterity. Thank you, Madam Chair. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you colleague for giving way. Madam Chairperson, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Bank of Uganda put the current unemployment rate at 83 percent, thus making it so difficult for a young lady or young man who has obtained this loan and who will not find a job in two or three years after graduation. We could provide, yes, for a penalty for those who do not pay, for instance, especially when they have gainful employment. But for us to come and say we have a loan scheme and are targeting the very needy people- the needy families, the needy children of this country- and then we charge them interest, would honestly be defeating ourselves and we would only remind us of what has happened with the government scholarship scheme. What is happening with the government scholarship scheme is we have 87 percent- and Madam Chairperson, I am speaking about this so passionately because I was a student leader and I know how difficult it was for some students to finish their courses at university because for government scholarship scheme today, about 87 percent of them come largely from schools where the annual school fees is almost much more than the annual tuition paid in universities; meaning that the government scholarship today caters for children who come from families who can afford to pay for themselves. So, we do not want to create a loan scheme- the information I would like to give this-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Members, I think let us focus on the loan protection fund. That is what we are addressing at the moment.

MR KARUHANGA: Yes, if we could make it as minimal as possible-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the Minister tell us what the loan protection fund is about? 

MS ALUPO: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the Loan Protection Fee is a matter that this law requires the beneficiaries of the loan to take care of sustainability of the money that is used for the loans. In which way? You know, not all the first intake, for instance, of the students you were with in P.1 finished P.7. You also know that when you joined university, not all of them completed the programmes for one reason or the other and I do not want to name those reasons. 

Our view is that even the beneficiaries of these loans, much as they will be deserving, when they are given the loans, not all of them will manage to finish the courses. Some may fall sick – (Interjections) – I will give you chance. Some may pass on, God forbid, and for one reason or the other, there are those who may completely not manage even when they become disabled or something like that.
In the countries where we benchmarked, they told us that to take care of that kind of money, which may not be recovered but for genuine reasons, all the beneficiaries are required to pay a small fraction of a Loan Protection Fee; a very small fraction. What we shall do is to give the amount and they will be required to pay at least before they complete the programme, the Loan Protection Fee, so that we can take care of the continuity of the students instead of lamenting. 

MR M.B NSUBUGA: The information I am giving you is to alley your fears. In fact, you have a point but what you can do is to have an insurance firm for any person taking that loan to insurance because as you said, somebody may die on the way before he finishes school. So, the government should have an insurance scheme for that. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I want to get clarification from the Minister. What is that fraction? What percentage of that fraction is going to be charged on the students for that protection fee and secondly, is it going to be paid up front by the students before acquiring the loan or will it be actually cut off the amount that is finally going to be got just like the banks and other financial institutions do? 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I think that probably we are not even speaking different things here but I want to refresh the memories of Members that earlier on in the debate, we did away with the guarantors completely and we all agreed that it will be difficult to get a guarantor and studies elsewhere in management of students loan schemes actually found out that the issue of a guarantor will be a cumbersome one and then they decided there will be no guarantor. 

Like hon.  Naggayi has said, to ensure sustainability and protection of the fund as argued by the minister, we cannot do away with both. If you do away with both, you leave this scheme as vulnerable as we left the Entandikwa Scheme. So, it is in our interest as a country that we have a sustainable scheme and also have a protected scheme. What we need the people who know how to craft to do for us is to modify (e) to mandate this board, to create or establish a loan protection arrangement where this contribution of 1 percent goes whether to acquire an insurance or to get into a fund but really, that is my line of thinking and I just think that all of us wishing this scheme well will pursue that line but if we do away with both, then we have no scheme, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, there was a question from hon. Franca Akello about how much the amount is. If you look at schedule 6, it says the amount of the Loan Protection Fee shall not exceed 1 percent of the loan amount. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, that one is okay but what we want to know is if am going to borrow a loan of say Shs5 million and one percent is something like Shs 50,000, are you going to deduct that Shs 50,000 upfront the amount that I am supposed to get or will you require me to pay it before I get the loan?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Minister of Finance. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I think we all, here as Members of Parliament, have taken loans from banks or other financial institutions - I am just picking on hon. Alaso’s point. There is what they call arrangement fee, there is what is called insurance that you have to take just in case something goes wrong. Either you lose your job and you are unable to pay or you die and then the insurance will be able to cover that. 

I believe the object of this particular clause was that that protection needs to be done for sustainability because without it, the scheme is going to collapse because we know the situation in this country, Madam Chairperson. And also that small fee will act as a sign of seriousness on the part of that individual. Otherwise, if we are not going to have any commitment from the borrowers, I can tell you there will be no need to establish the fund in the first place.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the Minister of Finance, he is very right. He says when you go to the bank, you must pay commitment and arrangement fees and because you have salary. So, you have something already or you have a business for which you are borrowing money and you must pay. But this is a student who is going to borrow money to finance education. Madam Chairperson, I know you raised the issue of caution money and we all went to school, we used to pay caution money but what I want to ask the Minister of Finance here is whether he can tell me if you have any government vehicle insured. Because they are government vehicles, they are used on the road and they are they not insured. 

Government says they cannot insure their vehicles, they say, we appropriate more money and buy more cars. So, in the same vein, if you are investing in education, I do not deny that there should not be protection of the money, when they are lending money to the students, Government should also be the one to protect you somehow. By the way, you are not looking at one time borrowing; I borrow it in first year, I borrow in second year and I borrow in third year and when I borrow the money, I do not think you are going to hand it to me because if you hand it to me, I will not reach the school. You must pay directly to the school. So, you pay me exactly what is equal to my fees. 

Now, for Government to protect the money is inevitable. In accounts, we have what we call losses; you write the losses off. If you assume there will be no losses, then you are making a mistake. We are saying that Government should be the one to invest in protecting this money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us be serious. If I want Shs 1.5 million for this academic year and I am asked to pay Shs 50,000, to secure Shs 1.5 – is that reasonable? 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you very much for that comment you have just made. At times, I ask myself whether we live on this world or not. I have never met a naked person claiming to be naked because they are poor. The people we are talking about could be poor, but they can afford certain things. By the time this parent gets his or her child to senior six, that means they have been buying shoes, books – none of us buys for them those things. Now, we think that they do not have any money to put in for their own fees? 

Madam Chairperson, we have to be realistic. Let us secure this money; we have seen such schemes start and fail and we are sure to be blamed for failing the scheme. For now, we need to come up with a scheme that is going to be sustainable, maintained and protected. 

THE CHAIPRESON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 as amended agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we redraft the provision to read as: “Vacating the office of member of the board -
    i) A member of the board may resign his or her office by notice in writing addressed to the minister and the resignation shall take effect from the date on which the minister receives the notice.
    ii) A member of the board may be removed from office by the minister on any of the following grounds;
    a) Absence for three consecutive meetings of the board without notice to the chairperson or without reasonable cause. 
    b) Ceasing to hold the position under which he or she was appointed to the board.
    c) If convicted of a criminal offense. 
    d) Is declared insolvent.
    e) Inability to perform his or her functions arising out of physical or mental incapacity.
    f) Misconduct of misbehaviour or 
    g) Incompetence.”
    h) 
The justification is to broaden the scope of the provision and for clarity. 

MS KAMATEKA:  Madam Chairperson, I rise regarding Clause 1. The proposal is that the resignation shall take effect from the date on which the minister receives the letter. Supposing the minister would like to negotiate – I thought we would give it more time to negotiate and probably agree on the date on which the resignation will take effect. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that is a very tricky area. Sometimes, people have resigned and then sought to reverse their decision; they are somewhere in between. I have had people coming to my office with such letters. 

MS KAMATEKA: Madam Chairperson, could we at least give it a week – (Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, some of us have served on boards. And in some of the rules, we are required to give two or three months’ notice. Therefore, to say that it is going to be effective on the date when the minister receives it is a bit dangerous. The minister may not accept the resignation; that is possible. 

So, the point I am making is that we should leave it as originally drafted. That you may resign by sending a letter to the minister; that is sufficient other than stating when it takes effect. What if the minister is on leave and there is nobody to handle the letter?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think you did not hear what I said. They may again seek to recede their own decision; so what do you do with such a member? Is it effective or not?

MS KAMATEKA: Madam Chairperson, usually, the person that receives the notice of resignation replies. So, we could put a provision to the effect that the minister must respond within a given period. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I think the difference between the two is that those that require giving notice are employees. But if somebody is just a member – and I assume that this member is not doing an ordinary job. Can the minister force somebody to continue supplying his labour on the board? The answer is in the negative. Once the minister receives a letter of resignation, it is enough. I can even say, “I have resigned”, even before you receive it. 

We are talking about somebody who must be willing to supply his or her service. So, whether you receive it or not, if I am not willing to supply my labour, you cannot force me. So, we do not need to go into those details. Once somebody has resigned, the resignation takes effect the moment they submit that resignation.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I was of the view that we change this word “receive” and say: “A member of the board may resign his or her office by notice in writing addressed to the minister and the resignation shall take effect from the date on which the minister accepts in writing”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means the minister may refuse. So, would that person have resigned? Suppose I resign and the minister says, “No”. Should I attend the meetings?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, what else can you add on this amendment? He has said,“a member of the board may resign his or her office by notice in writing. Address it to the minister and the resignation shall take effect from the date on which the minister receives the notice.” If the minister reverses this decision, there would be a problem with the minister and not with the person resigning. What amendment do we need here; we do not need any.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, what is the rationale of giving a notice in writing? If it is a notice in writing, it is also different from resigning in writing. If you add, “By notice in writing, then you have to stipulate a period. If you are only saying as in the original text, it does not require the timeframe. But here when they say, “by notice in writing addressed to the minister and shall take effect from the date on which the minister receives the notice” – you may go to a place and it is even difficult to prove receipt of a document. 

But if you are writing a notice, you should give a timeframe from the date of – maybe two months or two weeks, you know. And it is also right to say that the same right that this person in the board had to withdraw his or her labour, is the same right that board has to have a person representing an institution in that board. So, we should have the rights balanced. You cannot say that because you cannot be forced then you can just walk in – even in public places of convenience, you have to first know if it is vacant or occupied. Why should we trivialise being in the board that we say – I wanted to agree with my friend, who I have known for very many years, hon. Sseggona but on this particular issue I am finding a difficulty to incite people who are on the board by saying that the moment you feel like leaving, you can leave; and when you leave, you do not need to bother to know whether your notice was received or not. I think the issue is that we should put a timeframe – give some two or three weeks from the date of receipt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are supporting the committee but you want a timeframe? Otherwise, the Minister may end up with no board; she will be sitting in Kampala, thinking she has a board and yet maybe five people have resigned. (Interjections) No, I think the timeframe could be important.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to concur with my colleague. Under modern management, by giving notice – even in court when you are going to charge somebody, you give a notice of 14 days for him to respond. So, I think under modern management, it is sincere to do it; that by virtue of the responsibility that you have been holding on the board, when you give notice, let us agree that a one-month notice is adequate. So, that for planning purposes, for replacement and for responding and for you to hand over whatever has been in your custody during the process of executing that responsibility. I would propose a one-month notice. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we propose that we add “one month notice in writing” so that we move?

HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: On clause 6(2)(g), the committee proposes to add “incompetence” as one of the grounds for a member to be removed from the board. I want to ask the committee how incompetence of an individual board member will be measured. In my view, provisions (2)(a) up to (f) are sufficient to judge the performance of a board member. It is also true that the board reports to the authorities as a full unit and not as individuals. I propose to the committee that we drop provision (g) and go with the rest before it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the committee have any strong opposition to that proposal?

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Chair. For the same reason he had a problem with part (g) – on how to measure incompetence, I also have a problem with part (f) – that is misconduct/misbehaviour. In the previous Bill we have just handled, I think we put something to do with the courts determining – there was something for the court to determine. Otherwise, I will give an example: Suppose one of the board members got drunk at a function of the board, is that a situation, which envisaged here – whereby that board member would then be asked to vacate office? 

Madam Chair, my problem here is that – yes, I can understand what they mean but since we are drafting a law, I think we need to be a little more precise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, supposing I am a board member, then I remove three children from Sironko from the list and put in five children from Kooki, isn’t that misconduct? Shouldn’t I be sacked for that?

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Chair, on that one, I think in the previous Bill, we were talking about fraud. If you remove three children from Sironko, that is fraud because you are doing something, which is clearly illegal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, should I continue sitting there until the court has determined my fraud?

MR KYEWALABYE: No, what I am saying is that maybe in that case, we should replace “misconduct” with “fraud”.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, let hon. Kabajo tell us what he understands by “misconduct and misbehaviour”. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, on a serious note, I do not think that issues of drinking in the canteen can be imported into the Chamber. I think the misconduct must relate to your work. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, ordinarily, I would not support the view to remove these grounds – the grounds that have been attacked and indeed, others.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Including incompetence?

MR SSEGGONA: Yes, including incompetence. If you are incompetent and there is a measure of determining incompetence, what would you be doing on a board? My problem with the clause and indeed, the proposed amendment is that here, we have not established a mechanism for removal. This is because you can have the grounds but how is the process going to be executed? We have the Minister now – who is the appointing authority and can also disappoint. The minister may have these grounds cooked in his mind and the following day, he dismisses somebody from the board on allegations of misconduct, incompetence etcetera, without a process that is going to afford a fair chance to actually determine. 

Ordinarily, these are English words and you would understand them. I agree that we can leave them provided that the Minister and possibly the committee will give us a clause on how this is executed. This is because in all laws, these are grounds for removal but those laws establish a mechanism and a procedure for removal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, as we give time to the Minister and the committee chairperson to think about the new clause, I put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that Clause 8 be amended – amend the provision by substituting the words “ministers responsible for Public Service and Finance” with “the minister responsible for Public Service and the minister responsible for Finance”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to

Clause 9

MS SSINABULYA: On Clause 9, the committee proposes that we redraft sub-clause (i) to read as, “(i) the board may appoint the following committees; 
    (a) Loan and Scholarship Committee;
    (b) The Finance and Administration Committee and;
    (c) Any other committee that the board deems appropriate.

On (b), insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (i) to read as follows; “(ii) A committee appointed under sub-section (i) shall exercise specific powers or perform specific functions as the board may determine.” The justification is to be specific and for clarity.  

On sub-clause (C), amend sub-clause (ii) by inserting the words, “the chairperson other than the board chairperson” immediately after “chairperson”. The justification is to avoid conflict of interest.

On (d), amend sub-clause (iii) by inserting the word, “competent” immediately before the word, “person”. The justification for this is to avoid abuse. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those are the proposals. Yes, the Attorney-General and then hon. WafulaOguttu.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in the first amendment, “the board may appoint the following committees: the Loan and Scholarship committee, the Finance and Administration Committee, and any other committee that the board deems appropriate.” Now, the current provision in the Bill is that “the board may appoint committees:
    (a) To inquire into and advise the board on any matter concerning the functions of the board;
    (b) To exercise specific powers or perform a specific function for the board.”  

In my opinion, this is a more flexible provision because I see where the committee is coming from and they want to be specific on the Loan and Scholarship Committee and the Finance and Administration Committee. 

But midway, you may find that, for instance, they would want to merge committees for purposes of executing their functions well. May be, the finance and administration with any other and some others have got what they call corporate divisions or operational divisions and then, you have got to come back to Parliament to have an amendment. 

Don’t you think that the way it is provided in the Bill as it is it is more flexible?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I was going to say that why don’t we add these two (a) and (b) to the present (a) so that the (a) remains for flexibility and then, we also have the specific one? Otherwise, if we also do not have them, someone may say, how did you set up the loan committee?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I tend to concur with the learned Attorney-General because when you look at the proposal of the committee, we lose something along the way. The functions of these committees are lost and on top of that, we do not seek to distinguish between the role of a loans committee and a scholarship committee from that of finance and administration and any other committees that the board may deem appropriate. 

So, I have a feeling that the Bill in the form it is at the moment directs the committee on the functions of the board. It will then be upon the board to put in place such committees that would enable it to fulfill these functions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think I still have a problem with that because it says to inquire into, which means if there is no need to inquire, then maybe, they will not have anything to say. That is why I was suggesting that we can keep the “inquire.” I do not know. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I also agree with the learned Attorney-General that the existing construction is better. In part (b), it allows the board to set up a committee to exercise specific powers or perform a specific function of the board. For example, if the board wishes to have a loan and scholarship committee, it will establish it but supposing that the board wished that the functions, which it would have wanted to allocate to the loan and scholarship committee - suppose the board as a whole wants to perform that function and suppose they feel this is really a major part of why they were set up as a board and they do not want that one to be delegated to a sub-committee – 

So, I think by putting this loan and scholarship committee in the law, you would be tying the hands of the board. It is possible that they would have wanted to perform that function themselves without setting up a committee of the board. I think the construction as it is, is more flexible and better.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Chair. I rise to support the position of the Bill and as guided by the learned Attorney-General.  

Madam chair, to clear your doubt, I think the proposal by the committee is more narrowing in the sense that we all know the functions of the board. Now, if we limit the specific committees, we mention the Loan and Scholarship Committee when we know that the entire board is the loan and scholarship board.   When we say the Finance and Administration Committee, when we really know that the main function of this board is to administer this fund and then say any other committee, then we will be self-defeating. 

I would understand the concern that we need to be specific but from the functions, this committee envisaged in this proposed Bill is clearly out and as it stands out, it would inquire – (interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information that I want to give my brother, hon. Oboth, is that what you are saying here can best be done by putting in manuals; the operational manuals of this institution you are setting up. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you. I think I would agree with what the Leader of the Opposition is saying and add that going into the specifics, we would be going into the necessary details but not necessary for the purposes of legislation at this point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what was the rationale of your provision - because for me, inquire misses a grey area, which requires research, investigation etcetera - that is what inquire tells my head. So, what was the rationale of the minister? 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, we have a problem with the draftsmanship in both and why I say in both, start with the Bill; “to inquire into and advise the board on any matter concerning the functions of the board.” You see, if the board cannot understand its functions, then it is incompetent.

Number two; “to exercise specific powers or perform specified functions of the board.” Now, how can we put in place a board, then, allow it to appoint a committee to do a specified function, which is already specified in the other? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I asked the minister –

MR SSEGGONA: How I wish my colleagues could understand.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I asked the minister, what was the rationale for Clause 9 (i) (a)?

MRSSEGGONA: That is the first segment. The second segment is in the report and in the report, Madam Chair, the board may appoint the following committees:
    (i) The loan and scholarship committee
    (ii) The finance and administration committee
    (iii) Any other committee that the board deems appropriate. 

I am actually inclined to support the committee because; one, we have determined there maybe need for two committees but when you as the board find that there is need for other committees for you to be able to carry out those functions, establish those committees, give them a name you wish, give them a mandate you wish but you cannot – going back to the Bill- give them a mandate that you are supposed to carry out. Those are specific functions, which may arise along the way and we want to be flexible to allow you to carry out your function. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we borrow what is in the Constitution where it says, “Parliament may appoint committees for the better carrying out of their work?” Something like that. Wouldn’t that be more friendly and-

MR SSEGGONA: That is better. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: To give flexibility to – Okay, so, let us say, “The board may appoint committees for the better carrying out of its duties,” and then they can sit and decide: is it administration? Is it welfare like hon. Bitekyerezo wants? Okay. I put the question that Clause 9-

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chair. On Clause 9(3) I want to agree with the Chairperson where she suggests that the word “competent” be inserted immediately after “any.”  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Pardon.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: On Clause 9(3), she suggests that the word “competent” be inserted immediately after the word “any” before “person”. And also I think there is where when you read, it will read, “…any competent person to attend any of its meetings and may co-opt any competent person to the committee.” But here I think there is a little bit of incompleteness because I have checked in the list of definitions and I have not seen where they have defined the word “competent.” I may walk into the room and say,“I am competent.” So, where is the line that will disqualify me from being competent? It is not included.

MR RUHINDI: I think the word “competent” is redundant because for as long as you are inviting a person, you must need that person. It may be an expert; it may be investigating some matters and you have to talk to competent people, then you go into the problem of defining competent whether some of those witnesses will be “competent” to come and talk to you? That is a problem. I think the word, as it is, is proper.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I rarely wish to inform the senior Attorney-General but there is a Lusoga adage that if you have ever been hit by a snake and you see a crawling rope, you have to suspect that something is about to happen. I remember during the National Identity Card project, some officer had to facilitate a girlfriend to travel somewhere as a secretary. There was no competence of any sort. So, by putting this, we are putting checks and balances on those who may want to abuse the process. I thank you. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, I think we already asked the Minister to provide for guidelines to explain certain things and issues of competence are about performance in relation to the tasks assigned to an officer. So, we expect the Minister to provide the guidelines as to the evaluation of the performance of such board officials. If they are incapable of doing so- because some people could be selected to come to the board and they are incapable of discharging their duties or even comprehend and understand the functions of the board. They should be honourably retired. So, I support hon. Muwuma that it shouldremain there and the Minister should provide guidelines.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, I agree with the learned Attorney-General. One, whenever you introduce a key word like “competent”, you must define it and yet going by the ordinary English understanding, “competent” is understood. The reason for allowing room for co-option is based on skill, expertise or necessity. I think it will be an unnecessary tautology to even include the word “competent” because my understanding- and I want to assume there is good will on either side - is that why they are co-opting someone to say, “Today, we have such and such a thing and so and so is identified as capable of assisting this committee, we get him for this period and he goes.” I do not foresee a committee or a board co-opting somebody to work with them for life. Of course, I can understand the mischief that my brother hon. Muwuma is putting across. I was just about to say that we have seen these issues during the tenure of this Government but I am sure that they will improve. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 9 –

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. There was mention of operational guidelines. I am not sure I followed closely whether a specific proposal was made by way of amendment because that should be something to capture so that the board shall put in place operational guidelines to govern the conduct of its business. So, I am wondering, did we capture that or we just lost it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are directing the Minister, by law, to make the guidelines? Do you envisage a situation where the Minister will operate without guidelines?

MR SSEGGONA: Actually, Madam Chair, they already provided for it in Clause 39. Those are the regulations. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, we are moving from a point where we had attempted to specify the committee’s- and you had given us the advice in the Constitution. Of course, we also did not point out that in the Constitution, there was, for instance, a specific provision of the Appointments Committee. But having gone to that other provision, then, we are looking at a scenario where how those committees will conduct business. Just how? Are there some guidelines that would govern-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Look at page 22, Schedule 3, you will find it there. 

MS ALASO: Sorry. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On page 22 of the Bill, Schedule 3, it is provided for under No.4.

MS ALASO: Okay, thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 11, the committee proposes to;a)amend sub-clause 2, by substituting “and has five years’ experience in education” with “and have at least 10 years working experience with at least five years in higher education management.” The justification is to recruit persons with better experience and qualifications.
b) Redraft sub-clause 4 (a) to read as follows: “Resign his or her office by notice in writing addressed to the minister.” The justification is for clarity.
c) Amend sub-clause 4(d)(i) by inserting at the end of the provision “due to infirmity of body or mind.” The justification is for clarity and consistency with the provisions of other laws.
d) Amend sub-clause 4(d)(iii) by deleting the words “abuse of office” and replace with “misconduct.” The justification is for consistency and abuse of office is a criminal offence, which can be addressed under sub clause 4(c)
e) Introduce a new provision after sub-clause 4(d)(iii)to read as (4) incompetence. The justification is to broaden the scope of the provision. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, unless advised otherwise, I would like to propose that this Executive Director appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board shall be sourced through a public recruitment process – for lack of a better word really, but I want these posts to be advertised. I do not want it to be handpicking. I really want it to be clear. I do not even want headhunting because I think this is a very technical area and all Ugandans who are eligible should know when this recruitment is going on and therefore, qualify to apply and go through an interview process. So, I need to be guided. If it is covered, fine but that is what I want to move.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I think that it is not proper to tie this to somebody who has experience in education. What we are looking for is a good manager. We are not looking for a teacher. Actually, we can have a banker who can manage this very well as well and the jobs; that is why I said it must be advertised. People must go for interviews and we should not put things, which discriminate and limit others.   

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what hon. Wafula has said, having the proposal that one must have five years’ experience in education, even nursery education is education and it is also experience. (Laughter) An Executive Director of that level should be an all-round person. It cannot only be education, it can be many things and Madam Chairperson, that has been the style of drafting recently adopted by this House; that we give a wide spectrum of others – just experience in education alone is not enough. It could be in management, it could be in other fields, so that we open up. We know the bias of hon. Alaso when she proposes education strictly.(Laughter) 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chairperson, just like my colleagues have said it all, I am proposing that we delete the specificities and just talk of management. Maybe, we could elevate it in terms of academics either from a Masters Degree, but at least, management and not going to specificities of the qualifications of finance, education or whatever. So, we would just talk of management. I think it leaves it hanging and it is open.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am also thinking like my colleagues because when I look at the five years in education and “with at least five years in higher education…” why all that? Why don’t we narrow it down so that it exactly says what we want to say? I do not know what the learned friends are saying. Do we have to go round and round before we get what we want to say? 

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, we really wanted to emphasise experience in higher education experience because we wanted someone who understands the complexities of higher education. If we just leave it at five years’ experience in education, it could be primary education but this Bill is about financing students for higher education. That is why the committee seriously insists. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Chairperson, I thought we are looking for someone who can manage the finances, design strategies, plans, identify sources of money and lobby. They are not going to manage children. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I concur with you and colleagues who think this should be a management function but I also would like this House to say something about the years of experience. In the original Bill, there is a proposal for five years and I am looking at a person who, five years after graduation, is being given this kind of position. They will feel lost in this organisation. 

I would like to propose that we raise the bar to say, beyond 10 years. Yes, remember, Madam Chairperson, we are not depriving those who have – (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, ordinarily, I would not have moved a point of order against my colleague but honestly, we have been dealing with these issues of work experience. Every advert talks of five years or three years’ experience and we have some very brilliant young men and women who graduate and after training for three months, they can do a wonderful job. So, you are now proposing 10 years; is the hon. Member in order to surely propose experience of 10 years and neglect the youth?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there is a point about discrimination. Can we find a way for allowing the ‘dotcoms’ to participate without discriminating them? Can we find a compromise?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I have nothing against young people. I would have loved as many young people as possible to have jobs but as you will appreciate, this is a senior management position that we are talking about. The young people can be allowed to grow through the ranks and besides, this is not the only position in the organisations. I do not know where this order applies; I think it is being disruptive.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate my senior colleague, actually my neighbour from Kumi, hon. Amuriat, for the issues that he is raising but I wonder whether he is in order to state that young people cannot effectively perform in a senior position especially when a young person has the rightful credentials. Is my senior colleague in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, young people are capable. Hon.Kangwagye, did you want to say something?

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have to accept that I, as Kangwaje Stephen, I am new in this House. And remember, when you are new in a place, things are new to you. For that matter, I would like to thank you for the opportunity given to me to participate in this matter. 

First and foremost, I would like to concur with Members who talked about experience. We need efficiency and effectiveness in the exercise. We want the qualifications and at the same time, the period one has spent in the field. Our major question is whether one can deliver to the people for whom the services are meant. What is required is experience; do not mind about the years one has on earth. We should not mind about the size or the looks but the quality and experience one has. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do we marry the interests of the young and the old; experience and efficiency? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am very happy because of this paradigm shift in debating this issue. Personally, it has always bothered me. If you see the trend these days, actual management is really going into the hands of the young; people who can move things; people who can even be moved. Old people cannot even be moved. You look at a person, he thinks he has got his age and he is old – (Interjections) – let me add on. 

In recruitment, there is a process of shortlisting. If a young person – there are young people these days who do three degrees in three years and in very good universities. (Applause) When they come out, they are very brilliant and are able to move and do things. Why would that person not be considered in the vetting process? 

So, my proposal is that we should be flexible. If a person is competent in the relevant fields – a person should be eligible and should be vetted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to say: “A person of high moral character, proven integrity, and is competent in finance -”, without talking about the years?

MS BOONA: Madam Chairperson, I strongly support competence. Personally, I do not worry about the age, as long as somebody is competent. But my concern here is, the Executive Director does not seem to have an age limit. And we have young people who are sharp at 23. If that Executive Director is not chairing – I am looking at the people who are going to serve under him. Some may be 60 or 40 years – I would like us to propose an age limit. 

MR BIGIRWA: Madam Chairperson. You have asked us to find a way of balancing this. I also support the idea of competence, but we must also understand the level at which the Executive Director will be. So, I propose that rather than going into stating ten years and then higher education management, we adopt the five years’ experience – here, it talks of five years’ experience in education and then, it goes ahead to say, “At least ten years of working”. 

I propose we remove the ten years and remain with five years in general working experience, which we could call management. I think five years should be a benchmark for the entire work experience rather than dividing it into five years in education and then ten years working experience and then years in higher education specifically. 

MS BUGEMBE: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the ED, which we are considering; the ED is supposed to be a public servant. Under the Public Service, we have various levels or categories of staff. I want to know the equivalent of the ED we are talking about. Is that person equivalent to a permanent secretary, a commissioner or an assistant commissioner? 

And if the ED is below a permanent secretary, or is equivalent to a commissioner, what are the requirements for one to become a commissioner? That will help us to define the level of experience and education.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, tell us the kind of person you are looking for so that we can know how to fit them in. 

MS ALUPO: Madam Chairperson, my understanding of Clause 11(1) “the Executive Director shall be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board.” To me, this means that the board will use the public service prescribed criteria to recruit this member who is deemed to be an executive director using advertisement in newspapers and the normal procedure, in consonance with other laws and policies.

MR SSEGGONA: Like she said, the Minister and I are friends. I want to appreciate the Minister for that clarification but I seek more. When you go to the Public Service recruitment procedure, then they are going to put the qualification even higher than we have anticipated here. The person we are recruiting as Executive Director is virtually at the level of a Permanent Secretary – (Interjections) – Undersecretary. 

And for someone to get to that level – I do not want us to get into the same situation we went through with respect to KCCA. We said we were recruiting somebody at the level of Permanent Secretary. But we did not examine the qualifications of a Permanent Secretary in relation to this. 

I agree that the board, which is a board of highly qualified and competent people considering the organisation we are drawing them from is competent to decide on the kind of person competent to do the job.  Unless the minister convinces us that in the regulations, those issues will be tackled. But the moment you cross to the Public Service recruitment process, then you are going to set a higher bar for the person we said can be young, five or three years’ experience and competent; you will have that dichotomy that will cause problems in the recruitment process. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do not think we can run way from prescribing what we want in this law. 

MR RUHINDI: I just want to help the Minister – and I certainly see the challenge she is facing. But I would like to agree with hon. Sseggona because we are not in any way trying to amend the Public Service Act or modify it in any way; what we are prescribing here is how the recruitment process will take place. If you say it is the board, the board will set its criteria; it will do the vetting, the shortlisting and it will carry out the necessary recruitment, recommend to the Minister for appointment and so on. We cannot now begin talking about the Public Service Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing? We need to move.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I tend to agree with you. I think it is not right for us to prescribe the number of years of experience of an individual in a law. What normally happens is that the board will develop what is called a “human resource manual” and in that manual, they will clearly state the qualifications of the members of staff that are going to be in that organisation. And that is what the board will normally take.

So, for us to say that you need five years’ experience in photocopying and another five years in this – I think it is a dangerous way of drafting a law. My view is that we need to give the areas of competence, which is required of a board member – whether he is 20 or 30 years old as long as he meets the competences that are required. So, I would rather go with the field we need to cover in broad terms so that when the board develops the human resource manual, they will be able to say, “To be a managing director, you need 10 years of experience in this field…” So, I would propose that we move away from prescribing the years of experience in the law and leave it to the Public Service Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is a bit dangerous. Let me hear from hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, Parliament, with intention to legislate for posterity must be seen to be consistent and uniform. What has happened before? We have been prescribing – we have been doing the same thing we are now trying to avoid. This is one of the laws that should have passed as quickly as possible to enable the needy children of West Budama South to access this money. But we are now engaging in semantics. 

If we do not put what is required of that Executive Director, from what basis will the board recruit? I agree with the Attorney-General that we cannot borrow from the Public Service. The reason we are mentioning the Executive Director here is purely because we have to prescribe on who qualifies to be an Executive Director here. I find it necessary that we cannot run away; this is not an entry point appointment where we can get a Youth MP saying he wants a slot for the youth. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, please, make your proposal because we need to move. By the way, hon. Members, this person is the fulcrum of the board’s activities; everything rotates around him or her.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I very much know how the youth need to be employed. I am not very far from that but let us prescribe the level of experience and then, we go into the areas of competence and we conclude.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you propose. Hon. Bitekyerezo, please, propose.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I have just been reading the Constitution here about the Executive Director of this board and I was looking at the qualifications of the President here and they put the age limit of 35 to 75. And I think the people who put this here were thinking. And as a doctor, bearing in mind that somebody can develop Senile Dementia at 75 years – when you become very old – I was proposing that this person should have a working experience in a reputable organisation for at least five years but he should be aged between 35 and 65 years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Reputable organisation”? Supposing I am employed in my own shop, am I not qualified to compete for this job? Let us hear from hon. Opolot.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am a member of the education committee and we looked at this in light of the fact that this board – I want Members to know that this is supposed to be a serious board, which is supposed to handle a lot of money, if eventually, all other parallel financing arrangement are transferred to the board. And, therefore, much as we appreciate – as hon. Oboth has said – the plight of the youth, we should not make this a joking matter; we need someone who can preside over huge sums of money – somebody who can give direction to older people. We can have other opportunities for the youth in other levels. Therefore, as a member of the committee, I still maintain the amendment as made by the committee. 

I am surprised that the honourable minister stood here to say that we cannot entrench the number of years in the law and yet, we have done it several times before – I hope he still remembers. So, I still think that a 10 years’ experience is good for someone to manage an institution. 

MR MATHIAS B. NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I will give two examples: Recently, we were in China – those of you who have been to China will bear witness. We visited one company, Huawei, which employs more than 20,000 people. But the young people who were managing that company, because of the high level of technology they use, they were just young people. I was in Nigeria recently, with hon. Kyooma, the person – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How old were they? Tell us – were they 29, 23 or what?

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: They were in their 40s. (Laughter) No, I will give another example. (Laughter) 35 or 40 years is enough. Madam Chair, I will give the last example; the Nigerian Pension Commission is one of the biggest organisations but the lady who is now its Executive Director is in here late 30s. She is managing a trillion naira company. So, why don’t we say “from 35 years and above”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we say, “Not less than 35”?

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, that proposal of “Not less than 35” is actually worse than the committee proposal. Let us assume that someone graduates from university at 23 years. If you add 10 years to that, they will be 33 years. So, the committee’s proposal is even better than saying “Not less than 35”. So, I beg that the House adopts the committee proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what we need to do is to address the areas of competence – broaden them and take away education management and go maybe to finance, management – 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, I agree with you but I am foreseeing a problem because we are now establishing a board, which is going to start from zero. And you are telling this board to prescribe procedures – to therefore, recruit a person based on those procedures they would have put in place. And I foresee – being the Uganda I live in –I foresee a problem. What would be the problem with adopting the Public Service, which are already in place and just apply them? Because they are already in place, they are not made for anyone. I want to see a situation where somebody just comes in to fit into an existing institutional framework rather than telling the board some of whose members may have somebody in mind and put in place procedures to facilitate that particular person.

If you may permit me, I would even express my disagreement with the language used of “nominated by the board”, because I want the board to do an independent verification and do not even recommend – actually donot use the word “recommended” but say “nominated”, in which case, the minister would only carry out a ceremonial function that somebody has been certified and vetted as the most competent, therefore, the duty of the minister is to appoint- (MsNamugwanya rose_)

Before I take that information, I have seen in this country boards or other competent organs nominating persons and then, the appointing authority takes the liberty to say,“I will not choose this, I will choose the next person” and in the end, we have ended up in a disaster.

Talk about – let me take information from hon. BenaNamugwanya.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, hon.Colleague, for giving way. We have seen such boards where the board nominates the ED but in many cases, the ED pays allegiance to the board and it loses objectivity. At the end of the day, the whole process is so defeating.

Whereas, when you put it into Public Service, this person will follow the rules and guidelines of Public Service. And this person will be independent and do the right work that we expect him or her to do. 

So, I strongly support your view, that we go in for an already established procedure. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means that we add something there like, on the advice of the Public Service Commission or something like that? I do not know – 

MR SSEGGONA: Not necessarily, Madam Chair. What I am saying is that those standing orders are in place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, make a proposal.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I propose that the Executive Director shall be appointed by the minister on the advice of the minister board, upon nomination by the board, in accordance with the Public Service Standing orders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, either the board— you will make it very difficult. Either the board or the Public Service Commission.

MR SSEGGONA: The board, and not “recommendation” but“nomination.”

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think we should qualify these positions. I remember when we were debating the oil Bill, especially under the authority and all that, we had to find all the disciplines that were relevant to those specific positions and therefore, I would suggest that the Executive Director should have at least five years of working experience with a bias in management and financial disciplines.

HON. MEMBERS: Higher education. (interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not higher education. It should be open for – (interjections) 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Chair, actually, higher education will limit the competent managers who would be styling up that. It does not necessarily mean that taking up the EDship should mean someone that has worked in higher education.

This is just a management position; anybody can take it up. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is not the first board we are creating. We have established many boards in this House and the issue of recruitment by the board is that the board recruits, and recommends to the minister. It is not nomination; so, the issue of nomination by the board does not arise because the board recruits.

And secondly, Madam Chair, the issue of years, we really need to state how many years over this job of Executive Director.  (Interjections) Possibly, I would recommend five years minimum, at least five years. You can look for ten, you can look for fifteen, but at least it should not be below five years.

MR OKUPA?: Five years in management position not just five years. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Five years in management?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chair, I would like to go by the proposal by the chairperson of the committee, where we maintain the proposal of five years’ experience, in Higher education management and financial – (interjections) – I say this because this is management of education and we have to be biased on education.

For example, for me – (interjections) – can you protect me, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order members –

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I qualified as a secondary school teacher, with a Bachelor of Arts with Education majoring in Economics I did masters in economics policy and management; I would actually qualify because I have – (laughter)- yes, I mean – no, it is not about me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you looking for a manager for an education institution or for a manager of money and -

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chair, we are looking for a manager who also has experience in the area of education. 

Secondly, on the Executive Director, I want to agree with the point being raised by hon. Sseggona. Hon. Sseggona has a strong point because recently, something happened with the National Council of Higher Education, where the board recommended - just like it is in the law the board recommended - but the Minister went ahead and appointed the person that came second, who was actually not recommended and that is real.

So, in such a case, who will take care? Who is going to remedy that? It is happening, it is there. Somebody must be put in place as a second eye. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Education. What did you have in mind in making your proposals? 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I am one of those who very strongly believes in the fact that experience is earned and there is no shortcut to experience. The person that we are recommending or proposing here, this is going to be a chief executive officer of that institution, who is going to be responsible for billions of shillings, the administration, of that money.

The board comes to give guidance but the day to day operations of that institution rests on the shoulders of the chief executive officer. And therefore, this is somebody who, in my considered view, should have a lot of experience in financial management, administration - (interjections)- the competences that we should be looking for is one; this person must have financial background, very important.

Secondly, this person must have management because person is going to manage the whole organisation and therefore- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we are looking for a Managing Director. 

MR AJEDRA: We are looking for a Managing Director and – not to – most of you are right and just for when we are drafting this law, we need to keep that in mind that this person is not going to manage Shs5 billion. We are looking at even Shs30 or 40 billion. That is a whole ministry for your information and therefore, the person that you are going to be entrusting with that money must be somebody who is very competent, seasoned in financial management and also in human resource management. So, I think my considered view- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, propose- “A person shall not be appointed Executive Director unless he or she is a person of high moral character, proven integrity and…” – now, you propose from that point so that we move.

MR AJEDRA: “A person shall not be appointed Executive Director unless that person is of high moral character, proven integrity and has at least 10 years’ management-“ (Interjections)- no, wait. I was asked to make a proposal and that is my proposal. You will have a chance to make yours. “…at least 10 years’ experience in financial management and public finance.” That is my proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Minister. 

MS ALUPO: Madam Chair, I would like to appreciate the proposal of the committee but I would like us to agree so that we put this matter to rest. I would concede if Clause 11(2) read like this: “A person shall not be appointed Executive Director unless that person is of high moral character and proven integrity and has a minimum of five years’ experience in a senior management position” so that we do not cut out anybody. 

Secondly, “The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the board.” Normally, the board recommends three people to the Minister and the implied interpretation of that is that the minister can choose from all the names, which the board has recommended and that is what happened in the case of the National Council for Higher Education. 

I would like to inform hon. Franca Akello that the board recommended two professors who passed their interviews and they asked the Minister to choose from the two. Out of the two, one of them is the one I chose because the minister is also empowered to continue vetting and looking at the CVs.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, like my friend, the Minister said, I think it is not good to open those wounds because you have No.1 and No.2 and these are affairs of the State and your option for and on behalf of this country is No.2; and you come here on the Floor of Parliament and you start lecturing to us that, “I received two names and my exercise of discretion for and on behalf of this country is to choose No.2.” Is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you know that matter is not before this House. But Members, if we are not agreeing- 

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, it is becoming very difficult to process the proposals. I was wondering if it would be procedurally right if we received proposals sub-clause by sub-clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Written?

MS ALASO: No, and we deal with it. So, we go to sub-clause, what is the first one- and then we deal with the process of recruitment. Otherwise, there are now too many proposals. My head is actually failing to accommodate all of them. I made the first proposal. I do not even know what the fate of my first proposal is but the very first proposal I made- if it would be disposed of and then we could see what else. 

So, my first proposal on Clause 11(1) was that the Executive Director shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the board in accordance with Public Service guidelines. Something like that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I would like to propose that those who have proposals put them in writing and then, we look at them tomorrow, soberly and carefully. This is a very important law and I think we should all leave here happy and agreeable on how we are going to move. 

So, I will ask the Minister to move a Motion that we resume so that those who have proposals put them in writing and tomorrow we look at them soberly, one by one.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.11
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled,“The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013”, clauses 2, 4,5,7,8, and 10 and stood over Clause 3 and Clause 6- with amendments. Thank you. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.13
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, please, take the night to look again at all the areas where we have not agreed. Look at the other laws we have been making and make use of the research services and let us have them written, please. There are too many oral amendments, sometimes it is a problem. So, let us-

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, I want you to allow me to thank our ministers of education. It is very rare here to see ministers available when we are handling this business in some cases but today, we have two ministers, though two are missing. 

I am kindly requesting fellow Members to appear in this House tomorrow because these are very important Bills, which we are handling.

So, through that method of guidance I wish to thank the ministers and that is my word, kindly, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 December 2013, at 2.00 p.m.)











