Friday, 7 December 2012  
  
Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to apologise for starting at this time, yet we had agreed to start at 11.00 o’clock. The circumstances are clear to the Members; the committee that we had given business could not finish until just a few minutes ago. They have finished and I have been informed that the copies of the report will soon be here. But thank you very much for the patience. It really shows the commitment we have all demonstrated, that this matter is important and we should handle it in a comprehensive way. 

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery, this afternoon, we have Miss Lady Winnie Among Okot, a guest from the United States of America. She is here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming her. (Applause) 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall that when we adjourned yesterday, we referred this particular subject to a committee and the committee was to report. Clerk, can you call the clause first?

Recommittal of clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, honourable members, before I present this report, the copies will be brought. I have a copy for the chairperson – but the rest of the copies are being brought. (Interjections) Honourable colleagues, I would like you to appreciate the circumstances under which we are working, but the copies are being brought. [HON. MEMBERS: “We shall wait.”] Yes, I wanted to just say this, before actually embarking on submitting the report –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to thank the honourable chair of the committee. I rise on a point of procedure. The matter which is being debated or about which we are about to be informed as having been referred to the committee is such an important one, that we all need to be brought on board from the onset. It has been a normal tradition in this House that when a report comes from the committee, Members are given copies; more importantly, bearing in mind the nature of the work which has made us have an extraordinary sitting on a Friday. More so, all of us have come here because of our commitment, and we want to be closely associated with what the chairman is going to present. 

Therefore, I beg your indulgence, Mr Chairman, that we are given copies so that we can move together. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The copies are here. Please, proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I will not read the introduction. I think I will just go to the last paragraph on page one. The Rt Hon. Speaker ruled that the Parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources considers the position that Cabinet shall have come up with vis-a-vis that espoused by a section of the House led by hon. Katuntu and report back to the House. The committee hereby tables its report to the House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to speak loudly?

MR SSEGONA: Mr Chairman, I would like to be guided procedurally on whether we are proceeding well. The report or what appears to be the report of the committee that I have received is a report of the Parliamentary Sectoral Committee on Natural Resources - amendments on clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Production and Development) Bill, 2012 as presented by the Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Shadow Attorney-General. I am wondering whether this is a report of the committee or one presented by the two persons stated. There is no order in the procedure, unfortunately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are aware of what we are dealing with and the top of the report states: “The Report of the Parliamentary Sectoral Committee on Natural Resources.” The copies are being circulated. Mr Chairman, please, proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the committee invited the honourable Minister of Energy and Minerals and hon. Katuntu among others, to appear before the members of the committee. 

Observations and findings

On page two, under paragraph 2(1), the committee observed that that on November, 12 2012 the House pronounced itself on clause 9, by agreeing to its amendment as follows: 

Functions of the minister 

The minister shall be responsible for:

a)	Initiating, developing and implementing oil and gas policy;
b)	Submitting a draft legislation to Parliament;
c)	Issuing petroleum regulations;
d)	Promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector;
e)	Any other functions incidental or consequential to his or her functions. 

Part (2) of that amendment was as follows: 

“The minister shall in addition to the functions referred to in sub-section (1) be responsible for the approval of:

(a)	The grant and revocation of licences
(b)	Negotiations and endorsement of petroleum agreements
(c)	approval of field development plans and data management systems.”

3.2 The recommittal of clause 9 by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development was to the effect that clause 9 remains as was originally in the Bill thus reading:

“Functions of the minister – 

The minister shall be responsible for:

(a)	granting and revoking licences;
(b) 	initiating, developing and implementing oil and gas policy;
(c) 	submitting draft legislation to Parliament;
(d) 	issuing petroleum regulations;
(e) 	negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements;
(f) 	approving field development plans;
(g) 	promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector;
(h) 	approving data management systems; and 
(i) 	any other function incidental or consequential to his or her functions.”

3.3 	According to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the rationale for the recommittal was the need for greater clarity of the roles, which in the view of Cabinet had been lost in the initial position that the House had taken on 12 November 2012.

3.4 	The proposal by the Shadow Attorney-General was as follows:

To substitute the current clause 9 with the following:

“Functions of the minister

The minister shall be responsible for:

(a)negotiating petroleum agreements in liaison with the Authority -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I know some of my honourable colleagues may even want to disregard Rules of Parliament and I do not want to be party to that. 

Rule No. 208, “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House together with the report of the committee by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee, when reporting to the House.” Mr Chairman, are we proceeding well when we are offending this Rule 208?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are proceeding correctly. The circumstances under which this report has been generated is clear to all of us. It was ordered yesterday by the Speaker –(Interjections)- no, listen. 

It was ordered by the Speaker that this committee must sit from 9.00 o’clock and finish by 11.00 o’clock so that the House could receive whatever they have discussed. That is what I have done. So, the report is here. The absence of the minutes - I am sure the minutes will be generated and brought in due course.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, the minutes are being brought?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minutes are being brought?. Well, we can then stay the debate if you want to wait for the minutes, but let the committee chairman present the report.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, what is the purpose of the word “shall”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, please; let us receive the report.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, I had said that the proposal by the Shadow Attorney-General was as follows:

“Functions of the minister 

The minister shall be responsible for:

(a)	negotiating petroleum agreements in liaison with the Authority, and with the approval of Cabinet endorse Petroleum agreements and grant licenses;

(b)	revoking licenses on recommendation of the Authority and with approval of Cabinet;

(c)	initiating, developing and implementing oil and gas policy;

(d)	submitting draft legislation to Parliament;

(e)	issuing petroleum regulations;

(f)	approving field development plans;

(g)	promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector;

(h) approving data management systems; and

(i)	any other function incidental or consequential to his /her functions.

It is worth noting that clause 11 and any other clauses affected shall be amended to reflect the above changes.

3.5 	The two positions before the committee were, therefore, that in 3.2 and 3.4 above, whereas the ruling of the Speaker on 4 December 2012 was inter-alia premised on the opportunity for consensus, the committee noted that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is absolutely unrelenting in her desire to have the House decide on clause 9 as recommitted.


3.7 	On the other hand, the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu maintains the need for consensus on institutionalising a shared responsibility in as far as clause 9 is concerned. This would require ministerial decisions of technical nature being a culmination of the obligatory advice of the routine regulatory and technical arm of the Petroleum Authority.
 
3.8 	A consultative decision-making and role-playing process would ensure that the ministerial functions are played from a well informed and technically appropriate point of view.

3.9 	This inevitably requires a legal framework that enshrines and guarantees the sharing of these responsibilities so that the decision-making process in this regard is a thoroughly consultative one.

3.10 	The dichotomy of the functions of granting and revocation of licenses is imperative because, unlike the granting of licenses, revocation is a culmination of the outcomes of the monitoring function, which is under the proposed Petroleum Authority. Therefore, the minister in revoking a license should involve the Authority, which is the principal monitoring institution.

3.11 Both the institutions of the minister and the Petroleum Authority are institutions of Government. Therefore, powers vested in either or both of them are intrinsically vested in Government. The pre-occupation should, therefore, be in apportioning powers amongst these institutions in a manner that enhances not only the efficacy of the institutions, but the sustainability of the systems established as well.

Whereas the Executive is uncompromisingly bent on its position of reinstating the original clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Production and Development) Bill, 2012, the committee notes the inherent importance of consensus in shaping legislation and apportioning responsibilities of the institutional arrangements in the oil and gas sector of Uganda.

As the Speaker noted during the House sitting of 4 December 2012 - to quote her guidance: “It is okay to vote and defeat a side, but you leave unhappy. If there is an opportunity for consensus, let us go back to Cabinet. If there is chance for consensus, I think we should use it.”

Mr Chairman and honourable members, the committee in this spirit of consensus met in a bid to explore the feasibility of consensus between the varying points of view regarding clause 9. However, the Executive has stuck to its position.

Recommendations 
In view of its preceding observations, the committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the polarised positions of the Members on the two positions, the matter was subjected to a vote, and 10 out of 18 voted in favour of clause 9 remaining as it is in the Bill; five voted against; and three abstained.

I beg to submit, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the positions that I summarised yesterday are still the same positions that the committee has examined. That is the position in the Bill as it was presented by the minister in clause 9; and secondly, the position which was adopted by the House, which took away the initial original clause 9 of the Bill; and also, the final proposal that was made on the basis of the consensus effort from hon. Katuntu, which presented the third position.
 
We have debated the demerits and merits of these positions. We have had the opportunity to interact on all these matters that have been before us. On the position of the minister in the initial Bill, we debated that and departed from it and passed our own provision after a long debate. So, the only new position is that which has been presented by the committee, which was debated in the past and yesterday was again brought back to the House. 

So, the matters are actually basically here before us to take decisions on them. So, there are three positions, and we need to decide on them. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: First of all, I want to thank the chairperson for the report. The chairman said that 18 people voted. When I count the signatures, they are not 18. (Interjections) I want you to listen. Learn to listen. The signatures are 11. The people who voted are 18. So, which is which? 

The procedural issue I am raising –(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, can you protect me from hon. Kutesa.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The number of voters was 18, but the number of people who signed the report are 11. So, where are the seven people, and the minutes?

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, the honourable members of the committee were – I can even name them; hon. Alaso is a member; hon. Bihande is a member; hon. Akena is a member; and hon. Anywar is a member. They participated in the voting, but the report – I had to put this on record. Hon. Alaso said, if we put in the issue of the number of votes, she would sign. We enshrined this in the report, but she had come. They are here; they can tell you. This is not a concoction. Hon. Anywar is here; hon. Bihande is here; hon. Akena is here; hon. Chemutai is here; hon. Alaso - all these are members who participated in the voting. 

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I think it is necessary to appreciate the sequence of handling business in the committee. Decisions are made before reports are typed out. What is typed is the decision of the committee. Signing comes after the report has been typed out. But the decision is taken before the typing. So, what the committee is reporting is that in the committee, they made a decision, and they went to prepare the report for the House.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, the honourable member who has raised the issue, the Leader of the Opposition, has just been in elections. (Interjections) Let me build my point. You will get a chance. You will catch the eye of the Speaker and you will talk. And, I know very well that there are people who voted for him and those who never voted for him. I do not think everybody who voted for him signed on the tally sheet. [HON. MEMBERS: “That is different.”] There is no difference. These people voted. Those who did not sign did not want to sign.

Mr Chairman, these semantics of trying to delay us in taking a decision on such an important issue should stop, because we have debated this issue –(Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The honourable member who has just been speaking to the House is a senior Member of this House, and he knows very well the rules of this House. Is he in order to import foreign rules to apply in the work that takes place in this House? Parliament has Rules of Procedure by which it executes its duties. 

Is the honourable minister in order to confuse this House; to lie to this House; to impute unparliamentary motives? Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member raising the point of order should also use parliamentary language. (Laughter) But that notwithstanding, the honourable member who was stating the point was not stating the Rules of Procedure of this House. He was making a comparison of what happened elsewhere. Just like yesterday, hon. Gilbert Bukenya made a statement on a procedure on surgery, and he made his point very clear. So, there is no prohibition on these kinds of connections. (Hon. Members rose_) 

Let me hear from a member of the Committee.

MR MUJUNI  KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. We sat; voted and lost on some positions. But I am not a signatory. I did not sign because by the time we made the decision, the list of the names had not been brought?. So, as a member this committee, I want to state that I own up what is here. But I want to state -(Interjections)– yes, because this must be stated; why some people are said not to have voted.

I want to state that in the committee, there was a position, on whether the position as recommitted in clause 9 should stay or whether we should do that in consultation with the Authority. And five members - and it is on record; I hope hon. Alaso will also mention it. We decided that it should be in conjunction with the Authority, but we lost the position. 

Honourable members, today is the D-day. We are tired of moving back and forth on technicalities. You are either moving for Uganda or against Uganda. You decide to make a position today, and that will be all. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday –(Hon. Member rose_)- honourable members, the Chairperson is speaking. First of all, one of the rules says, “The Speaker shall be heard in silence.”

Yesterday, what was referred to the committee was exactly what the committee has handled; and the committee has reported. What is left before us is to take the decision. (Members rose_) Please, first wait. 

This referral is made at Committee Stage. At Committee Stage, what we are examining are provisions of clauses. We cannot start debating provisions of clauses. What the committee has said is that it was not able to reconcile the three positions. That reconciliation can only be done by this committee by vote. That is what I am guiding on, honourable members. There is no other way. This is the report of the committee. The committee has not come out with any position except of them taking a vote on whether we should retain or not, and with a vote of 10 out of 18. That kind of thing has happened. (Members rose_) Please, let us not bog ourselves down now.

Honourable members, we sat here up to 9.30 p.m. last night, and a decision was taken that we refer this matter to the committee. The committee has reported, but its report has not helped the House. The procedure now is for the House to take a decision on the three positions. (Members rose_) That is it, please. (Members rose_)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, it is true this Bill has taken a lot of our time. The committee has come back with a report that takes us back to the position at which we adjourned yesterday. Today, is the D-day - to borrow the phrase of my colleague, hon. Kyamadidi. I propose that this being a very sensitive matter, which is not about us, but the whole country, we vote by roll call. I would be happy to see how –(Interjections)– let us all be counted as we vote by roll call. I beg to propose. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By order of the Chair, we will proceed to vote by roll call and tally, under the provisions of our rules so that there is transparency in what we are going to do. Everybody must stand and be counted, and own up.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: These behind-the-scene games must stop. The moment is now here. We will vote; let us votehonourable members, by the rules of the House. (Mr Jack Sabiiti rose_)

Honourable members, there are three positions. The first position was what is in the Bill, which has been recommitted. The second position is what the House adopted; and the third position is about what happened even after you had started voting, but in the spirit of building consensus. So, we will first take a vote on whether to adopt the amendment proposed by hon. Katuntu, first. We will take a vote on the position presented by the hon. Katuntu –

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, first of all, I would like to thank everybody for the effort they have put in this debate. I also think it is time this journey comes to an end. We need to take a decision in one way or the other. But as I said yesterday, my amendment or “our amendment” was premised on some understanding that never was. And if that understanding is not there anymore, it would be a waste of time to imagine that it is also any option.

Therefore, for purposes of the record, I withdraw my amendment. (Applause) It does not exist because there was no consensus reached. I was or we were misled and the record should show that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The rules require me to grant you leave to do the same. You can proceed.

MR KATUNTU: So, I am now withdrawing the amendment. However, I need to give my colleagues the reasons that have led me into withdrawing. It is not that I just came up to withdraw this amendment. There are reasons, which I am sure the whole House, including the minister and the Leader of Government Business appreciates. The point I am trying to make; the ‘long tail’ of it is that there is no third position. This is because the so-called consensus amendment does not stand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it is withdrawn. Honourable members, the latest proposal from hon. Katuntu is that he has withdrawn his amendment with leave from the Chair. So, we have two positions left; the position that was initially adopted by the House and that, which the minister seeks to change by reinstating the provision in the Bill as it was initially published. Are we together?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the vote is now –(Mr Sabiiti rose_) I am guiding on this issue. Honourable member, let me guide on this issue now. Please, let me guide on this matter. We have all had enough of this Bill and I think we need to bring it to an end.
 
Therefore, those are the two positions. We know the position that was adopted by the House. But the minister has moved a motion that that position be changed. So, the question is going to be whether to adopt the position now presented by the minister as presented in the initial Bill. That is the question, because if you vote in favour of reinstating clause 9 as it is, then what had been previously adopted by the House will fall by the wayside. So, I now put the question – 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much, for guiding us to the point we have so far reached. The point of procedure, as we go to the next step is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you state to us clearly the two positions with their details for us to make an informed decision of what we are voting on? (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have stated these positions, time and again. The chairperson of the committee has just read them out again.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have stated this provision time and again. The chairperson of the committee has just read them again. It is not even 20 minutes ago. The chairperson read. If you look at copies of the report, it is contained in paragraphs 3.1 and 3.2. That is what the chairperson of the committee read out and those are the two positions. There is a position already adopted by the House, and then there is also a position in the Bill and both are published. I do not have to read them again because we already voted on them here to change the minister’s position.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for your indulgence and for giving me the opportunity to make this statement. Mr Chairman, the Rules of Procedure of this House compel us to broadcast the proceedings of the House on national television. I want to read you rule 217(1). “The proceedings of the House shall be available for broadcast on radio and/or television during all hours of sitting except under circumstances determined otherwise by the House or as directed by the Speaker. (2) Broadcast of the proceedings of the House shall maintain such standards and fairness as are adopted, from time to time, by the House.”

Mr Chairman, the procedural matter that I want to raise is that the TV is not on. (Interjections) I want you to give us guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which TV?

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, the matter that we are going to decide on is not only a matter of Parliament. (Interjections) It is a matter of the entire country. There are also Ugandans who are living abroad and they need to see what is happening in this House. May I, therefore, seek your guidance on this? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, order! The rules that have just been cited are very clear. They say the proceedings shall be made available for broadcasting. It does not say, shall be broadcast instantly. No. It states, “Will be available for broadcast.” It is up to the different television stations to broadcast as they want. We used to have WBS TV which had stationed itself on the other side of Parliament and it was broadcasting live. They have since moved. We cannot force them to come and broadcast. 

What is being relayed in the House is on the House television everywhere. It is there. We cannot force UBC or anybody else to broadcast this live. No, we cannot.

Honourable members, we will vote by roll call and tally and – (Members rose_)- I now order it as follows - please, let us take the vote. (Members rose_) No, no, please. We have reached a time to take a vote. Let us vote, okay. The vote is whether the position of the minister –(Members rose_)- Please, honourable members, have respect for the Chair. (Members rose_) No, honourable members. (Members rose_)

Honourable members -(Hon. Sabiiti rose_)-  Hon. Jack Sabiiti, I have a lot of respect for you and that is why I am not going to allow you because you are now disrupting my proceedings. We are going to a stage where there is no procedural issue at all. We have moved and said there are two positions to vote on. Please, let us move forward. (Members rose_)- No, no.

So, by roll call and tally, a Member’s name will be called and that Member will say ‘Aye’ or ‘Nay’ or ‘I abstain’. There are three votes. You either vote for, against or you abstain. Those are the three votes. The names will be called in the order in which they are published; and the question is, whether to reinstate the position initially presented in the Bill. That is the question. We will now start the vote.

The question is, Clause 9 of the Bill as initially published in the Bill should be reinstated. Those in favour will say ‘Aye’ and those against will say ‘Nay’. Those undecided will abstain. Is it clear? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, those who want to reinstate the initial position in the Bill will say ‘Aye’. Those who do not want that position to be reinstated will say ‘Nay’; and the others will say ‘abstain’ or ‘no vote’. Just stand up and say ‘I abstain’. Okay, please start.

(Members voted by roll call and tally.)

The following Members voted “Aye”:

1.	Acayo Christine Cwinya-ai  
2.	Achia Achieng Sarah Opendi 
3.	Remigio  
4.	Akello R. Aleper Margaret Achilla 
5.	Aleper Simon Peter 
6.	Akello Rose Lilly 
7.	Alupo Jessica Rose Epel  
8.	Amoit Judith Mary 
9.	Amongin Aporu Christine Hellen 
10.	Amuge Rebecca Otengo 
11.	Angina Charles (Brig.)
12.	Anite Evelyn 
13.	Arinaitwe Kariisa Joy
14.	Arinaitwe Rwakajara K.
15.	Aronda Nyakairima (Gen.) 
16.	Atuku Bigombe Betty
17.	Ayepa Michael 
18.	Ayoo Tonny 
19.	Bagiire Vincent Waiswa O. 
20.	Bakkabulindi Charles           
21.	Bakaluba Mukasa Peter       
22.	Bakeine Mabel Lillian Komugisha 
23.	Baliddawa Edward 
24.	Balyejjusa Sulaiman Kirunda 	 
25.	Bangirana Anifa Kawooya 	   
26.	Banyenzaki Henry  
27.	Barumba Beatrice Rusaniya Namala 
28.	Bbumba Syda M. Namirembe
29.	Biraaro Ephraim Ganshanga 	
30.	Buchanayandi Tress  		 
31.	Businge Rusoke Victoria 	    
32.	Byabagambi John 		 
33.	Byarugaba Alex Bakunda  	 	
34.	Byarugaba Grace Isingoma 
35.	Cadet Benjamin 
36.	Chekwel Lydia 		 
37.	Chemutai Phyllis          
38.	Daudi Migereko  
39.	Dombo Emmanuel Lumala   
40.	Drito Martin Andi 	             
41.	Ebil Fred        
42.	Ecweru Musa Francis           
43.	Ekuma George Stephen 	    
44.	Engola Sam 			    
45.	Eriakui Peter Emmanuel 	    
46.	Gudoi Yahaya 			    
47.	Isabirye Iddi 		    
48.	Jacan Omach Fred 	
49.	Kabaale Kwagala Olivia 	   
50.	Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro
51.	Kabajo James Kyewalabye 
52.	Kabakumba Masiko Labwoni  
53.	Kaabule Evelyne Naome  
54.	Kafabusa Werikhe Michael 
55.	Kafuda Boaz			
56.	Kajara Aston Peterson	
57.	Kajura Henry Muganwa	
58.	Kakooza James		      
59.	Kamanda Cos Bataringaya	
60.	Kamara John Nizeyimana	
61.	Karungi Elizabeth		  
62.	Kasaija Matia			  
63.	Kasamba Mathias		  
64.	Kase-Mubanda Freda Nanzira 
65.	Kasule Justine Lumumba	  
66.	Kasule Robert		       
67.	Kataaha Janet Museveni	  
68.	Kataike Sarah Ndoboli	  
69.	Katumba Wamala (Lt. Gen.)  
70.	Kibuule Ronald	            
71.	Khiddu Makubuya Edward
72.	Kiiza Monday Ernest Apuuli 
73.	Kintu Florence 
74.	Kitatta Aboud 
75.	Kiyonga Chrispus 
76.	Komuhangi Margaret
77.	Kutesa Kahamba Samuel	
78.	Kwiyucwiny Grace Freedom	
79.	Kyeyune Harun		     
80.	Lakot Susan (Capt.)		
81.	Lematia Ruth Molly Ondoru    
82.	Lokeris Aimat Peter		
83.	Lokeris Samson			
84.	Lokodo Simon			
85.	Lolem Micah Akasile	
86.	Lowila Oketayot		
87.	Lugoloobi Amos		
88.	Madada Kyebakoze Suleiman 
89.	Malinga Stephen Oscar	
90.	Matovu Gregory		 
91.	Mbabazi Betty Ahimbisibwe	
92.	Mbagadhi Frederick Nkayi	
93.	Mbogo Kezekia		
94.	Moses Ali
95.	Mpabwa Sarah (Lt. Col.)	
96.	Mpiima Dorothy Christine	
97.	Muhumuza David		
98.	Muhwezi Jim Katugugu (Maj. Gen. Rtd.) 
99.	Mujungu Jennifer K.		
100.	Mulindwa Patrick 
101.	Muloni Irene Nafuna	
102.	Musinguzi Yona	
103.	Mutagamba Maria 
104.	Mutyabule Florence Tibafana	
105.	Muyingo John Chrysostom	
106.	Mwesige Adolf
107.	Mwesigye Fred 
108.	Nabbanja Robinah 
109.	Nabirye Agnes 
110.	Nabulya Theopista S.
111.	Najjemba Rosemary Muyinda 
112.	Nakabale Patrick 
113.	Nakabira Gertrude Lubega 
114.	Nakadama Rukia Isanga
115.	Namara Grace	
116.	Namayanja Rose Nsereko
117.	Nankabirwa Ann Maria 
118.	Nankabirwa Ruth Sentamu 
119.	Nantaba Idah Erios 
120.	Nasasira John Mwoono 
121.	Nauwat Rosemary 
122.	Nekesa Barbara Oundo 
123.	Nokrach William
124.	Nshaija Dorothy Kabaraitsya 
125.	Nyakecho Okwenye Annet 
126.	Nyiira Zerubabel Mijumbi 
127.	Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke 
128.	Nyombi Peter 
129.	Nyombi Thembo George William 
130.	Oboth Marksons Jacob 
131.	Ochwa David 
132.	Okello Anthony 
133.	Okuonzi Sam Agatre 
134.	Omona Kenneth Olusegun 
135.	Omwonya Oribdhogu Stanley 
136.	Onek Obaloker Hillary 
137.	Ongalo Obote Clement Kenneth 
138.	Opolot Jacob Richards 
139.	Oryem Henry Okello 
140.	Owoyesigire Jim (Lt. Gen.) 
141.	Ruhindi Frederick 
142.	Rwamirama Bright Kanyontore 
143.	Sabila Nelson 
144.	Sempala Mbuga Edward William 
145.	Ssali Baker 
146.	Ssekandi Edward Kiwanuka 
147.	Ssempijja Vincent Bamulangaki 
148.	Ssemugaba Samuel   
149.	Tashobya N. Stephen	 
150.	Tete Chelangat Everline	 
151.	Todwong Richard	 
152.	Tumwebaze Kagyigyi Frank	 
153.	Tumwine Elly (Gen.)	
154.	Yaguma Wilberforce	

The following Members voted “Nay”:

1.	Akena James Michael Jimmy 
2.	Alaso Alice Asianut 
3.	Amoding Monicah 
4.	Atim Anywar Beatrice 
5.	Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara
6.	Bakireke Nambooze Betty 
7.	Birekerawo Nsubuga Mathias 	 
8.	Bwambale Bihande Yokasi 	
9.	Epetait Francis 		     
10.	Karuhanga Kafureeka Gerald 
11.	Kasibante Moses		  
12.	Katuntu Abdu			
13.	Lubega Medard Sseggona	
14.	Magyezi Raphael		
15.	Mpuuga Mathias		 
16.	Mugume Roland		
17.	Mujuni Vicent Kyamadidi	 
18.	Muwanga Kivumbi Mohammed	
19.	Nabukenya Brenda 
20.	Naggayi Nabilah Sempala 
21.	Namayanja Florence 
22.	Nandala-Mafabi Nathan 
23.	Ninsiima Ronah Rita 
24.	Nzoghu William 
25.	Obua-Ogwal Benson 
26.	Odoo Tayebwa 
27.	Oguttu Wafula Phillip
28.	Ogwal Jacinto Deusdedit
29.	Okupa Elijah 
30.	Olanya Gilbert 
31.	Osegge Angelline 
32.	Sabiiti Jack 
33.	Ssebagala Abdu Latif Ssengendo  
34.	Ssekikubo Theodore 
35.	Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda 
36.	Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga 	
37.	Wadri Kassiano Ezati 
38.	Wamanga-Wamai Jack	

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the results of the vote are as follows: The “Ayes” 154; the “Nays” 38; and there were no abstentions. The “Ayes” have it. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.11
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.11
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 9 of the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and adopted it as recommitted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.12
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

5.12
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: 
“THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister! Congratulations, Mr Chairman! Congratulations, honourable Members of Parliament! (Applause) 

This has been a long trip; bumpy, slippery; we moved forward, we moved backward; we moved sideways; but today, we have been able to take this decision in the interest of this country.

Honourable members, you will recall that there is another Bill on the same subject, which is also at Committee Stage: “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012.” At the earliest opportunity, we will handle it. There were harmonisation meetings held on this and I am sure they will enable us to move quickly.

We also have the Accountants Bill, 2012 and I am advised that the motion was moved for second reading; and what is left is debate. I do not know whether my information is correct; but at the earliest opportunity, we will be handling those two Bills, and that earliest opportunity should be when we resume next week.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, it does seem to me that the relevant point at which this intervention would have been meaningful has been passed. So, thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you again, honourable members. At an appropriate time, I will be designing medals and giving them out to those who have been persisting with me through this long and tedious Bill. House adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.17 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 December 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)

