

Tuesday, 12 December 2017

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just looking at the board and it is showing that only three Members are present and yet, we have been clicking and our numbers are more than three. Therefore, we want to have a correct record captured. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please, correct the programme there because I can see there are more than three Members seated in this House.

H.E the Vice President, the Leader of Opposition, members of the Cabinet, Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting.

First, I would like to report the absence of some of our colleagues: The hon. Joyce Moriku Kaducu, she is hospitalised in Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi. She is not able to attend our proceedings. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi of Bukomansimbi is also in hospital in Nairobi and so, he is not able to come to work to today. I just want to ask that we keep them all in our prayers and wish them a quick recovery.

Secondly, the new Rules of Procedure of Parliament have been published and placed in your pigeon holes and so, you now need to make use of those which have been amended so that we are up-to-date in our work.

In the public gallery, we have hon. Louis Opange former Member of Parliament for Pallisa County. He is here to attend the proceedings. We welcome him. (Applause)

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work you have been doing both in your constituencies and in the different committees of Parliament. 

I want to start by talking about some of the issues that occurred here sometime back but before I do that, let me introduce the leaders of Ngora District council represented by hon. Jacquiline Amongin. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have a big delegation from Pallisa District represented by hon. Richard Oseku and hon. Agnes Ameede, they have come because of the issue that is on the Order Paper. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have the newly appointed staff of the Parliamentary Commission who joined this service on the 1st December. You are welcome to the Parliament. These are the people you are going to serve and work with. (Applause)

Honourable members, as I was saying that there were certain events that occurred here in the past. I wrote to the Head of State about them but nevertheless, I would like to take the following measures concerning our security.

First, there is an access on the fourth floor of the Parliament building leading to the Office of the President. It has been established that somebody can move from the Office of the President into the Parliament building, reach the lobby without going through any security check. This constitutes a danger to the precincts and I am now instructing the Sergeant-at-Arms to seal that entrance from the parliamentary side. (Applause)

I am further directing that all the staff of the Parliamentary Police must henceforth wear uniforms and they must have name tags. We should be able to identify who they are with their names. 
I am also directing the Clerk to ensure that the names and ranks of the police personnel deployed at Parliament are submitted in writing to the Speaker. Any changes made must be communicated and agreed upon with the Parliamentary Commission.

Honourable members, Parliament is a civilian institution and should be guarded by the police. All other security organs, if they are here, should withdrawal and go where they are supposed to go. (Applause)

During the recess, I visited a number of constituencies. Last week, I was in Tingey on the campaign against female genital mutilation; they are excited about the loan of Suam-Kapchorwa road and they are looking forward to its earliest implementation. I told them that we are really happy as a House for that loan.

I also visited my old school, St Catherine Secondary School in Lira. They are building additional infrastructure. I would like to call upon the old girls who are here to support the school in what they are doing.

I visited Teso College Aloet who are also busy fundraising for additional infrastructure but most importantly, they have taken up a very vigorous tree-planting programme. They already have seven acres of trees and by the end of this year, they would have planted 20,000 trees. We want to commend them and ask them to continue.

I also visited Bukomasimbi, Insingiro, Kazo, Luuka to touch base with the population and support Members of Parliament.

At the international level, I have just returned from the State of Israel, where the parliaments of Africa have been requested to increase visibility and partnership with the State of Israel and the Parliament Knesset and I bring greetings from the Speaker Edelstein who hosted us together with the speakers of Tanzania, Ghana, Rwanda and South Sudan.

I also visited the United Kingdom and held discussions with officers of DFID to address the issue of support to the elderly fund so that we can achieve a national roll out. This House has been demanding from the Government that we should have a national roll out. Therefore, I did my part together with hon. Opolot and hon. Kabahenda the former Member from Kyegegwa. We think that we made a good case.

I am more excited to report that on Sunday I was in Dar-es- salaam to support the Uganda Parliamentary delegation to the Eighth Inter-parliamentary Games and I am glad to report that overall, our teams performed well but challenges remain around netball, which was cancelled but I know that the team captain will be formally reporting here but we were the overall winners. We thrashed those people again. (Applause)

Honourable members, there are other issues I want us to address. I wanted particularly to remind Members about our Rules of Procedure and code of conduct. On many occasions, I have reminded the House about the conduct expected of Members of Parliament while they are here. We have an obligation to execute our constitutional mandate as commanded by the Constitution and as required by the people whom we represent here. This is our duty and we must do it objectively.

As we proceed with our mandate, I would like to remind you about the following rules. Rules 69 to rule 91 which govern debate, behaviour and general conduct of Members in the House. Take special interest in rules 81 and 82, which provide that:
“81 (a) A Member shall dress in a dignified manner.”

“82 (1) During a sitting-
    (a) a Member shall enter or leave the House with decorum;
    (b) a Member shall not cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily;
    (c) while a Member is speaking, all other Members shall be silent and shall not make unseemly interruptions;
    (d) when a Member has finished speaking or making his or her observation he or she shall resume his or her seat;
    (e) a maiden speech shall not be interrupted except by the Speaker or in circumstances, which in the opinion of the Speaker warrant the interruption –“ But as you know, I have never interrupted a maiden speech;
    (f) “g) a Member shall not, without consent of the Speaker, bring into the House anything other than papers, books and other documents, which are directly connected with the business of the House;
    (g) a Member shall hot bring into the House any camera, arms or weapons, tape recorders, transistor radio; and
    (h) a Member shall not clap in the House.”

83. 	A Member shall not use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.

84. 	In all other matters, the behaviour of Members is guided by the code of conduct.

 I invite Members to look at Appendix F. The purpose of that code is to assist Members in the discharge of their obligations to the House, their constituents and the public at large.

More importantly, I want to address paragraph (5) rule 82 of the new rules on the issue of public trust: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner which will maintain and strengthen the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never undertake any action which may bring the House or its Members generally, into disrepute.” 

Rule 86 mandates me as Speaker to observe order and decorum in the House. I, therefore, wish to reiterate that this Parliament is a place to speak and exchange views, including listening to those you do not agree with. The rules obligate you, honourable members, to listen to your colleagues even when they have diverse opinions with which you disagree. 

We cannot all have the same views and that is why one of our cardinal tenets of parliamentary etiquette – and indeed as provided in the rules of procedure – is that we should listen to each other. It is also important to note, honourable members, that section 2 of the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act (Cap.258) provides for immunities of Members from legal proceedings for words spoken or written in a report in the House. This privilege is restricted to the words spoken not actions of Members in the House and there is no immunity from arrest on criminal grounds. Speaking is what is protected and anything else is not protected.

The actions of all of us, honourable members, must be guided by the common good; that is to achieve improved accountability, representation, constitutional democracy, rule of law and sustainable development for the people of Uganda.

Honourable Members, we collectively are the people’s representatives and the true voice of the people. Parliament, by its nature, is the embodiment of the people’s aspirations.

I further wish to remind the Clerk that the electronic coverage of parliamentary proceedings must be with due regard to the dignity of the House under rule 227 under Appendix G, which provides as follows:

“Disorder on the Floor of the House-
    (1) Televising may continue during incidents of grave disorder or unparliamentary behaviour for as long as the sitting continues, but subject to the following guidelines-
    a) On occasions of grave disorder, the Public Relations Manager shall normally focus on the Speaker for as long as proceedings continue, or until order has been restored;
    b) In case of unparliamentary behaviour, the Public Relations Manager shall normally focus on the Speaker and shall certainly do so if he or she rises, but occasional wide-angle shots of the Chamber are acceptable.

(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)-
    a) ‘grave disorder’ means incidents of individual, but more likely collective, misconduct of serious disruptive nature as to place in jeopardy the continuation of the sitting;
    b) ‘unparliamentary behaviour’ means any conduct which amounts to defiance of the Chair but which falls short of grave disorder.”

Honourable members, I believe you may not have looked at the appendix in the Rules of Procedure but these are the rules of this House and we expect you to abide by them. It is, therefore, important that we protect the sanctity and integrity of this Parliament especially because the work you are doing is for the people of Uganda and it must be done in their interest. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance of this House. I have heard you clearly read our Rules of Procedure and you quoted rule 81 on our dress code. On your right hand side, I can see hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, the Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality, clearly donned in a cap that is unparliamentary. (Laughter) It is true it is a jockey’s cap and our dress code clearly shows that we should be in a suit, a jacket, blouse, skirt or dress for the ladies and a decent traditional wear for the men. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for hon. Ibrahim Abiriga to dress like a disco jockey in this House and continue doing so. We would like to adhere to the rules as you have put it, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I now direct all those who have caps or hats in this House to remove them. They are here. All of them should remove them. (Applause) All of them. No exceptions. The hats are not part of our dress code, please.

2.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I wish to stand up to make this statement – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewanyana has just entered the House attired in an overall, which has not been included in our attire. Is he in order to come in dressed as if he is at a building site constructing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are wearing is not an official attire of this House. Kindly vacate. You are not visible when dressed like that. You cannot speak in this House. No, I am dealing with the Member who is improperly dressed. We had already agreed that we are going to abide by the Rules of Procedure.  That is what you said.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was with hon. Allan Ssewanyana when we were brutally dragged out of this Parliament. Hon. Ssewanyana’s suit was torn into pieces - (Interruption)
 
MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, you have just communicated and ably guided the House to ensure that mistakes made in the past are not repeated.  

Madam Speaker, a Member just rose on a point of order about Members who have put on caps and you ruled that all Members putting on caps should remove them. As if to defy orders, for the first time in the history of this Parliament, a Member of Parliament has come to the Chamber dressed in an overall. You have ruled that the Member should vacate the Chamber but the Member stuck to his guns and refused. Therefore, is it in order for a Member to come and defend someone who is dressed in an overall?

THE SPEAKER: It is out of order. In any case, the Parliamentary Commission pays the honourable member sufficiently to buy several suits. Hon. Ssewanyana, vacate the Chamber. Please, vacate the Chamber. 

Leader of Opposition - 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, on the fateful day of the fracas here – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, take your seat. 
 
MR NAMBESHE: It is a procedural matter concerning live coverage. 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot negotiate with the rules. Kindly, sit down. We will discuss it later. Allow the Leader of the Opposition to speak.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I move under rules 25(2)(k), and rule 52 of our newly adopted Rules of Procedure to make this statement. The statement regards the safety and welfare of Members of Parliament and reiterates some of the issues that you have communicated. 

I would like to welcome you back Members from the recess and take the opportunity to welcome and congratulate the gallant Members of this House who participated in the Inter-Parliamentary Games in Dar-es-Salaam and made the Pearl of Africa shine. I wish to congratulate you and welcome you back. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the recess was meant to give us an opportunity to consult our constituents on the different matters of national concern including the Bill that is before this House. It is sad to note that while the recess was meant to do that, some Members of this House were not accorded that privileged to consult their constituents peacefully to get their views.

Madam Speaker, I had planned to make this statement at the resumption of Parliament on 29 November 2017. However, the Presiding Speaker then advised that I make this statement when you are in Chair and I am glad that you have given me this opportunity to address this matter.

Madam Speaker, while we were facilitated as Members of Parliament to go and consult our voters in regard to the Bill that is before the House, it is unfortunate that some Members of this House were not allowed. While we went out there to consult even when some of us had informed the police – we wrote a letter to the Inspectorate General of Police to permit us have consultative rallies in groups and then later retreat to our individual constituencies. The police came up with a directive that put the House in jeopardy.

The directive of the police was that Members of Parliament should be stopped from consulting in groups. Even some of us who are district Members of Parliament were stopped from consulting with our male counterparts. I am a living example. I was stopped from consulting with my Members until I asserted myself and my Resident Police Commander was reprehended for allowing me to consult with my colleagues.

Madam Speaker, you told us to go and consult. The issues that ensued on 27 September 2017, I do not have to repeat them because you have talked about them. I would like to join you to ask the Head of State to give an explanation to Ugandans as to why Parliament of Uganda was invaded by the Special Forces Command (SFC). And also to be sure that that Ugandan’s representatives will never be attacked again, as they do their work.  

Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for setting the ground rules at the beginning of this House. You mentioned in your communication that when a Member is speaking, others should accord the Member an utmost faith to be heard. Therefore, may I request that the Government Chief Whip allows me to continue making my contribution without being interrupted? The matter I am talking about is very dear to me. You are here on behalf of the Government. My request is that the President should explain why the people’s House was invaded and Members attacked. At the moment, hon.  Betty Nambooze has screws in her back resulting from that attack. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table - Members, unless it concerns you, you may never know what it means. Currently, hon. Nambooze travels with a document that enables her to move through metal detectors -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order, hon. Kawooya?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I am at pain to stand and call my sister to order. I gave her a good amount of time to raise her statement requesting the Head of State to explain why some of our colleagues were not given time to consult with their communities. It is, of course, a concern and I am not against it. Is it, however, in order for her - (Interjection) - can you allow me to raise a point of order? 

THE SPEAKER: Please raise the point of order. 

MS KAWOOYA: Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to order the Head of State to explain why some of our colleagues were denied to consult without explaining why her members have defied the Speaker’s ruling that they remove their caps this afternoon in accordance with the rules? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed we are going to acknowledge and follow the newly printed Rules of Procedure. Please, comply and remove your hats because they are not part of our dress code. (Applause)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. However, also, I would like to request that in future, possibly, we better be able to understand the traditional attire of men and what they look like. Why am I saying so? Some of the caps that people may think mean something different in this House are traditional caps. I invite you to look at our directory to see the type of attire hon. Reagan Okumu was sworn in with. I can also let you know that my husband wore the same kind of attire at my introduction. It is traditional attire. (Laughter)

Therefore, some of the traditional attire must not be misinterpreted. Otherwise, in this House, there will be some members - Madam Speaker, it is not that I would like to dilute your ruling; I really would like to reinforce but let Members understand that there are some other people who you may think we are defying the Speaker’s ruling and yet for some, their faiths allow them. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, those who think they are inappropriately dressed, I pray they honour the Speaker’s directive. However, those like hon. Zaake who is still nursing wounds from that attack is using the cap to cover his head which was badly brutalised. It would be unfortunate -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I think you are abusing -

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the statement I am making was in regard to the attack that happened. I was explaining that as we speak right now, hon. Zaake should be allowed to move in the House with his cap because of the injury he sustained. 

Hon. Nambooze for now - [Ms Ruth Nankabirwa: “Must it be red?”] The choice of the cap he will use is his, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. Hon. Nambooze, as we speak right now, has screws in her body. I would like to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nambooze is a member of this House. She will come and make her full statement. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, we are all aware hon. Nambooze is a member of the Opposition, a side I lead. When I speak about her, I am talking about my Member who is no longer able to execute her duties freely because of the fracas that happened on 27th September this year. The attack that happened is regrettable and should never be allowed to happen again.

When it came to the time of consultation, apart from our rallies being dispersed, we were welcomed with teargas; the communities we were consulting were treated to live ammunition - in Kawempe Division. When we went to Kasubi, two of hon. Kasibante’s members of the community were injured badly and were hospitalised. Some Members of this House: hon. Joy Atim, hon. Osegge, hon. Ssemujju, hon. Franca Akello and hon. Achiro were hospitalised in Kampala hospitals. We would like to say this should not happen again.

Like you have said, Madam Speaker, it would be proper for us to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs as to how long members of Parliament will be kept in their own villages when they are national leaders. We find it hard to even visit our members of Parliament in their constituencies for fear of letting the members of their communities face the wrath of the Uganda Police Force. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, at her age, was kicked during the consultation in Lango and she was hospitalised. This was as a result of the police who are now becoming political; they are treating people differently. While our colleagues from the ruling party were allowed to consult in groups, those who were seen to be opposed to the Bill before the House were not allowed to consult in groups. I pray that this Government finds it within its heart to give equal treatment to all political players.

I also pray that the rule of law must prevail. Madam Speaker, we all swore to protect and defend the Constitution and we need to enjoy the fruits of democracy. We are in a multi-party dispensation; our police should know they are supposed to protect all Ugandans irrespective of whichever political party they belong to. It is the same with some of our staff around here; they should know they are here to work for members of Parliament irrespective of the political side they belong to. 

Madam Speaker, some of our Members after the fracas that happened here had bombs thrown into their homes. They would like to thank you for visiting them, sympathising with them and possibly for giving them hope. We would like to thank you for that gesture. 

However, we would like to also say that intimidation should not continue because it puts our families into a tricky situation. Being a leader, the people in our homes get scared as to whether we made a mistake by choosing to be people’s leaders. Certain police officers said that some of them are factory bombs; may we know how these factory or non-factory bombs found their way into the Members’ homes? We need to be sure that the Members’ security and safety is guaranteed. 

It is for the same issue, Madam Speaker, that we still demand for an explanation because as we are here as Members of Parliament, we may not be sure of our security and safety. Even this morning as we were coming to the House, we found a lot of police officers around town and Parliament. We are glad that now we can sit without any pressures or tensions. We would like to be assured that things that happened that day that keeps haunting us will never happen again and that people’s leaders will debate in a free and secure environment to the benefit of our society. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and I would like to conclude by requesting you - (Interruption) 

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give my colleague information on what happened. I will not speak as much as you may think because of the bad experience I am going through.

As you are all aware, I am one of those that were beaten so hard, especially on my head. You all heard how I was hospitalised here and then went for further treatment. Madam Speaker, as you can all see, what I am passing through- 

THE SPEAKER: Do not open the wound. 

MR ZAAKE: Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected. 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members! 

MR ZAAKE: Honourable colleagues, I beg that you listen to me because I am the only person who can feel the kind of pain I am going through. 

Madam Speaker, even when I got some treatment from the Hospital of Toxicology of Minnesota in the Department of Mercy Hospital, I was examined and diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury that has caused visual problems to me. Therefore, without the use of glasses, there is nothing I can read right now. 

I also have a lot of trauma concerning whatever happened. I feel that for me to get total recovery, as I am waiting for my review of 18 January 2018, I wish to at least know the kind of people who picked me from the House and beat me up. The doctors also found chemicals in my body which were detoxified. I was cleansed and most of the medical documents were sent to the parliamentary doctor. 

It is so unfortunate that up to now, the hospital I was treated from is still demanding me money. Having informed the responsible people of this institution and having passed through all the rightful procedures, there is nothing being done up to this time.

On that note, therefore, I request you, Madam Speaker, to sympathise with me because of the pain I feel. Colleagues take time and empathise with me in anyway because what I am facing is very hard. It is so unfortunate that right now even when I am trying to inform the House, there are some Members who might think that I am not going through pain. I can see some colleagues celebrating my pain, which is not right. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that you caution them because today it has happened to me and tomorrow it might be somebody else. You know whatever happened and I beg - (Interruption) 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I know you constituted a committee to investigate what happened on those fateful days. Isn’t it procedurally right that we save those issues to be debated when that report is brought to the House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, of course I would like to sympathise with you on behalf of the House. I came and visited you at your home and both the Speaker and Clerk worked very hard with the Ministry of Health to handle your issue; over several weeks of calls, letters and visits. We do care, hon. Zaake but I could give you leave for a few weeks so that you do not have to struggle in this House. You could stay home and get treatment while the Clerk works out the areas of deficiency but I am happy to see you. Please conclude.

MR ZAAKE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable Leader of the Opposition. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having said that, I would also like to hint on something in regard to the Uganda Medical Board; the processes surrounding granting of permission by the Uganda Medical Board are becoming unnecessarily unfriendly. To the extent that by the time the board sits and possibly gives permission to the member to travel out of the country, if you are not lucky, you may have met your creator. 

Hon. Zaake had to leave before the Uganda Medical Board could authorise his going out of the country. Even when they knew that some of the procedures that were supposed to be carried out concerning his sickness were not available here in Kampala but the medical board still wanted to be hesitant. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the decision that you took. I would like to pray that that decision is respected.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the nation has great trust in us. As we deliberate in this House, we should always be mindful of the people we represent; be mindful of the duty that we are entrusted with. We should always take care of the Constitution that we swore to protect and defend. 

Madam Speaker, we shall forever remain duty-bound to protect and defend the Constitution. I would like to thank you and say that we shall observe it strictly and shall always respect our Rules of Procedure. And we want those same rules and the same Constitution to be respected by all those who hold power in this country. 
I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and all Members for giving me their kind attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, we are not going to debate that issue. Honourable members, you had time when the presiding officer was here; you made your comments this was only for the Leader of the Opposition.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, this is a procedural issue. I would like to refer you to Rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure, which commenced on 10 November 2017 and particularly sub-rule (2) therefore, that reads that: “The statement made by the Leader of Opposition maybe debated by the House provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.” May be debated by the House and it is coached in such a way that the discretion must be exercised judicially. 

Madam Speaker, I would implore you, that this particular statement by the Leader of the Opposition, to allow us the time frame provided in the Rules OF Procedure to debate it because most of our members may not be in position to raise matters of personal explanation since doing so may offend Rule 54 as it may be deemed to be controversial. This would be the only time to let off the steam by letting members to debate this statement. I beg to implore you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think I have some difficulty here today. First, among you in this House, you have filed a suit in the East African Court of Justice concerning these issues. Now I do not know how much I can allow you to speak or not to speak. I do not know if it will offend the other forces - Yes, there is an ongoing case on these issues. Therefore, all members of this House are potential witnesses. 

Therefore, how can we now - No, we have heard the statement. I think let us leave it until we have heard from the East African Court of Justice because we are going to disrupt the work of the court. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE UGANDAN DELEGATION TO THE WORLD YOUNG LEADERS ASSEMBLY IN THE USA FROM 7TH – 17TH AUGUST 2017

3.35
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the Ugandan Delegation to the World Young Leaders Assembly in the USA from 7 to 17 August 2017.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report will be scheduled for debate at a date that will be announced.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) EDUCATION SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

    II) HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.37
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on the Table the following:

    1. The Education Service Commission Annual Report – Financial Year 2016/2017.
    2. The Health Service Commission Annual Report – Financial Year 2016/2017

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Both reports will be going to the sectoral committee for perusal and report back.

Now, Prime Minister, there is something that the Leader of Opposition talked about - two areas. Yesterday I received a complaint about one of the members about his security and I asked the Inspector General of Police to give him support; we have also heard from this side of the House. I would like to call on the Government to see how they can support members who have security challenges.

Secondly, during this session, the Minister of Health assured us that there would be fast-tracking of applications for Members of Parliament at the medical board but I can assure you Prime Minister, there is no fast-tracking. It is a very hard process and very bureaucratic. We would want you to address that as well.

3.39
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise an issue that has seen the entire country largely awash with the same. Madam Speaker, close to a month back, Uganda has been reading, watching, following a very critical matter, where the Minister of Foreign Affairs has been accused of having participated in bribery at an international level while he was serving as President of United Nations General Assembly.

Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament, we raised issues to do with the oil sector here and we had a very hot debate in this House. Many people said: “Hon. Karuhanga is making unfounded statements.” Madam Speaker, in this very Tenth Parliament, I raised similar issues.

Madam Speaker, again issues were raised shortly before the election of hon. Sam Kutesa as President of the 69th Session of the UN General Assembly over his credibility and integrity. We were saying that Uganda is not short of men and women of credibility and integrity that would certainly fit that position.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is largely in charge of Uganda’s international public relations. If, as it is stated by the court of the United States in the public document, indeed he participated; indeed he now has a challenge travelling to the United States; indeed he solicited a bribe of $500,000 which is about Shs 2 billion and obtained the same; indeed he lied that he was executing UN functions on behalf of the UN and Uganda as the Minister of Foreign Affairs; indeed if the same minister lied that he had established a non-governmental organisation that was supposed to receive that donation –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are now going into the merits of the issue.

MR KARUHANGA: I am summarising, Madam Speaker. If I may conclude by just raising two issues and I make my final remarks and request to this House. Two pertinent issues have really come out that I would request the honourable member to make a personal statement – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the honourable member who was on the Floor, the sources of the information he is putting before this House are media reports. They are media reports that he alleges have been awash in the entire country. In absence of an authoritative and formal or official document regarding the matter the honourable member is raising, is it in order for this august House to entertain the allegations and sit to debate the matters the member is raising before the House? Can this House properly rely on media reports of whatever nature to debate and consider a matter that has not come to us? Is it proper, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will study the issue, including the documentation, and give a ruling tomorrow.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. As I conclude, the document I am referring to is a court document. This is the case involving the United States of America v. Chi-ping Patrick Ho as a defendant. I have also seen the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issue a statement referring to the same but not denying this information I am presenting here. I have also seen a communication by the United Nations General Assembly commenting about the same but not denying this case and the issues I am raising here. Therefore, it is not called for, for anybody to begin speaking as to the source of this document. We all know the content anyway.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when we have a statement –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, hon. Karuhanga, for giving way. The issues being talked about are matters of grave public importance to this country and I would have expected the Attorney-General to come to this House to clarify on the matter. Now that he did not take the opportunity, we cannot have a person who goes to the United Nations to represent Uganda as the President of the 69th Session of the United Nations General Assembly and there is an indictment – this is a court indictment – to the effect that the Ugandan Minister of Foreign Affairs solicited payment from Ho purportedly for a charity foundation that he wished to launch. 

He called the Energy NGO of Hong Kong to wire $500,000 to an account in Uganda designated by the Ugandan foreign affairs minister through a bank in New York. In his communication, he variously referred to this payment as a donation to the re-election campaign of the President of Uganda who had already been re-elected and as a donation to support the Ugandan foreign affairs ministry.

With this, Madam Speaker, it is only pertinent that the named hon. Sam Kutesa comes to the House and makes a statement in regard to this very grave matter of public importance.

Second to that, as Ugandans, the moment we sit down we shall all be culpable for that crime. We are not all corrupt and we are not all beneficiaries of the solicited money. If Government has its words - recently one of us, hon. Kabafunzaki, was arrested and taken to Nalufenya for just Shs 5 million. Now, for a sack of $500,000 everybody is keeping quiet. (Laughter) Kabafunzaki was a minister in this Government and this one is being protected and nobody is raising it here.

Madam Speaker, enough is enough. We are not all culpable. We are not all guilty of this crime. To have a foreign affairs minister who cannot travel to the United States yet he is the chief diplomat of this country; to put the name of the President into disrepute; to put the name of the President and this country that they solicit a bribe to finance a re-election! 

Madam Speaker, I am not a beneficiary of that bribe and I know members are equally not beneficiaries of that bribe. It is only proper that for us to regain our sanity as a country and to regain our image as a country – and to be trusted internationally – we should not keep quiet about this and these crimes go unabated. This is a matter of urgency. 

This is to request through you, Madam Speaker, that tomorrow or by the end of this session, the Minister can be here – fortunately he is around.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I have listened with pain to all the statements labelled against my brother, hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa, who has been our representative to United Nations General Assembly. As a precedent set by the President, I wonder whether it is not procedurally correct that the Prime Minister who is also the Leader of Government Business in this House, informs members of the steps taken by Government since this controversy arose.

When I look at the honourable minister responsible for foreign affairs, I see a reflection of my face on the international scene. I wonder whether the Prime Minister could not procedurally inform this House of the steps taken by the Government especially, in light of the precedent set by His Excellency the President that when a minister is suspected to have misconducted himself in a public capacity, he or she should be relieved of his or her duties by the President and then investigations can continue.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this procedural question in light of the challenge that has been placed by my big brother, the Deputy Attorney-General –(Interjection)– you know I am civil.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order!

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, members taking the Floor are referring to the conduct of one of the members of this august House.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to refer you to Rule 71(2) of our Rules of Procedure, and I would like to read it. It says: “The conduct of the Speaker, Members, the Chief Justice and Judges of the Courts of Judicature shall not be raised, except upon a substantive motion, and, in any amendment, question to a Member or remarks in a debate or a motion dealing with any other subject, any reference to a conduct of persons mentioned is out of order.”

Therefore, given this rule, is it in order for honourable members to continue raising issues that touch the conduct of a member without going through a substantive motion?

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, this did not come by a way of motion. It came as a matter of national importance. That is how they brought it.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I had risen on a point of procedure when I was interrupted by the Deputy Attorney-General, and I could not imagine that he was not knowledgeable about the rules of this House. Otherwise, he rudely interrupted me.

Madam Speaker, now that you have guided him, is it not procedurally correct that before the Prime Minister leaves this House, he informs the House of the steps taken by Government against a suspected errant member of the cabinet, abusing a position conferred upon him by the President. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are only assuming that the Prime Minister knows. Honourable members, can you give me time to study these documents and then I give the ruling tomorrow?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we agree that you give the guidance tomorrow. However, I would like to give this Parliament notice that tomorrow, I will be moving a substantive motion and I hope my friend hon. Mwesigwa-Rukutana, who was on the same charge sheet with hon. Sam Kutesa, during CHOGM, will be satisfied by the motion I intend to move tomorrow – (Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have guided that you will give this matter adequate attention after you have looked at the statement. However, for the benefit of the House, I would like to urge members to look at these documents. They are public court documents which you can access. Because it is very voluminous, I would like to request members to look at the three headings of this document. The first is page 37 entitled “During the Ugandan foreign minister’s term as President of the General Assembly, Ho lays the ground work for future business in Uganda”. On page 42, look out for the heading reading “After resuming as foreign minister, the Ugandan foreign minister solicited a bribe from Ho, promising access to the President of Uganda and lucrative business advantages.” On page 46, the heading reads, “Ho causes USA $500,000 salary bribe to be wired to the Ugandan foreign minister’s purported foundation” –(Interruption)

MR MUYANJA MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, as the Speaker of this Parliament who has served for some time – we have had a history   where unauthentic documents have been presented, investigated and found out to be wrong. How authentic are the documents being read here? Is the honourable member in order to present allegations and documents which are cooked before this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already ruled that I will study the documents before I make a ruling. We have noted your case but we shall make the ruling tomorrow after studying the documents.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the document entitled the “United States of America v. Chi-ping Patrick Ho, as the defendant.” The details are in the document. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will make a ruling tomorrow after studying the statement.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Another one?

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise for not being ready for the second reading of the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2015. We did write to inform the Office of the Speaker that due to the new developments raised in the report of the committee, we needed to do more consultations. Therefore, we pray for more time.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I must express my disappointment concerning this Bill. It came here in the Ninth Parliament; our committee worked on it, produced the report and presented it here. In the same way this minister has come today, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives came here and said she was withdrawing the Bill. I told her by withdrawing that Bill; she must present a new Bill. Now, she has presented the new Bill; it has been studied, the report has been done and now we are being told the Bill is going to be withdrawn for the second time.

4.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to apologise for wasting Parliament’s time by not being prepared. The first time the item appeared on the Order Paper, I stood here and requested for further harmonisation. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives came in the House and requested for further harmonisation and they were given two weeks. I would like to propose that we give the minister one week to come and present the Bill or else a new Bill will have to be tabled. 

THE SPEAKER: The House will consider it again, spend money in the committee and then come back. 

4.04
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to reiterate to the House that as the committee, we did our work. We are waiting to present this report before the House. Therefore, the onus is on the minister. I do not know, according to the rules, whether when we have a report that is ready to be presented, it cannot be presented because the minister is blocking it. I am at a loss. I would request we go by what the Government Chief Whip has said because we had said two weeks but the letter whose copy I have is asking for two months.

Therefore, I am now getting much more confused, Madam Speaker. What does two months and one week mean in the real sense? What will happen if we come after one week? I need clarity on this matter because it is giving the committee a bad image. For us, we have done our work. Can the ministry put their house in order and we have this worked out?

4.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, it is obvious that the minister responsible should have been prepared. The position given by the Government Chief Whip of giving them one week to ensure they are ready is the final position of Government. 

4.06
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would invite you to consider rule 129 (1), and see whether we cannot dispense with the Second Reading by the minister and have any other minister or any other member, particularly a member of the committee to move the Bill to be read the second time in light of the wording under that rule since the minister seems to be shying away from his responsibility.

THE SPEAKER: How can the chairperson of the committee move the Bill for the Second Reading and also present the report? It would be difficult. Any other member of the cabinet; do they know the policy issues involved? 

4.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Counterfeiting is a very dangerous thing and it is one of the reasons people are dying. I am very certain now that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is involved in counterfeiting - (Laughter) - because if it were not, by now, we would have already worked on this law. It was here in the Ninth Parliament; now, it is in the Tenth Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the people who are dying because they cannot afford to fly out to be treated are the villagers suffering from cancers they got from eating and taking counterfeit foods and drugs. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, you have gone into the merit of the Bill. What we are debating is how much time we should give them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I am saying, Madam Speaker, is that we have given them too much time. We would rather deal with it now or they withdraw the Bill and we make a Private Member’s Bill – (Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. As a Member of Parliament and member of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we had a very comprehensive discussion about counterfeit and sub-standard goods. Therefore, we gave the ministry time to go and harmonise because we wanted to balance the impact the Bill would have on our manufacturing industry as a nascent industry -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are a member of that committee; you are not supposed to discuss the report before it is here. 

We are giving the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives one week to come and present the Bill for Second Reading. If they do not, we shall just read our report and proceed. We cannot go on like this. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BIOFUELS BILL, 2016

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Biofuels Bill, 2016” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. What is your justification?

MR PETER LOKERIS: The objective of the Bill is to create a conducive environment for the production and management of biofuels including promoting the production of biofuels for power and to create the instrumental and institutional frameworks for the management, production, storage, transportation and the blending of biofuels in petroleum products and utilisation of these fuels. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I believe our committee has had time to peruse the Bill. 

4.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I wish to present the Committee on Natural Resources’ report on the Biofuels Bill, 2016. 

Introduction

I am utterly sorry that I do not have hard copies but I am quite sure that it has been uploaded on your iPads and you should be able to follow properly. It is a fairly short Bill so I beg for your patience. 

THE SPEAKER: I see the members of the cabinet leaving. Why are the Cabinet members leaving? 

MR BYARUGABA:  The Biofuels Bill, 20l6 was read for the first time on l5 November 2016 and was referred to the Committee on Natural Resources in accordance with Rules 127 and 128 of the Rules of procedure of Parliament. The Committee on Natural Resources has examined the Bill in greater detail and has made inquiries in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. We would like to present our observations and recommendations to this House as follows: 

I will not go through the methodology but we held consultative meetings with submissions from the following stakeholders: The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), African Power Initiative, Vivo Energy Uganda, Total Uganda Limited, Engineers in Green Action Africa and the Office of the Leader of Opposition. 

The committee also visited the biofuel refinery operated by African Power Initiative in Kansanga Muyenga. The committee also had benchmarking visits to Ethiopia and Malawi, where this initiative has already taken root. 

The policy and principles of the Bill 

a) 	To create a conducive environment for the production and management of biofuels and promoting the production of the biofuels including promotion of the production of biofuels for power and the transport sector;
b) 	Promoting the availability of an alternative, renewable energy which preserves the natural ecosystem and the biodiversity and ensures food security in Uganda;
c) 	Creating the institutional framework for the management of the production, storage and transportation and the blending of biofuels in petroleum products and utilisation of the biofuels;
d) 	Regulating activities related to the production, blending of the biofuels in petroleum products and utilisation of biofuels for social and economic benefit and increased rural incomes. The biggest beneficiaries will be the rural farmers;
e) 	Promoting sustainable production and utilisation of biofuels for social and economic benefit and increased rural incomes; 
f) 	Ensuring occupational health, public safety and protection of the environment in the production of biofuels; and
g) 	Increasing the reserve base of the oil and gas resources in Uganda by blending biofuels in petroleum products.

The rationale of the legal framework is clear so I will go to the general observations and recommendations. In scrutinising the Bill, the committee made some general observations and general recommendations.

Policy framework on biofuels

The committee notes that the Government under the Renewable Policy for Uganda commits to make modern renewable energy a substantial part of the national energy mix. This policy lays out specific modalities for the development and production of biofuels. The Biofuels Bill is therefore a step towards establishing the legal framework for the management and use of biofuels in Uganda. 

The need to attain energy security and independence

The committee observes that the Government of Uganda has made efforts to develop renewable energy resources as an integral part of the country's energy future.

Despite the sporadic changes in the cost of oil on the international market, the cost of petroleum products in Uganda has remained quite high. Petroleum products remain the highest contributor to the country's import bill. For instance, in 2015, petroleum and petroleum products accounted for the country's highest imports bill at Shs l000.78 million that represents 18.2 per cent of all the imports in the country. 

The high price of fossil fuels has therefore contributed greatly to the commercial viability of biofuels like ethanol, methanol, biogas and biodiesel. As such, partial substitution of petroleum products with locally produced biofuels will reduce the burden on the economy caused by imported fuels and will move the country towards energy security and independence. 

The current status of petroleum imports and envisaged biofuels

They are clearly outlined and I will not go into the details. Here, we recommend that while developing the biofuels as an alternative fuel, the Government should be cognisant of the current required volumes of biofuels at required blending levels and also adequately cater for projections in import volumes. 

Current biofuel capacity in Uganda 

Biodiesel 

The committee notes that biodiesel will be produced from oils from plants such as jatropha, croton, candlenut tree which are majorly non-food crops. Plantations of jatropha, candlenut and castor nut have been set up especially in Nakapiripirit (Karamoja) and Masindi districts.

Whereas companies such as NEXUS in Masindi and African power Initiative have started pilot activities, the production capacity for biodiesel is still a bit low and inadequate to meet the blending requirements at the imported levels. 

Recommendations 

    a) The committee recommends that elaborate modalities and mechanisms for production, collection and processing of biodiesels be developed over the next five years.
    b) The blending of biodiesel should be deferred until adequate production capacity is established or staggered for that matter. 

Bioethanol 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, in its presentation to the committee, noted that bioethanol shall be produced from molasses from sugar cane, sweet sorghum (Sekada and Epuripur). The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development noted that sugar factories are currently producing enough ethanol that can comfortably be used to blend petrol. It put current production levels of 54 million litres per annum i.e. Kakira - 24 million litres, Kinyara - l2 million litres and Mayuge Sugar - l2 million litres. The statistical abstract of the ministry on the other hand however does not give a clear indication of these capacities but rather notes it as an envisaged projection of all sugar manufacturers to come on board. UNBS noted the current capacity as only 32.85 million litres per annum. 

Projections at the current importation volumes of petrol indicate that at 5 percent blending requirement, 38.5 million litres of bioethanol will be required per annum; at l0 percent blending, 77 million litres per annum will be needed.

We recommend that bio-fuel should not exceed 5 percent given the current capacity of production.

About pricing, the committee did not ascertain the cost of production per litre of ethanol and therefore, could not ascertain the impact of blending on the cost of fuel.

The Ministry Of Energy and Mineral Development however, recommended that the price of ethanol from the sugar factories should match that of petrol so as not to overshoot the final product price.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, are you reading the entire report? Don’t you have a summary?

MR BYARUGABA: No, I am about to finish. On that particular issue, the committee recommends that Government should ensure that the cost of blended fuels is not prohibitive to the consumer.

Number five is on inherent properties of ethanol - I can only read the recommendations that:

    i. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) should test and certify that the ethanol being produced meets the quality requirements for blending.
    ii. Quality system control mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that the integrity of the blending process is assured.
    iii. The ministry should guide on optimum quality requirements that will ensure integrity of the petrol blend.

On vehicle requirements, we recommend that:

    i. UNBS should establish minimum requirements for the vehicles to optimally operate on biofuel blends.
    ii. The UNBS should establish a minimum requirement for vehicles. Therefore, not all vehicles may use these blended biofuels.
    iii. Appropriate tax incentives should be put in place to encourage importation of newer vehicles, which can use blended fuel.
    iv. Studies should be commissioned by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to effectively support the policy on blending of the biofuels.

The status of storage facilities in Uganda and the inherent properties of ethanol

The committee recommends that investment in appropriate ethanol storage facilities and injection equipment at these depots should be in place before any petroleum products can be blended with the biofuel.

Safety concerns

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development should put in place safety requirements for facilities handling biofuels and the blends.

We recommend that the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development monitors and ascertains that facilities handling biofuel and its blending meet safety requirements.

Type of storage tanks in place

The committee recommends that UNBS should put in place adequate standards for storage facilities for blended fuels.

We recommend that adequate capacity to inspect, maintain, and certify such facilities should be developed.

Bio-fuel social economic impact

The committee recommends that the petroleum laboratory of UNBS needs to be adequately equipped for its role in the quality assurance of petroleum products in the country.

Government programmes such as the fuel marking programme need to be realigned with developments such as blending of fuels.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should give a comprehensive plan on the bio-fuels programmes for easy execution by the government entities.

On other logistical concerns, we observed the following:

    i. Additional tankage and additive dosing facilities are required at depots.
    ii. Absolutely dry storage and transport systems are also required.
    iii. Floating roof tanks need to be replaced with fixed roof tanks.
    iv. Accurate blending equipment is required at all depot levels.
    v. Ethanol petrol will need to be treated as an additional grade at depot level unless blending takes place directly into delivery vehicles.
    vi. Additional analytical facilities will be required at depot level.

The committee’s proposals for amendments
The committee notes that biofuel production is still at initial stages of research and development and has not yet reached commercialisation.

Raising the production levels to commercial levels requires incentives, investors, technologies and time. This would address the gaps relating to technical feasibility, investment costs needed to expand production capacity, operational costs and availability of feedstock. Therefore, it is ideal to stagger commencement dates for the different provisions of the Bill to enable feedstock production for biodiesel and ethanol to rise to commercial levels. The period will also be used to put in place modalities and mechanisms for technology and regulation development.

Interpretation clause 

I am about to finish, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But you cannot address the proposals here. You will do that at committee stage.

MR BYARUGABA: I thought it would be good to internalise this a little bit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, read them.

MR BYARUGABA: The committee notes that there are incidents inconsistent with the definition of biofuels. The definition excludes fatty acids from animal oil/ fat and waste oil in addition to agricultural crops from where biodiesel can be made; while the definition of feedstock excludes other sources for biodiesel production like plant oil such as candlenut seed oil, croton seed oil, castor seed oil and jatropha seed oil.

The committee further notes that the minister responsible for biofuel should be the same minister responsible for energy therefore, the committee will seek to amend the definition when time comes at that level.

The mandatory blending of petroleum products with biofuels was also touched and we observed as follows:

Although Uganda now has insufficient feedstock supply, particularly of ethanol and nonfood crop feedstock; candlenut, castor and jatropha, it is essential to develop the production of biofuels. Without an elaborate legal framework, it would be difficult to motivate biofuel production, cost and pricing control and investor confidence.

It is imperative to mention that Uganda currently has less than five companies - Kakira, Kinyara, Mayuge and Lugazi sugar factories which are engaged in production of ethanol and other two other companies that make biodiesel, that is, African Power Initiatives and Nexus Biodiesel.

Recommendations

The petroleum supply Act needs to be amended to cater for blended petroleum products to be specified in the Bill.

Attendant regulations arising from the Petroleum Supply Act also need to be aligned to the objectives of this Bill. These include the petroleum (Marking and Quality Control) regulations, 2009 where, for instance, the term adulteration needs to be modified.

Clause 4(2) also must be amended under the Petroleum Act so that this Act shall only apply with necessary modifications to the supply of blended petroleum products in Uganda supplied under this Act.

I will not go into the role of the ministry and the details of functions of the Ugandan National Bureau of Standards, which are very clear.

Finally, I want to thank my colleagues for having put in a lot of time during recess to come up with this report.

I now would like to move that the Biofuel Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report. I wish to lay at the Table the committee’s report as well as the minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Natural Resources for working during recess. Honourable members, you are free to debate.

4.31
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the chairperson to make clarifications on the following. 

Firstly, the committee suggests that Government should police the price of ethanol with that of petrol and other fuels yet as far as I know, we are operating in a free market economy where Government has no role to play in setting prices of fuel and other products. Can the committee chairperson, therefore, clarify to the House how that one is attainable and possibly what Government can do to realise this in their understanding?

Secondly, he has talked of the monitoring of the blended oil and the committee puts this responsibility under the ministry responsible for gender. What is not clear to me is whether the ministry in charge of gender has the technical capacity to monitor quality and other aspects of the blended oil. I thought that such a recommendation would actually be given to a ministry which has the competencies to do that role. I do not know the parameters that the committee considered in bringing this proposal to the House that the ministry in charge of gender can monitor the quality of blended oil.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I know very well that ethanol – in some instances – has contributed to a number of challenges in our country, specifically where some of the spirits are made out of that. I do not know why the committee did not look at how and where ethanol could be monitored from so that our youths do not fall victims of this. Thank you.

4.35
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To the chairperson and your committee, that was a good presentation. My only problem is that biofuels are a highly complicated field. As a country, I am just wondering whether we are ready to explore this new area.

We recognise that when you are talking about biofuels - you have been looking at what they call in science “metabolic engineering”. I have had a chance to evaluate our academic and research capabilities as a country and asfar as I know we have no metabolic engineer in Uganda. 

I was also really interested to know whether the committee has explored collaboration opportunities with Makerere, which has a full-fledged department of renewable energy. I have not heard it in the report. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the report does not really guide us on the specific variables and in this case how the dependent and independent variables will relate. What happens to capacity building in trying to help this new and grey complicated area to move forward as a country? Thank you.

4.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the committee and the ministry has tried to move ahead by coming up with a law. I think that is something which is commendable.

This technology seems to be very complex and from the Government plan, I do not know the level of preparedness – maybe the chairperson of the committee had interface with the ministry. We have had serious issues with financing implementation of what we pass. Given the sophisticated nature of this Bill, it will require serious Government consideration when it comes to financing. Therefore, I hope the committee has taken note of this. Otherwise, we will have this law but it will go on the shelves and we do not see it being implemented.

Madam Speaker, I have had opportunity to visit some of the sugar factories in this country and I was amazed with the technology which they apply. For the ethanol product which is being produced, the biggest percentage is being exported and we would think that if the Government could speed up the process of this Bill, then maybe that would enable us to tap what we are producing. This is because locally, our level of consuming ethanol is very limited. Maybe with this Bill, we can see it being utilised. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good report.

4.40
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. However, during his presentation of the report, the chairperson talked a lot about the petroleum laboratory being inadequate to handle ethanol that will be produced. Government should be prepared because it is one of the items that are on market in the world now. I would like to agree with hon. Ruhunda, that as a country, we should be prepared to use ethanol. 

I have noted that the committee talks about incentives supposed to be given out. We should prepare Ugandans to be ready for this because most people in this industry are not Ugandans. Again, when you look at the capacity of the producers of ethanol - I think Government should provide financial support to Ugandans to produce ethanol so that it can add value to our local investors. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Biofuel comes from ethanol and biodiesel. It will take a long time to reduce carbon dioxide that cars emit. I worry about not knowing what Government has put in place to deal with this. As hon. Ruhunda has rightly said, we may pass this law but it will remain on the shelves. 

We have the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act, 1966 - In fact, ethanol is alcohol. If Government used waragi to convert it to a biofuel, it would have done something. Since we have not even used what we have, what is Government’s commitment to ensure that ethanol and biodiesel work in Uganda and yet it does not have capacity in the current state to use what it has?

Madam Speaker, I am worried that we might be producing waragi for Ugandans to drink. It is an alcoholic drink. It is brewed the same way beer is brewed and sometimes it comes from the vegetable oil, animal fat, starch, and sugar cane, among others. In the current state, we have a lot of sugarcanes, which produce sugar, but there are some bio-products that can be used to generate the biofuel. Since we have not done anything with what we have, what is the purpose of this law that you would like us to pass? What is it that we would like to achieve? 

Why do you involve the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and yet we have Ministry for Energy and Minerals? What rationale are you using or do you want to create jobs for another ministry?

Therefore, before we go to the committee stage to scrutinise this law, I would like Government –

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, the issue that was referred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is about occupational safety and health, which is on page 8. That is the recommendation that should be implemented by the ministry because it is responsible and competent enough.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, all projects in Uganda -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we should be happy that the ministry is now going to do some serious work on occupational safety and health. We have been complaining about working conditions among other things - hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you not happy about that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, occupational safety and health is everywhere. It is not only in biofuels. Even now, if you are dealing with petroleum products, safety is given priority and it does not call for gender. Even a barn can be burnt and a child can be burnt –(Interruption)

MR SONGA ONEGIU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, as a country, we made a commitment during the Paris Agreement that we are going renewable energy and biofuel is a renewable energy because it is carbon neutral. That means that the amount of carbon dioxide produced is absorbed by the plants and so, it is not a greenhouse gas that can degrade the environment. 

Therefore, since we made that commitment, it is important that we implement it and one of the ways is the enactment of the Biofuel Bill, 2016 that will help us to generate renewable energy. The only consideration should be to balance the land uses because we must have land for biofuel and food security. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, for the information. We have agreed that biofuel is made up of ethanol and biodiesel. If that is what we have agreed, then it is not different from petrol, diesel and paraffin. Are you now telling us that biofuel is different from petroleum products that we should take it to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

Safety issues are a priority. You cannot run petroleum or biofuels without approval from the environmental units for health and safety. I would like to agree with you that it is going to reduce carbon dioxide. However, if we want the system to work better, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral should be responsible -

THE SPEAKER: You have utilised your minutes. I would like to permit hon. Rwabwogo to make her contribution.

4.46
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM,	Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the Biofuels Bill, 2016. 

Economically, to invest in this sector, project developers in the field of biofuels require secure markets and supply. This can be developed through legislation and opening up the legal space for the players in this field. The production of biofuels will enhance mass production of crops like maize, soya beans, sugarcane from which biofuels are made. This will improve the income status of our farmers, lead to value addition through agro-processing and farmers will definitely cash in on this.

Concerning the environment, the Biofuels Bill, 2016, if passed into law will reduce logging, save our trees and provide an alternative source of fuel. More so, it will create more job opportunities in the biofuels industry both directly and indirectly as farmers will increase production to sustain the demand on the biofuel industry through -(Interjections) - this Bill will definitely regulate the use of the biofuels-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the honourable member got up to speak, we thought she was going to speak from her mind and what she has read. However, she is now reading a whole report. Is she in order to read a report we do not have?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this afternoon, we agreed to treat each other with courtesy. Therefore, it is you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is out of order. (Laughter)

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you, for your protection, Madam Speaker. I think I was just giving my views, facts and reasons why I am supporting the passing of this Bill into law. That is acceptable. That means I am agreeing with the presenter that we pass the Bill into law in order for youths in Uganda to have jobs of supplying crops to the biofuel industry and also being directly employed by the biofuel plants. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
HON. GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson for this very important information. I would like to emphasise one key area and that is the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). Although the committee emphasised that UNBS should be supported and empowered, it looks as if it is not performing to the expectations. 

If you look at it critically, we have very many small industries, whose operations UNBS is not aware of. For example, in 2007, there was an industry in Hoima that used to make a spirit which harmed very many people. They were distilling alcohol using that spirit. When the investigation was done, it was discovered they used a spirit in their alcohol and very many people who took that alcohol got a lot of problems.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to empower the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and follow it up. When giving out certificates to those companies, I do not know why the foreign companies get their certificates faster than Ugandan companies.

Madam Speaker, let the committee emphasise this issue. We need to empower Uganda National Bureau of Standards to help in monitoring the giving of licences and certificates to reasonable companies so that they produce good products for this country. Thank you.

4.55
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. Mine is on socio-economic impact of the biofuels. I wanted to see the benefits to our farmers but they were not mentioned in this report.  

We realised, as Members of Parliament, when we visited the sugar growing areas that the main beneficiaries of the by-products of sugarcanes should be farmers. However, in the whole economics of ethanol, which is being sold, our farmers do not benefit. They just get the cost of their sugarcane. The benefit of ethanol is not passed back to the farmers. No wonder, the farmers continue to grow sugarcanes but the socio-economic benefits accrue only to the factories. I wanted to say this because we had also tasked the Ministry of Energy and Minerals to help our farmers because they are now the source of fuels to the country. I need to see this in the report. Parliament should focus on the benefits for our people. 

In addition, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come together and calculate the benefits that should accrue to our farmers in ethanol pricing. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.57
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. This Bill is very interesting. From the word biofuel, it means we would get fuels from living organisms other than fossil, which when burnt; produces carbon monoxide, which is very poisonous. Biofuels, however, will produce carbon dioxide which is consumed by the plants and it is quite healthy.

We are able to get biofuels from various sources: the plants mentioned in the report and also bananas, cassava, maize and even the Kasese and Lira waragis which we produce from ethanol. When we pass this Bill, we shall be able to collect all these ethanol products to be used in the factory to provide biofuel.

I once heard that somebody used alcohol for driving a machine. That should be the aim. However, what I have not seen in Uganda is how effectively we are using ethanol. Do we use it in the factories? 

As somebody mentioned earlier, if we do not use it, people will consume it and become drunkards. Therefore, I would like the minister to tell me which factories are producing it and what they are using the biofuels for so that we pass it to become a healthy fuel. 

However, we should also be careful of the by-products of ethanol. There are some alcohols which are dangerous. For example, methanol; Methanol is an insoluble spirit of alcohol. They can come together and if they are not properly separated, they can be poisonous to human health. We have to be careful and we need all these to be made clear so that we pass a law which is useful for the people of Uganda, particularly our farmers who will produce crops that will produce these fuels. Thank you very much.

5.00
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. There are only two missing things, in my opinion, and they must be there since they are pertinent to this particular report. I have not heard the report saying anything about farmers in two big areas: How are we going to motivate the farmers to cultivate enough to sustain the factories we are talking about? How are we going to protect them in order to avoid exploitation? This is because we have seen some of the things in practice here in Uganda. 

The other thing is how are we going to educate the farmers to avoid overgrowing certain types of crops and neglecting the others? In the near future, that can give rise to other problems like what people are currently experiencing in Busoga region. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.02
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I have not looked at the Bill fully but I would like to make a point of emphasis. The Bill is good in trying to improve the economy but I do not know whether the ministry has a programme of creating awareness in the population. 

For example, the population should understand the object of the Act, the licensing procedures and even the mandate of Uganda National Bureau of Standards so that people do not take it as harassment. Therefore, my emphasis was actually creating mass awareness in this Bill. Thank you. 

5.08
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues by thanking the committee and the ministry for coming with this Bill. I have about two issues: One, I would like to appreciate the minister for at least trying to bring a Bill to regulate the production of biofuel. 

Madam Speaker, I also request that the farmers should actually be catered for. I would like to emphasise the issue raised by hon. Naggayi. Of course we hear that the plant products or remains are used for production of biofuels. Individually, there are other companies that have contacted Members of Parliament over what they wanted and how they could develop it in their constituencies. However, we lacked the capacity and sufficient knowledge. 

I would also think that it would help us to get rid of the waste in the towns; if it is going to be part of it, then I think it is going to help us. Go to Tanzania, for example; when somebody goes to sell maize, you do not even get a drop of maize waste remaining. 

I believe if this country is conditioned in a way that people are sensitised, then they can sell such remains to the industries. Driving towards Jinja at Kireka, you find heaps of remains from potatoes, bananas and the rest. All these are products that can be used in biofuel production and protecting the environment. I want to believe that can work. 

Madam Speaker, my worry is that we still have petroleum, which is not yet out of the way and we are still struggling to put up the refinery. I really need clarification on whether there will be no competition between the two. If we now develop biofuels everywhere, who will buy our petroleum products? How will it be? Won’t it confuse our market outside? I really need some clarification about this. 

However, on the good side of it, I would like to thank the ministry because I believe our farmers will also have the market for their other by-products. Thank you so much. 

5.06 
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank the committee and the chairperson for coming up with a good report and I support the Bill. I wonder whether the committee considered the matter of competition for land with food crops. Remember in the previous years, we have had shortages of food basing, among others, on the fact that our storage facilities for our own food crops and food security are minimal. I wonder whether the committee considered that matter so that we do not have food shortages. 

Madam Speaker, ethanol and other products related with biofuels at times have by-products which are alcoholic in nature and are strong drugs that can cause several sicknesses, as my colleague has mentioned. In Hoima, we had a plant which produced ether and ethanol and most people became blind because of that drug. How are we going to control such effects? Otherwise, the Bill is good and I support it. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, do you have any response before we call the minister? 

MR BYARUGABA: Once again, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also honourable members who have supported this Bill very strongly. This is a very important Bill for your information. I think Brazil is now 100 per cent compliant with biofuel. Malawi is taking it on, Ethiopia is doing the same, Rwanda is at the verge of out-competing every other country on that issue and Uganda has also outcompeted Kenya. Kenya is also trying to follow in our footsteps. 

In my opinion, I think this is a very good thing and is not controversial at all. However, hon. Nzoghu raised a few questions which were also answered in a way through a clarification by the honourable Minister of Labour and Social Development.

The committee wanted to know about the price of ethanol harmonising it with petrol; yes, I think that will be done through the mechanisms that will be set out by the relevant ministries. We do not have anything to do with price controls at all but somehow you bring some harmonisation of sorts and that one can technically be worked out. 
Members were worried about the involvement of the Ministry of Labour and Social Development in almost all other sectors. That is what we are doing and everything revolves around handling of the safety requirements and monitoring –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I was interested in the how. How can the harmonisation be done and attained? That is what I was asking and that is what I wanted you to clarify on because I did not get it clearly. 

MR BYARUGABA: It is a multi-sectoral sort of concern. I do not have an immediate answer to this and remember this is a new industry altogether; you and I should know this. It has never been done anywhere in this country so it will be a harmonisation process generally. Unless the minister has a definite answer to this, but as I have said, it is quite multi-sectoral and all sectors will be involved in the negotiation with regard to the pricing factor –(Interruption) 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is critical, especially when we have the oil industry that is yet to take off. I would like to encourage the country to consider whether we really need this Bill at this critical time. 

It has happened elsewhere and investors have abandoned the oil sector. I know the competition bids that occur, especially when a country focuses on both ends. You have biofuel production and at the same time, you are trying to promote the petroleum oil industry, especially at a nascent stage. I think the minister knows better.

Madam Speaker, it is critical for us -

THE SPEAKER: Are you making a new contribution? You cannot speak twice on the same Bill.

MR KATUSABE: It is just a procedural issue, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are already submitting. Raise the procedural issue then.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was wondering whether the chairperson would be correctly guiding the House in trying to relate biofuel production vis-à-vis the oil that we so desperately need as a country.

THE SPEAKER: Chair, please respond and conclude.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All these are very good suggestions. They are additions to our understanding of the industry and I think they are most welcome. However, I would like to emphasise the fact that there is no one ministry that acts in isolation and the pricing mechanism will be dealt with accordingly.

Responding to hon. Ruhunda, the implementation modalities with regard to financing are of course a challenge. However, there was a certificate signed and presented and we all approved it so I am sure the financing bit will be catered for. 

I only fear, as much as you do, that the implementation may take some time. The Executive has to ensure that they act according to what they promised and oversight is one of our roles as Parliament.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was also wondering whether this Bill will be put to effect. Your guess is as good as mine; I am sure it will be put into effect because the President himself is quite concerned. I remember when he was commissioning a factory in Jinja, sugar manufacturers were crying out that they did not have where to put these bio products. Thank you.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek some clarification. If the report talks about specifics and numbers such as 5 percent, where is the percentage to the farmers?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, when the chairperson was responding to the “how” question raised by hon. Nzoghu, he never came out very clearly on how they intend to address that. He talked about being cagy, which was not clear. I think the chairperson and the ministry need to come out very clearly so that the nation knows how to respond to those specific issues raised by hon. Nzoghu.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you allow the chair to close and the minister to raise any policy issues? We can then go to committee stage.

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I do not know why this issue is bothering the honourable members. As a committee, what we can do is to recommend that the ministry takes this up. It is not for us to give the mechanisms of how it will be implemented. 

Therefore, our concern is that the ministry takes this up and looks into the occupational health and safety issues. That is what they will be coming up with in the course of implementing the Bill.

5.16
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee and I would like to answer to the concerns of the Members. When we introduce bio-fuel, there is going to be big demand for some of the materials that we are talking about, for example, sugarcane and sorghum. When there is added demand, it will push up prices. 
In addition, with added demand and value addition, the farmer will be the first beneficiary because it will be up to him or her to decide what to sell. Are you selling sugarcane for sugar or for biofuel?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, please close.

MR BYARUGABA: In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. If only we had time to go through the details of the report - you realise that I was only reading the summary. The sordid details are in the main text of the report and they are quite satisfactory: issues of land and the food security component have also been addressed. 

When we go into the next stage, you will realise that there are certain food stuffs that we have completely isolated from this list. We are very specific and conscious about that and these have been clearly put in the schedule; that the following food crops will not be part and parcel of the production of biofuel. 

In addition, regarding the question of land, it is not that if you have 10 acres, you will be regulated on the amount of land you will be allowed to cultivate for biofuel. All these are details that are contained in the main text of the report. 

I would like to thank everybody who contributed to this report and I beg that we move to the next stage. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, you will speak at the committee stage. Any comments, minister?

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues for your valuable submissions. This policy on biofuel is in our policy that we have already passed and these biofuels will constitute part of the renewable energy mix that we have. 

After discovering that we have these energy sources like ethanol, we said that we must put a law in place to manage and regulate this industry. This is what we are doing and when we go to the law, we will then give the details. You have given very good advice in this area.

However, how about our oil vis-à-vis biofuels? We are blending. We are not saying the other one should not come. The other one is also in Uganda and there are commodities - farmers will be encouraged to plant crops that will be bought from them. That is how this trickles back to the farmers.

Therefore, when we go into the activities, everybody will participate. That is why we need them. The world is moving from the use of fossil fuels, which are finite in nature. Even the oil we have here will get finished but with these renewable sources, every time it rains, they grow; one harvests and uses them the next day. They are also friendly to the environment. 

I thank you very much for your contributions; they are very valuable and we shall enshrine them when we are discussing the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Biofuels Bill, 2016 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BIOFUELS BILL, 2016

5.21
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification as to why we want this Bill to commence in stages. Clause 1 is about commencement and there are different dates of commencement. I would like to get justification as to why the committee chairperson is proposing that this Bill commences in stages.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the chairperson is bringing an amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Madam Chairperson, under clause 1, which is on commencement, the committee would like to move an amendment to substitute clause 1 with the following:

“(1) This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument; and different days may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions of this Act.”

The justification is that biofuel production is still at initial stages of research and development and not yet at commercial levels. Raising the production levels to commercial levels requires incentives, investors, technology and time. This would address the gaps relating to technical feasibility, investment, costs needed to expand production capacity, operational costs and availability of feedstock. 

Therefore, it is ideal to stagger commencement dates so as to enable feedstock production for biodiesel and ethanol to rise to commercial levels. The period will also be used to put in place modalities and mechanisms for technology and regulation development.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. By the time a Bill comes to Parliament, we assume that a lot of groundwork and preparation has been done. In most cases, there is a policy that is first put in place before a Bill is drafted and brought to us for its first reading. 

My view is that we need to pass this in order to address the challenges. We are not anticipating because we already know the challenges. Therefore, in this case, we would address this Bill on matters that we are already faced with and not matters that we anticipate to happen. This is why I have concerns about the commencement dates being different. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you could give us an example of the staggering - what part you are staggering - so that we can internalise your rationale?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Musasizi, that we wanted this yesterday because we all want to reduce carbon monoxide emission. 

Madam Chair, if you say that we should allow the minister to stagger this, this Bill is going to be on the shelves and we would rather not put it there. Before the minister comes, this Bill should become effective immediately it is assented to, so that we give the minister milestones to achieve. If he does not achieve them, we will ask, “What are you doing?” When you give these ministers a law and allow them to go and do it at their own pace, they will never do it. They will sit there and say, “We shall decide”. We must make them work. 

Therefore, before the minister comes up, I would like to move an amendment that the Act comes into force immediately it is assented to. (Applause)

MR BYARUGABA: After further consultations, I concede.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, my issue is quite different.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it to do with the commencement as well?

MR ANYWARACH: On that one, the committee brought a proposal and he is trying to give justification as to why the coming into effect of this law is on different dates. He alluded to the fact that we are not going on to commercial production. He also mentioned that investors must be involved and so on.

Madam Chairperson, this Bill is so technical that it even affects the land ownership system. In Germany, for example, what happens is that you do not have to look for investors on issues of biofuels and biogas. What Government does is that they have a policy of €3,000 per acre per farmer. Therefore, if you have 10 acres of land, you are sure you are going to get €30,000. 

If we are to get into the economics and have our farmers benefit – That is why hon. Naggayi was saying –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you addressing the commencement or the substance?

MR ANYWARCH: I am getting to the point. For me, the principle of this Bill, right from clause 1, is defective. It gives us a reason to defer the committee stage, so that instead of biofuels we look at biogas and see how our farmers – do not think about the investors – can benefit through Government policies that can encourage people. If I have 10 acres of maize as a farmer –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give my brother is that we now have the law. If there is anything you want to put in it to benefit the farmer, this is the opportunity. Therefore, let us go ahead. Bring your proposals and we insert them here.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, that was my serious concern. If it is going to be taken care of here, then we can proceed. Short of that, this law will benefit outsiders instead of our local farmers here.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Honourable member, I think there is no need to wait for biogas because we want it blended now. The materials are available and the people producing are already exporting. That is why we would like to use what is here to blend our oil the way others are doing elsewhere. We are not reinventing the wheel. We should do what others are doing now. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The proposal is that we amend clause 1 to read as, “This Act shall commence immediately upon assent.”

MR ONEGIU: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether the chairperson has conceded to that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister in charge of the Bill has conceded.

MR PETER LOKERIS: We have conceded.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA–MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 is about the object of the Bill. However, I thought the object of the Bill is always in the preamble. I would like to ask the minister why he brought it in clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale of clause 2?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Well, it is matter of emphasis. Otherwise, it is stated above as well. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want it to remain as it is?

MR PETER LOKERIS: Since I said it was a matter of emphasis and it is already stated above, if we do not need it here it should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will handle clause 3 last. We normally handle interpretation last.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is about blending -

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is about petroleum products supplied in Uganda to be blended with biofuels. We would like to substitute sub-clause (2) with the following: “(2) The Petroleum Supply Act shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the supply of blended petroleum products in Uganda supplied under this Act.”

The justification is that section 5 of the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 defines “blended petroleum products” as products derived from refining and processing of petroleum and oils. Therefore, the blended petroleum products envisaged are without biofuels. Based on this, there is need for modification of provisions in the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 so as to apply to the supply of blended petroleum products in Uganda.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, is the chairperson of the committee in order to purport to be amending another law while we are trying to pass the Biofuels Bill, 2016? This clause purports to be amending the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is importing the provisions of the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 to this Bill. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, he is not only importing but saying, “…shall, with the necessary modifications, apply…” What are these modifications? In effect he is modifying the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 without being specific.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. In order to apply to this law, there may be some modifications. He is not touching the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. Where there are areas that are not in conformity with the other one, they have been provided for in this law.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In drafting, cross-referencing is allowed and is proper; hon. Kamateeka should not worry. We have been doing it in all other Bills.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, cross-referencing is always at the end. You can say, “Read this in conjunction with other laws”, but I would like you to read clause 4 carefully. It says, “All petroleum products to be supplied in Uganda shall be blended…” This means that from now on, all petroleum products must be blended with biofuels. 

This is very dangerous for us. We are trying to get another product on the market, which is good for us. We can have the new and blended products but we cannot do away with the other petroleum products, which we are going to get from Hoima soon. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to explain to me how all petroleum products such as paraffin, petroleum and diesel, will be blended with biofuels because if they are not blended, we cannot say – 

MR PETER LOKERIS: If we are to make comparisons, there should be reasons because some people will take this and say, “This one is not blended” and maybe arrest someone. I think there will be a mix and it will take time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this means that it is mandatory to blend. That is what the provision is saying.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Yes, I have observed that it is mandatory but we can recast it so that it is not mandatory. The word, “may” should replace “shall” because “shall” means it is compulsory. Implementers can say you do it now and then you get problems.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister should know that you can only blend diesel and petroleum but not paraffin or jet fuel. Therefore, the honourable minister should be very careful with this statement. 

I would like to propose that clause 4 be deleted. The justification is that there will be petroleum products, which will either be blended or not. The law we are dealing with is for biofuels.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. This was a contentious clause in the committee. However, I remember we agreed to replace the word “shall” with the word “may”. This is because even when we agree to blend, we do not need to blend all the time because it is a process for people to begin blending. Even in countries that use it, it is a process. That is why in the committee we agreed to use the word “may”. I hope that Members are comfortable with that. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that we critically follow what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has submitted. When we debated the matter of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), certain sensitive issues were raised. If I may relate it to GMOs, it would be like saying that everyone in Uganda should produce GMOs now. That is what we are trying to say in effect. We are making it mandatory and that is totally dangerous. I probably feel my vehicle cannot use blended fuel because it has a very big engine. We should make a separate law to cater for this. 

Let us make sure the law allows for production of biofuels that we shall use for blending, and it must be clearly marked. Perhaps we should also gazette the places where blended fuel can be got so that whoever wants it knows where to get it. We should not mix up everything - (Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, hon. Aogon is a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and he even participated in the benchmarking. Is he in order to open up the debate and waste time for other Members? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are not supposed to debate your report. If you signed it, then you are part of it.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to correct the record; he said that I benchmarked on the Bill but does he have a record that I travelled to any country for that? Secondly, I can be a member of the committee but also -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under our rules, you cannot -

MR AOGON: I was not there on the day that it was discussed because I had travelled. I can prove it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you are bound by what the committee has brought.

MR AOGON: Besides that, I have remembered that - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aogon! Honourable members, suppose we remove the word “All” and say, “Petroleum products to be supplied in Uganda may be blended with biofuels”; will that solve our problem? 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I wonder whether that will be a law if it remains that way. Why don’t you just delete the whole section? Are you making a law or something else? How will you enforce it? What is its purpose? Won’t it just be redundant?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there may be people who want to bring in blended products and others who do not want to; are you going to stop them?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we stay that clause while we go for the alternative to replace “shall” with “may”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what we said. 

MR KATUSABE: Okay, thanks.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, I think this one is causing a lot of anxiety. Much as I know that in law the word “shall” is quite mandatory, but it also has some alternatives whereas “may” may be too weak to make it look like a law. Supposing we used the word “will”; for those who have studied English, “will” and “shall”-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, while we think about this, I propose we stand over clause 4 and go to clause 5.  

Clause 5

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, the committee has proposed to insert a new paragraph (n) to read as follows: “establish and maintain a central biofuel registry for the purpose of monitoring the supply chain of biofuels”. 

The committee further recommends the deletion of paragraph (j). The justification is that certification of quality should be the mandate of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). This provision has been considered under clause 6 on the functions of UNBS.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify something. You are saying that the ministry shall, for the purposes of regulating the production, blending of biofuels in petroleum products and utilisation of biofuels, do the following – 

I thought when you are giving the licence it would prescribe what is supposed to be done. What I would like to ask the minister is: do you get the licence before NEMA and UNBS have cleared you or you can get the licence and then go for those clearances? I ask this because you are bringing in UNBS and NEMA here. Where do we start from? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: According to the laws on environment, anything you would like to do in regard to this must first of all get clearance from NEMA. The licences are issued after the permit is seen. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is the case, UNBS should also be included as one of the entities that will clear someone before the ministry can issue the certificate. This is because the ministry can easily give a licence and somebody will produce low standard products. Therefore, UNBS and NEMA should be the first to give licences before the ministry issues the certificate. 

Therefore, my proposal is that for the purpose of regulating production, before the ministry can authorise you to produce, the factory should have certification from NEMA and Uganda National Bureau of Standards. The justification is that you would have been cleared to go and produce. The ministry has no capacity to clear standards. The only agency that can clear standards is UNBS.

MR BYRARUGABA: Your concerns are clearly answered in clause 9 (2) (g).

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, if you are inserting paragraph (n), then we need to delete paragraph (k) because it is a repetition. Paragraph (n) says, “establishes and maintains a central biofuel registry for the purpose of monitoring the supply…” Paragraph (k) is also about monitoring of biofuels. Therefore, we need to delete paragraph (k).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I did not get you.

MR OLANYA: I was saying, Madam Chairperson, that if you are inserting the new paragraph (n), then it means we need to delete paragraph (k) because it is about monitoring of biofuels. If you insert paragraph (n), it will cater for (k) as well. That is what I was saying.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What comprises the supply chain of biofuels, because that is what is under paragraph (n)? What else is in the supply chain that is different from what is in paragraph (k)?

MR BYRARUGABA: At the end of the day, it is important to monitor the utilisation of biofuels; if not, it will dilute the essence of why we are setting up this industry. We need to monitor who is using them. Supposing they are being used for bad purposes, as you know biofuels are inflammable also? I think we can do very well and it harms nobody to have paragraph (k) retained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is the supply chain of biofuels? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: The supply chain has the effect of integrated linkages. You start from where you are producing and you keep checking that, then you come to the factories and you blend; all that is the supply chain. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it clearer, hon. Nzoghu? They are both relevant.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have not understood it clearly. If you look at (l), it says “liase with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards in setting standards and in ensuring compliance with the standards.” 

If you are saying that we have got a chain, who is to monitor it? I thought that when the Uganda National Bureau of Standards sets the standards, you are the one to ensure that the standards are being followed? Therefore, what is the purpose of this? You have said that is the supply chain, so how do you link it to (l)? 

MR MACHO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know whether at this stage it is important for us to insert one of the functions of the ministry, which is to help the farmers who are the producers of the biofuel product. If so, I would like us to include a statement that would ensure that the ministry helps the farmers and guides them on how they can produce biofuel. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, paragraph (n) is for establishing a registry so that any new products or biofuels in the supply chain are registered, because they are probably changing from time to time. Therefore, when you get a new one, you register it. Uganda National Bureau of Standards sets the standards; it is quality control. I think the other issue is to control the manufacture but this is quality control. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to address this issue clearly. According to my understanding, it is more realistic to monitor the supply chain and then the utilisation of the biofuels would come in within that context. It is better for this to be addressed in that context than have it as an independent issue. That is what I think, Madam Chairperson. 

MR BYARUGABA: I do not know why this issue is causing uproar. Paragraph (n) is mainly to establish and maintain a central biofuels registry for the purpose of monitoring the supply chain of biofuels. We have various suppliers. Remember in our report, we said we are not going to blend 100 per cent. We are going to blend incrementally from 10, 15 and then 20 per cent depending on the supply. If we have a central registry and we get to know that we have much more supply, then we can increase the level of blending incrementally. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, unless this central registry is defined in the interpretation clause, we are hesitant to quickly run for it. This is because there is an outcry that we are creating agencies every other day. In this case, unless the chairperson defines for us what he means by a central registry, we need to move slowly. 

MR BYARUGABA: The central registry, to our understanding and conviction, will be based in the directorate within the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. It is already there. 

MR MUSASIZI: Is it defined in the interpretation clause? Define it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The reason we normally close with the interpretation clause is because during the debate, we might define things in a new way. You arrange a definition and when we come back to the interpretation clause, we can insert it. That is why we do it last. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me give an example of cooperatives. When you register a cooperative, the registrar of cooperatives registers it and they will always have a register for that cooperative. I am sure there is a big book that records that Kakira Sugar Works is one of those producing biofuels. When you say you want to create another registry, even if we have a definition it becomes very – Maybe we should just say, “The ministry shall maintain a register”. 

MR PETER LOKERIS: First of all, you have given an example of your cooperatives and they have registers. However, you need to know how many people will come on board to produce these quantities in future, so that you can decide to upgrade the percentage to be used as a biofuel. Therefore, at all times there needs to be tracking and monitoring, and this is going to be done by the ministry. There is already a department which does that. We only want to tell them that the register should exist. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why we would like to move an amendment. After (g), there should be (h)- Madam Chairperson, what I would love to say is- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the headnote is “functions of the ministry” so- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, maintain a register 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is the role of the ministry to establish and maintain. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I think we should say, “establish and maintain a register”. They should register the licences they have issued, the companies dealing in biofuels and what type of biofuel they are producing. That should be there, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not an authority. The registry will be in the ministry. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I insisted on seeing the definition because I did not want to use the definition to help us pass this particular clause but I wanted to use it to defeat the spirit of this proposal. 

Madam Chairperson, a central biosafety registry cannot be a register and the intention of this is not to register but to regulate. The moment you go into regulation, it means you are forming an agency. It can be housed within or outside but it will have cost implications on Government. This is what we are totally against because we have other agencies which can help us to perform duties of regulation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: As we consider that, I just want to advise the delegation from Pallisa that we will handle your matter tomorrow when the Minister of Local Government is here. We have been waiting for Mr Butime but he is still travelling –(Interjections)- There could be a conflict of interest because he is part of that community.

Okay, Members, what do we do now? Minister, are you creating more expenditure? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: There is already a department handling this, so we are not creating any expenditure. It is the one that handles biofuel and it already exists. The only thing is to require that the register is present for monitoring purposes.

MR MUSASIZI: No, you cannot establish what you already have. Madam Chairperson, the amendment is seeking to establish and maintain a central biosafety register. Therefore, honourable minister, please-

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Do you already have the register?

MR PETER LOKERIS: We have not started maintaining a register but after creating this law, we want to have a register. Maybe it is the issue of a central registry, which raises eyebrows and Members may think we are trying to create another authority.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chair, I do not know whether the minister and the chairperson can concede on this, but we could delete the word “central” and maintain “registry”. The register will be maintained in the registry. Therefore, we could delete “central” and maintain “registry”. The word, “central” is the one causing conflict because it would entail us forming an agency that would be managing that. Let us delete “central”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I just want to ask a simple question. Honourable minister, you have been giving petroleum licences to people. When issuing them, did you create a central registry for petroleum?

MR BYARUGABA: Look at the law; section 28 (1) of the Petroleum Supply Act says, “The Commissioner shall establish and maintain a central petroleum registry for monitoring the supply chain.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, you borrowed from the Petroleum Supply Act?

MR BYARUGABA: Yes. That is good practice and it is a practice that has gone through a legal regime.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if that is true, then I foresee one thing: if you have a petroleum central registry, then this biofuel one must be maintained there and not here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But these are renewable energies, why mix them with others?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chair, it is oils - petroleum. The other one is petroleum products and this is biofuel. It is the same thing used for fuel cars, etc. 

We do not want to create more burdens for the ministry in charge of energy. If we already have this, the biofuels and all other fuels should be managed there, and I think the earlier we do it the better. This has now opened my eyes.

MR PETER LOKERIS: When we are dealing with the issue of petroleum, we are talking about the production chain from upstream, midstream and then downstream. When you go downstream, where you are now selling, this is where our concern is. This is the area that is not being handled by that registry. It concerns issues like selling, mixing, which is outside this. That is why even now we have a department concerned with that and it is outside the other one – the supply chain department.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the moment one mixes, they are now upstream. If you are not aware, let me help you understand. The one who does not mix is the one at the pump, and that is what we call downstream. The moment you start mixing something, you fall under upstream and we cease to have you under the ministry but we take you where upstream entities are. The only way we can help you stay around for the time being is that when you issue your licences, you must register them in the registry but you cannot create a central registry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do we move on, honourable members? Should we delete the proposal? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5, paragraph (n) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. There is a deletion of subclause-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, are we establishing a registry?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there is no registry. There was proposal to delete paragraph (j). I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BYARUGABA: Clause 6 - Functions of Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Under subclause (a), we propose to insert the word “packaging” between the words, “production” and “storage”.

Two, we propose to substitute paragraph (b) with the following -

MR NZUGHU: Madam Chairperson, I find it very arbitrary to bring the functions of UNBS here and yet we have an independent Act for this. I thought that since they have defined this, they could possibly bring it in the interpretation clause. I move that we do not spend a lot of time here because the Act is clear; let us delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair, what was your rationale?

MR BYARUGABA: The justification is that, considering the challenges that are likely to occur in the processes and value chain, it is important to reinforce the role of UNBS under this particular Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What you should do is to have standards for this and not for UNBS. This is because the moment you put UNBS here, you are actually saying that you making for them a law and yet they already have a law. 

Therefore, you can say, “The following shall be the applicable standards…” and then you elaborate them and put them in the regulations. You cannot put UNBS here for God’s sake! I think we should first delete this. Uganda National Bureau of Standards is even not under your ministry. It is under ministry in charge of trade.

MR PETER LOKERIS: These provisions are specified here so that they check these people and ensure that they come and do their job under this Act. Also, we are lifting the provisions that are elsewhere into this law so that we clearly specify what their participation is in this Bill.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, what is before us here is what they call a principal legislation contradiction, in sense that you are talking about aspects that are already cast in stone.  You are talking about UNBS and there is a law already. I think it would be a tragic precedent to have functions that are passed into law at is stage being subjected to modification. This would be legislation fraud.

Mr Chair and honourable minister, I think it is critical that you concede. We need the functions but we can only align the Bill to the functions of UNBS; we do not have the mandate to modify.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chair, I think let us try to understand this soberly. We are talking about UNBS and it has its own general mandate to do a, b, c, d. However, under this law, we are specifically talking about the roles that UNBS will be performing under the Biofuels Act. Please, read through them. One, “formulate national standard specifications for the production, storage and transportation of biofuels and for the blending…” Do you find that in the UNBS law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we removed the word “functions” and said, “Application of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards”?

MR BYARUGABA: It is still okay. I would rather go with your guidance. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I think after this, the minister may come up with guidelines and possibly, that can be stated in those guidelines. However, we should not replicate the functions of UNBS.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at what they are trying to propose – the functions of Uganda National Bureau of Standards – it is already in the UNBS system and its functions are known within the law. Therefore, what are you trying to cure here? Its mandate is already within the law and when they apply it, they do so to the standards that you are trying to prescribe. Therefore, if they already have an existing law, what are you trying to cure?

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, we are saying that one of the principal actors within this Bill is UNBS and we are trying to specifically come out with their functions under this Act.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, this is the contradiction that I was talking about in legislation, and it happens; it is normal. Let me have your attention, committee chairperson and minister, please. This is what I said is called “principal legislation contradiction”, and if we continue like this, we run a risk of committing piracy or getting a copy-and-paste virus.

Madam Chairperson, the functions of UNBS are clear, and I am very sure that they went through the normal national statutory process. Therefore, if we cannot align the Bill or commit ourselves to saying that the Bill will conform to the functions or the regulations of UNBS and we adopt what the chairperson and minister are trying to propose, that will be piracy. The reason I am saying this is because when making laws, we need to come up with clear enforcement mechanisms and procedures for those particular laws. 

Madam Chairperson, I propose that we say that this Bill will conform to maybe the standards and procedures of UNBS. Therefore, let us drop this clause as it stands because it will diminish the strength of this Bill. Thank you.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, I think we have heard many proposals and suggestions. I would request for your final guidance on this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I come with experience. (Laughter) You cannot be allowed to operate a depot without clearance from the Ministry of Energy and Minerals and that depot must conform to the standards. If you are saying these are the standards you want, then you should own them. You should say, “The following are the standards, which shall be followed…” and it will be the ministry ensuring their enforcement, not UNBS. 

You cannot direct UNBS because UNBS already has its own law, which says that standards must be maintained - right measuring tools, right transport methods, right storage methods and so on. Supposing tomorrow we want to manufacture something and not biofuels, shall we also put another standard in the law? No! Therefore, we either say that they shall conform to the standards of Uganda National Bureau of Standards, or if you want to take this into consideration, own it yourself and do not bring in Uganda National Bureau of Standards.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, you cannot limit UNBS. As the issuer of the licence, you would want to know the standards you want somebody to conform to as you give them the licence. Therefore, if you say UNBS will operate within the functions you have stipulated in the law, you are limiting them. It is you, the owner, who gives the licence and knows the standards you want maintained, but not another institution that is governed by another law and has a different mandate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t UNBS the national regulator? If that is the case, then what they are doing is to borrow from the other law and bring it here. I think we should find a word that shows that we are borrowing, because what you want is to import the standards of UNBS into this.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Chairperson, there must be some reference to this so that it warns those supposed to do their job to come and act.

MR ANYWARACH: I think the chairperson of the committee believes that there is a principle that UNBS should be involved but the challenge is how to capture it. It is known that UNBS is the national regulator of standards, whether we prescribe it here or not. Therefore, all we need to do is to give indicators of what we would really want them not to miss. These indicators can be included as terms of the licence. 

In view of that, I propose that we delete the entire clause 6 and instead have it incorporated under clause 7 where we have declaration of licensing authority, or we create a title for terms of licence. This is important because when I read through clause 6(a) to (f) - Clause 6 (a) says, “formulate national standard specifications for the production…” but here we are going to say, “The licence shall conform to the national standard specifications for the production, storage, transportation…” 

When we say, “the licence shall conform” then it will be up to the ministry to ensure that this is done, or if they relegate that function to UNBS, we will not lose anything. Let us import all those functions under clause 6 as terms and conditions for the licence. In that way, we lose nothing.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to request that we share information on the Biofuels Bill with other committees. Let us admit and agree that this is a new phenomenon in Uganda. 

I agree that we may not recycle the functions of UNBS. However, to effectively enforce standards on biofuels, UNBS needs reinforcement from the parent law by mentioning specifically what they have to do in order to monitor standards. This is what has been mentioned in the clause. You can help us to re-draft the functions and rename the clause just like the chairperson had guided. 

However, I would like to propose that we maintain this clause in order to help us enforce these standards because these functions are detailed. The functions of UNBS are broad but they are not specific to what we are dealing with here. I know the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is very conscious, but I am certain he will eventually agree with us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I get the feeling that we need to stay over this Bill because there are many areas which are not coordinated.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of the committee and the House in general to the functions spelt out in (a) to (f), which are clearly functions for a minister. That is why I said the minister can simply come up with guidelines to highlight these functions so that when UNBS is carrying out its mandate, they can compare notes with the instruments which the minister will have issued.

MR KATUSABE: As one of the best lawyers this country has ever had, Madam Speaker, you are very familiar with the force of law. We are dealing with a Bill and we need to be careful as far as what aspects of this Bill will buffer the force of law. It is like bringing up definitions at this stage and we want to make them part of the law. What is going to happen when it comes to the stage when the police or other law enforcement systems – 

Madam Chairperson, basically what I am trying to say is that for this particular case, we have two options. The first option is to re-align clause 6 and we say, “conform”, and the second option would be to drop it. 

In legislation, it is important to interest yourself in law enforcement mechanisms and procedures. When drafting a Bill, there should be clear roles, obligations and responsibilities and how those will be executed. Otherwise, what we are trying to do now is like having declaratory statements of intent to be part of legislation, which will be unfortunate. Therefore, we have only two options: One, that this transforms into conformity with what we have –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, from what I have observed, the minister just wants to have some standards. In that regard, I would like to propose that we rephrase clause 6 to read as follows: “The licensee shall conform, in addition, to the following: 1. The UNBS specifications for…” and then you would go on to list these. 

Paragraph (f) says, “assist the ministry in determining the appropriate amount of biofuels…” No! The ministry would have already determined this. The ministry must have experts to determine this. Uganda National Bureau of standards cannot do that. It is the ministry to determine the standards and give them to UNBS. I think you making a mistake.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we defer this matter. Can we go to clause 7.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 8 says, “A person shall not produce…” Once a licence is granted, it specifies what to do; why are you limiting them? I think you can say that once you issue the licence, no person can go –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. You cannot produce, store, transport and/or blend unless you have a licence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay, Madam Chairperson, but when you look at the heading, it says, “Obligation to obtain licence”. If you say it is an obligation and then you say, “a person shall not”, then there is a problem. What we can say here is that no person shall produce or do all those things without a licence. We cannot use the phrase, “obligation to obtain licence.” Once you use the word, “obligation” then you must show how one can obtain the licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to propose that heading reads – (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Before come in with your proposal, I have been advised that in order to enrich this Bill, we should insert a new clause immediately after clause 7 to read thus: 

“Biofuels Committee
(1) 	There is established a committee known as the Biofuels Committee. 
(2) 	The committee shall consist of the following-
(a) 	a representative from the Petroleum Authority of Uganda; 
(b) 	a representative of the ministry responsible for planning; (c) a representative of the ministry responsible for trade; 
(d) 	a representative of the ministry responsible for agriculture, animal industry and fisheries; 
(e) 	a representative of the ministry responsible for gender, labour and social development; 
(f) 	a representative of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; (g) a representative of the National Environment Authority; 
(h) 	a representative of the civil society, nominated by a forum of non-governmental organisations.

Tenure of Office

(1) 	Members of the committee shall hold office for a period of three years and are eligible for reappointment for one more term;
(2) 	A member may – 
(a) 	at any time, before the expiry of his or her term, resign his or her office by giving written notice to the minister and copying the notice to the chairperson of the committee;

(b) 	be removed from office by the minister where the member- 
(i) 	fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the committee without notice in writing to the chairperson; 
(ii) 	is incapacitated  by physical or mental illness; 
(iii) 	is convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term…”-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are those not regulations?

MS NAMUYANGU: I stand to oppose the chairperson’s proposal because I think he is either introducing a board or an authority in the names of a committee and yet Government is trying to cut costs. He cannot introduce a committee at this level. Let the commissioner handle.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think what he is stating here are the roles given to members of a board or an authority. I would like to think that this can be operationalised by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. We do not have to create another committee that is going to be a cost centre because Government will have to pay them and meet all their costs. It is not necessary. Therefore, I would like to propose that it should not be incorporated in this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the minister - 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Honourable members, the chairman of the committee has conceded.

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Chairperson, this particular recommendation actually came from the Leader of the Opposition and we thought we were doing them a favour. Thank you, but we have consented anyway.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You know what we are doing is in the interest of the country. We are already aware we have the Oil Authority and it is not fair for the chairperson of the committee to go personal because the Leader of the Opposition is not officially a member of that committee. We have Members of Parliament allocated to committees. Therefore, honourable chairperson, that is not proper. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are not supposed to understand your negotiations and agreements. 

Honourable minister, ask the House to resume and you report.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Motion for the House –(Interjections)– You mention what you would like me to say. The Chairperson said I should ask the House to resume - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, say, “I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee reports thereto” - I am just guiding, honourable members. (Laughter)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Members, when you begin shouting, now what can I do? I beg to move that the House has considered –(Interjections)– I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Biofuels Bill, 2016” and passed amendments in clause 1, deleted clause 2 and stood over clauses 4 and 5. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give the chairperson of the committee, the minister and all of you time to reflect on this Bill. This is a new area and it is a bit challenging, so we can complete it tomorrow. It is a small Bill; you can study it overnight.

Honourable members, we are not able to do deal with items 6 and 7 because it is now coming to 7 o’clock. Therefore, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 December 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
