Wednesday, 17 December 2014

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, the honourable Leader of the Opposition and honourable members of Parliament. I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I do apologise for the late start. As we are getting to the end of the sittings, there are a lot of things that are happening but we shall try to catch up. 

Tomorrow morning, there will be a joint press conference of the commissioners of Parliament, the committee chairpersons and the Clerk to give a brief to the country on the work that has been done in the current session and the challenges that have been faced. So the chairpersons and the commissioners are invited to the Members’ Lounge at 11.00 a.m.

Secondly, honourable members, a few weeks ago, the Minister of Justice wrote to us to say that he is expecting proposals for constitutional amendments but I have received a letter from the Uganda Law Reform Commission to the effect that none of the members of Parliament had submitted any proposals. I do not know whether they are being done together with civil society but if you still have amendments to the Constitution that you wish to be considered, please ensure that they reach the Ministry of Justice or the Law Reform Commission by Friday 19th 2014, which is at the end of this week. So please move fast in case there is something you want to do.

Thirdly, honourable members, you recall that in 1977, the late Archbishop Janan Luwum was killed during Amin’s time. There is going to be a memorial on the 16th of February 2015 so preparations are going on. I would like to encourage members to participate. The information will be with hon. Betty Aol and the Office of the Deputy Speaker. Let us celebrate the life of a great Ugandan.

This morning I also launched the campaign to support the She-Cranes to go to Sydney, Australia in August. I want to appeal to the members again to do the needful. We were supported by a few corporations but they still need a lot of support to ensure that they are in Sydney to represent Uganda. So please do the needful if you are approached.

This afternoon again I had an opportunity to go with His Excellency the President at the opening of a new factory in Bugolobi; a textile factory called Fine Spinners Uganda Limited. It has been launched this morning. The cotton is from Kasese, I think it belongs to hon. Dr Kiyonga –(Interjections)- as for the price, we shall talk about it. I am just reporting what I did and that there is a new factory and the cotton farmers should have some hope that they have somewhere to sell their products. 

Finally, I will be amending the order paper to include a motion, which should have been moved some time back on privatisation. So it will be added to the order paper. We debated it some time back and they wanted to move an oral motion but I said, “No, do not move an oral motion, please put it in writing and come back.” So they have come back and they will be moving it later today. Thank you very much. 

There were some urgent issues from Sebei and hon. Mpiima has an urgent problem. I will also be inviting hon. Akello to make her maiden speech.

3.24
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, which pertains to Kenyan refugees who are currently camped in Kongasis county, Bukwo district since July 2014. 

There are about 500 families who left their country in 2006/2007 and 2007/2008. In our neighbouring country, we had clashes, which are sub tribal in nature and we also had political turmoil, which culminated into bloodshed. These families took off and they are over 3,000 families that were hosted within Sebei region that is in the districts of Kapchwora, Bukwo and Kween. 

Some of these people were resettled back in their country but there were left a section of them. In July this year, they recollected just near the UPDF camp in Riwa Sub-county, Kongasis County, Bukwo District where they are now and they are living in bad shape. There is a health centre, which is under construction by the UPDF. In that health centre, all those families are being hosted. The women are sleeping in some rooms and the men in other rooms. They have over 900 children with them. These people do not have food. There are many pregnant women. How these people meet is also funny because - 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you said they are sleeping separately. (Laughter)

MR SABILA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, how these people meet is another issue. It is scientific I think because the women are pregnant and there is an impending problem because if these women are going to deliver, the children need to go to school. They do not have food to eat and the sanitary facilities are not there. This is going to give us more problems. 

Attempts have been made to have these people taken back to their country but during the time of resettlement, when they went back they found their land had been relocated. So they are now waiting for Government to help them. 

They have three prayers:

    1. They be fed because they have no food.
    2. They be linked up with their government so that they can be handed over to their government.
    3. We can also look at other avenues like providing them with some tents, if they are still around. I would ask the respective ministries to come to their rescue otherwise it is a very serious problem -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister has heard.

3.27
MS DOROTHY MPIIMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national concern. I would like to draw the attention of this august House to the encroachment and fraudulent sale of government land at the Ministry of Agriculture, specifically Njeru stock farm in Njeru. 

About a year ago, some of that land was portioned out, I think by members of Njeru Town Council and beautiful buildings have been constructed. Recently, another 10 acres have been allocated and my fear is that unsuspecting people are being apportioned this land and at the end of the day, we are going to see graders coming in. 

This is Njeru stock farm where people have even put up lines and they have demarcated it into an estate for residences. I think it is important for me to draw this to your attention so that we could probably save this stock farm because at the end of the day so much land has been taken. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you are aware about the Kenyan refugees in Kongasis that hon. Sabila has reported about.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I will bring a formal statement here on these Kenyans who are camped in Kongasis but on the onset, to qualify to be a refugee, one must seek asylum, go through a refugee eligibility assessment and then be located to where we have gazetted for refugees to settle.

As we talk, Madam Speaker, we have 1,600 Kenyan refugees in Kiryandongo and we are negotiating with the Government of Kenya to see how we can, in a very dignified manner, return them to their country. 

We will work with the Member of Parliament to establish this case also and I think I should be able to update this House probably tomorrow or the day after - I do not know when we are closing - so that we can see how we can proceed but they are not captured in our records.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Lands, someone is stealing the land at Njeru stock farm, I do not know whether you are aware.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of land at Njeru stock farm, which has been encroached on is one I will have to take up. I am going to get in touch with the honourable member of Parliament so that I can be able to get more information. I would also like to appeal to members because we are having serious problems with quite a number of district land boards, which have taken it upon themselves to allocate land belonging to institutions.

It is true we have been making every effort to ensure that we reign in but at times we get the information a bit late. I would like to appeal to fellow leaders to assist us and deliver the message that institutional land is not for sharing by various leaders in the districts because this is where the problem is coming from. I am going to take up this matter, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the honourable member for raising this important information. I just wanted to inform the House that I interacted with hon. Dorothy and I assured her that I was going to take up the matter in the Ministry of Agriculture. I indeed went to the ministry and discussed with my senior colleague, hon. Bucyanayandi who called one Dr Ssemambo who is the MD for NAGRIC and the staff in the Ministry of Agriculture in charge of that stock farm. 

We are planning to put an injunction on the portioning of this stock farm as we discussed with Uganda Land Commission and the Minister for Lands. So the matter has been drawn to our attention and we thought that the first thing to do is to seek for a court injunction into the exercise of portioning and constructing houses on the stock farm.

So it is already at the desk with the Ministry of Agriculture and I promise, Madam Speaker, that we shall move ahead to make sure that we secure the stock farm. (Hon. Ssewungu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not on the floor. I was looking for hon. Franca and then hon. Akello.

3.32
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About three years ago, two seats fell vacant in Agago District; the seats for the councillor for Omiya Pachwa Sub-county and councillor for Wol Sub-county. The councillor for Wol Sub-county died, may her soul rest in peace and the councillor for Omiya Pachwa got a job with Bank of Uganda.
So these seats fell vacant and the people in these two sub-counties have been asking why by-elections were not held. They have been without councillors for three years so we are requesting the minister concerned to give us an answer as to why these seats have not yet been filled up to now yet by-elections are being carried out throughout the country.

Madam Speaker, my second matter of national importance is about teachers’ money. In the last financial year, this Parliament passed about Shs 6 billion for teachers’ SACCOs. I remember I raised this matter on the floor and the Minister of Education promised to bring a statement for members of Parliament to appreciate how far they had gone with getting this money to reach the teachers’ SACCOs. 

To date, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education has not yet given any response so we would like to ask the Ministry of Education to update members of Parliament on this money because teachers throughout the country want their money. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.34
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank all the honourable colleagues for the warm welcome you have accorded me during this time that I have been in the House. (Applause)   

I bring you warm greetings from the great people of Amuru. They are very happy, you showed them a lot of love because during the campaigns, we saw many people in Amuru and I hope this love continues even in 2016. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to bring to your attention two key issues that are of national significance but affecting the people of Amuru. First, on Monday morning there was an attack in Apa where six people were injured. Two people were seriously injured and referred to St Mary’s Hospital, Lacor. They were attacked by unknown attackers from the Madi side. 

The reason I am here is because the situation is not good and I want to bring to your attention the fact that the people of Apa are scared because the festive season is coming and they are not sure of their security.

Secondly, post-election violence is still going on -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is her maiden speech. Please give her an opportunity to speak. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: On the day of my swearing in, my supporters went back and were attacked. One person was seriously injured and up to now, he is still nursing injuries. I now appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs to look into these issues very seriously because the people of Amuru want their safety. They are entering into the festive season and they would like to see that their safety is guaranteed. 

I also call upon the government to give a formal response to these two issues that are scaring the people of Amuru. I thank you so much. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Akello. You are warmly welcome to this House and we wish you well. (Applause) Is there any response on the issue of the teachers’ SACCOs? Minister of Education? And the outstanding elections for dead councillors throughout Uganda! 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I want to inform my colleague who asked about teachers’ SACCOs that we have already published the SACCOs, which are going to benefit per district and disbursement will be done soon.

Therefore, I request my colleague to wait for disbursement according to the SACCOs, which have been published. (Interjections) I have told you it will be soon. It can be next week, it can be – 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have an agency, which is responsible for that and that is Microfinance Support Centre –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that I raised this matter and members of Parliament stated that they would like to get informed about the criteria of selection. That day the minister responded that they were still searching for a consultant and that they would come back to this House to inform members of Parliament when a consultant was identified so that they can make a publication for districts to apply. 

I am very sure that when you look at the publication the minister is talking about, so many districts have been left out, which districts have SACCOs. So can the minister tell us, where did you send the circular for the selection criteria in the districts?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister for his submission. I am a member of the Education Committee and already there is a problem about this SACCO money. There is a war about this money between Uganda National Teachers’ Union (UNATU) and the ministry. UNATU states that the money they are thinking of giving as SACCO money was given to UNATU. Meanwhile, the minister is still relying on this Shs 5 billion. 

Could the minister clarify regarding the money he is talking about? This is because this issue raised problems in the committee and up to now, UNATU is saying the money is theirs and that the President gave it to the union in order to carry out their SACCO business. Who is going to manage this? Is it UNATU or the ministry? And which money are you talking about? Thank you very much.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also a member of the Education Committee and I would like the minister to clarify something to this House. It appears that there are a few SACCOs that are going to benefit. If the ministry has statistics of the number of SACCOs throughout Uganda and the criteria upon which they are selecting a few to benefit, when will the rest of the SACCOs benefit? How are you going to follow up to the last SACCO? 

We would like to know if you have the statistics of the SACCOs in Uganda and the criteria you are following as you disburse this money to the various SACCOs because I know this money is meant for all the teachers’ SACCOs across Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it not better if you bring a formal answer so that we can debate it? Because, everybody has issues on the teachers’ SACCOs. That question was raised several months ago and no one has answered it.

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, my senior colleague talked about the consultant who was being procured but that has been overtaken by events. That is why I told you that there is Microfinance Support Centre, which is responsible now and they are handling this thing.

Secondly, my colleague talked about UNATU. UNATU is part and parcel of the committee handling the SACCOs. Regarding the criteria, the ministry and the Microfinance Support Centre received names of teachers’ SACCOs in every district and we have published that. Those that have not yet submitted are continuing to submit so that they are considered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, don’t you think you should make a formal statement? I think you ought to bring a formal statement on the issue as it is very controversial.

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, on your request, we can come with a statement about it tomorrow or next year, whichever - we shall come with a statement, I want to assure you.
THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow. Okay, let us go to item three. Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights –

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
TOGETHER WITH THE MINUTES ON THE 15TH ANNUAL REPORT 
OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2012

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Rule 24 and Rule 193(l) of our Rules of Procedure, I rise to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Human Rights together with the minutes on the 15th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2012. Please note that it is on the 15th report of the Commission and not the 16th report as recorded on the order paper. 

I pray that at an appropriate time, the report will be given a slot on the order paper for presentation, consideration and adoption by this House. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. A date will be appointed for debate on that report. Now, Minister of Internal Affairs, the honourable MP for Amuru raised some issues. I do not know whether you are a position to speak about them.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, we will certainly make sure that if there are lawless elements in the post by-election, we will find out and deal with them. I am sure police could be dealing with them at this time but I need to check. 

I also need to appeal to the political leaders in the area to work with members of police and security in order to ensure that people are peaceful, coming and going about their business. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we will pursue any lawless elements and take action.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to the next item. Honourable members, I wanted to propose that since we concluded debate on the two motions for defence and internal affairs pacts, we could take a vote on them before we go to the Prime Minister’s question time. Honourable members, we will bring forward items seven and eight. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT 
ON RATIFICATION OF THE MUTUAL DEFENCE PACT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was debated extensively yesterday. I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT 
ON RATIFICATION OF THE PEACE AND SECURITY PACT

THE SPEAKER: Again, debate ensued yesterday extensively. I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the issue I am raising to you concerns Ugandans who fought in the second World War. You may be aware that a few years ago, the Government of Uganda, working together with the British Government, made arrangements to pay these people. Those who are alive would receive the payment and for those who are not, I believe their families were to benefit. 

However, people from my constituency, which is Bulamogi County, Kaliro District have never received this money. I want you to explain to the nation what has become of the payment of the people who took part in the Second World War, which was supposed to be cleared through the Government of Uganda. Thank you.

3.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, anyone who has rendered service should be given adequate and proper remuneration and if our country men and women who fought in the Second World War have not received their due payments, Government of Uganda will work with Her Majesty’s Government to ensure that appropriate remuneration is given to those people who have not received the remuneration they are supposed to receive. 

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I am sorry but I do not think that answer is satisfactory. That matter has been raised in the Seventh and Eighth Parliament and it has not been resolved. These old men are dying.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is sad that such a matter should be raised so many times when in fact these people sacrificed their lives. So, Government takes this matter very seriously.

Secondly, I do not expect that this matter will be raised again because I believe Government is going to come up with a decisive response over it and the House will be informed accordingly when it resumes in the new year.

3.50
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister aware that the health centre, which he oversaw being built for children suffering from nodding disease in Tumango is complete but not operational? If so, when are we going to have that because we already have a home built by a certain international NGO to operationalise it? We already have power and water going there. When is it going to open up?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that hon. Anywar and I visited Tumango health centre before it was constructed. I am glad that the health centre is now completed. Government will ensure that staff and drugs are available. 

I have already agreed with hon. Beatrice Anywar that this matter is going to be pursued by our sister Sarah Opendi, the Minister of State for Primary Health Care to ensure that these children suffering from nodding disease and who are to be treated in that health centre are properly treated as quickly as possible.

3.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I rise to pose a question on an issue that Government is very aware of. I would like to get a progress report so that it may comfort the people of West Budama South, Tororo and even the North in relation to the 1986/1987 Lakwena War. 

When is Government going to consider making ex-gratia payments to the families in the sub-counties of Paya, Nabiyoga, Nagongera, Yolwa, Mulanda, Kirewa, among others? The poverty in those areas is because most of them did not only lose animals but they lost heads of families as well. 

A place like Yolwa, a matter that I brought here, lacks even a secondary school. Why can’t Government wipe their tears with a seed secondary school?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as you all know, Government is committed to ensure that the lives of Ugandans who were affected by conflicts are brought to normalcy and that is why there is a ministry specifically responsible for this.

Secondly and with regard to a secondary school, again the policy of Government is to ensure that every sub-county has a government secondary school. We are fully aware that because of lack of resources, this is not the case in all the sub-counties. However, gradually the number of sub-counties being given secondary schools is increasing and I believe that the sub-counties concerned will be beneficiaries as well and this is as a matter of policy.

3.55
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, you may be aware that Government is constructing the Masaka-Kampala Road, which is about to be completed although with a lot of patches. Ninety eight percent of the road is being patched before it is commissioned. 

The question I want to ask is, there is a section along Kampala-Masaka Road at a place called Maya and I know you use that road. It is about 700 metres wide. That section has remained unattended to. Could it be that the government has failed to compensate those people owning land around that place? Can you tell the nation? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as colleagues may know, there have been some challenges on compensation especially in road construction on a number of roads. Government is fully aware of this and Government is endeavouring, through the Ministry of Lands, to ensure that that problem is sorted out. 
I do not have the specific details of the particular area that you are talking about. Nevertheless, I will interact with the minister responsible and urge him to ensure that there is expeditious action on the subject matter.

I see the honourable member pointing to where the minister is. It would have been very beneficial if the honourable member had taken advantage and linked up with the minister before, because the ministry is better informed than me on the matter. (Laughter)

3.57
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Mr Prime Minister, the Uganda Prison in Mutuvu was badly affected by the first rains of this year as the roof was blown off and the inmates are in horrible condition with the roof that keeps on leaking. Necessary steps were undertaken by the O/C and copies were given to the relevant offices in the ministries of Internal Affairs and Disaster Preparedness. 

Secondly, the Uganda Police Station in Busulani was also affected and is in bad shape. What steps has Government taken to rescue the situation and when is Government going to reconstruct that prison and the Busulani police post?

DR RUGUNDA: The honourable minister responsible for Internal Affairs has assured me that plans are advanced to reconstruct the area affected. I have full confidence in the honourable minister, take his word. You know how he has performed over the ID project. I am sure he is going to also act on this decisively.

3.59
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, honourable Prime Minister. Are you aware that Uganda has signed an international treaty called the Arms Trade Treaty and that this treaty will come into force on 24th of this month but that Uganda has not yet domesticated it and yet Uganda is holding the presidency of the UN General Assembly? When do you intend to domesticate this to avoid international embarrassment? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Uganda is committed to its international obligations. Operationalisation of some of these obligations sometimes takes a little longer because of processes and bureaucracy. 

Nevertheless, I agree with hon. Amongi that there is an added obligation because of Uganda’s presidency of the United Nations General Assembly. This is a useful reminder and I believe that Uganda will swiftly move to ensure that we are not caught on the wrong foot.

4.00
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, 20 months ago a UPDF General, David Sejusa deserted the army. He went into exile and declared war on the Government of Uganda. During the same period, media houses were closed, some people were arrested and the General lost his seat in this honourable House. 

While he was away, Government officials including the UPDF alleged crimes against him. Now that he is back, is Government considering arraigning him before courts of law to answer these alleged crimes?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I want to believe that hon. Nambooze is as happy as many of us that our brother Gen. Tinyefuza is back home. Therefore, Government will do what it has always done, through the process of reconciliation, to make sure that the brother is back home and properly settled. 

Secondly, the case of Gen. Tinyefuza should be an indicator to anyone else who may be living outside Uganda on the pretext of security and other political issues to know that Uganda is our home and that Ugandans are always welcome to come back to their home and not to be refugees.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable members, there are those who benefited from this opportunity the other week and I know you. I know your faces.

4.03
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pose a question to the Prime Minister. 

Mr Prime Minister, I would like to ask if you are aware that the road Masaka to Bukakata, for which funding had been approved in this House on a loan from the Arab Bank I believe, has never been worked on. It is coming to over two years. 

Some roads of less importance to the business of this country and also to tourism have been worked on for instance, the Katosi road and yet the Bukakata-Masaka road has not been worked on.

I was dismayed to see that briefs are coming to Parliament to borrow money to work on other roads and yet money already borrowed is not being utilised. I believe Government is paying interest on this loan. 

Could the Prime Minister please inform the House and also my constituency and my district, which is very much concerned? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Mubanda is assured that the road is going to be done. There was a small hitch and the consortiums of banks that are financing that road are due to give a no-objection. The Ministry of Works and Government of Uganda are waiting for that no-objection from the bank. 

4.05
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I want to ask the Prime Minister just one question, which will have four parts. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think you are abusing question time. Just go to the point, one question. Other members want to ask questions, please.

MR WAIRA: Rt hon. Prime Minister, one year ago, two Ugandans were executed in China and over 100 are still on death sentence and life imprisonment for drug trafficking, lack of working permits, among others.

There is information that the Government of Uganda was to sign a prisoners’ exchange agreement. How far has Government reached? How can that agreement be sustained? How many Chinese do we have in Uganda and how many have work permits? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised a very serious matter where our compatriots for different accusations and crimes have had harsh punishments meted against them, including execution. This is a very regrettable development.

It is true that Government of Uganda has been in close contact with Government of China so that our compatriots who are currently in jail or on trial in China can come to Uganda. This is so that they are handled within Ugandan prisons and also under Ugandan laws.

I do not have the specific information on how far this development has gone but in principle, there has been an agreement on the exchange of prisoners. Due to the excellent relations between the two countries, I expect that the remaining steps to ensure that our compatriots are brought back to be imprisoned here or otherwise will work out. 

This House is entitled to get progress reports on this important matter and Government will make more information available to the honourable House as Parliament resumes early in the year. 

4.08
MS NAOME	KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to tell us when the 64 remaining districts that were supposed to get bicycles for LCs and did not get them, are likely to get them including Ntungamo District. I want assurance from the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as I was sitting, hon. Nambooze reminded me that there was a component of the question I had not responded to on China with regard to how many Chinese are here and how many are issued with work permits. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is following up this matter very well. There are many Chinese who are here and many of them have done very good work in terms of investments, business and many other things that help our country. Some of them however, we suspect may be having questionable immigration status but this matter will be handled by the responsible ministry. With regard to the numbers, one would need to ascertain this matter with the responsible ministry. 

With regard to the bicycles for LCs, all districts of Uganda will get the bicycles for LCs in recognition of the great work being done by the LC leaders. I do not have the specific details of the procurement process but I am certain of the principle and the fact that this will be fulfilled.

4.11
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Uganda’s foreign policy, may I know from the Rt hon. Prime Minister, what plans are under way to upgrade some of our strategic missions and embassies from their current status? For instance, the current grade of our mission in Beijing is grade B and you know the associated benefits of upgrading from B to A. 

This is one of the most strategic missions we have so what plan is under way to ensure that this mission is upgraded from B to A? 

Two, is the Rt hon. Prime Minister aware that Uganda’s foreign service staff receive one of the least in terms of education fund in the entire continent of Africa and what plans are underway to ensure that we enhance whatever benefits they receive for educating their four children per year from Government to a reasonable amount such that they can also compete with their colleagues from other countries? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that missions are classified on the basis of the volume of work that they engage in. I do share the view of the honourable member that certain strategic missions like Beijing and others fall in the category where there is heavy amount of work and therefore, where there may be need for increased staff and other related facilities. 

With regard to foreign service officials, it is true that Ugandan foreign service officers are doing excellent work amidst difficult conditions. However, coupled with their patriotism and innovativeness, they have been able to represent Uganda very well. I know that Government is already improving conditions, especially for their children and doing whatever it can to ensure that families are kept together, which was not the case some time before. 

So in conclusion, Government is very mindful of the conditions of Foreign Service workers and we give them as much support as possible.

4.14
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to inquire from the Rt hon. Prime Minister about the status of the Capital Youth Venture Fund. When I move across the country, the one question we are being asked is, what is the official status of that fund? 

You may recall that Government of Uganda allocated Shs 12.5 billion but ever since allocation ceased to that budget line, no one can tell you where that money is. It is neither here nor there so we are wondering, what is the official status and what is the way forward? 

Secondly, the issue of Hepatitis B was raised in this House and the response from the Ministry of Health in regard to that issue was to vaccinate the health workers in that part of the region in eastern Uganda. However, we continue to see a lot of deaths arising out of Hepatitis B and people keep asking, what is Government doing, has Government left us to die as a result of this? 

As politicians, we keep greeting and in Teso, it is a habit that you must shake hands as a way of acquaintance and therefore, we are at risk as a people in that region. What is Government doing in that direction? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Members, please ask one question because if you raise so many subjects, other Members will not have an opportunity.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not have specific information on the Capital Youth Venture Fund and the way it is. I know that the government has done everything possible to mobilise resources and to inject these resources to support the youth so that they can acquire both skills and also acquire employment or employ themselves. 

But again, this is a major subject matter where a substantive statement should be made to alert and inform honourable members so that in turn, the honourable members will know what is happening to youth in their respective constituencies, districts and the country.

On Hepatitis B, the concern is well taken. We did discuss it recently and it has come to this House many times. As I had occasion to say, Hepatitis B is increasing and becoming a serious problem. It is a disease that essentially spreads in a similar manner as HIV/AIDS. The most important weapon against Hepatitis B is preventive measures to ensure that the spread is cut. 

The last comment is that vaccines are available but they are expensive for the general population. Government has therefore devoted the money available to procure vaccines for health workers. For complete vaccination of a health worker, you need three shots. A number of health workers, especially in relatively endemic areas like Teso and West Nile have been given first or second doses of the vaccine. The aim is to ensure that all the three vaccines are received by health workers and Government is very committed to accomplishing this.

4.18
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Come mid next year, the Millennium Development Goals that were set in 2000 will be coming to an end. Uganda is placed in such an advantageous position because its own is the President of the General Assembly and it will be a major subject to be discussed and agreed upon during his reign. 

To date, Government has not come to Parliament with a set of proposals and recommendations so that we give an input to the next World development agenda. What does Government have to tell us and when shall we get involved as Parliament?

Finally, Isingiro is the most water stressed district in Uganda. What programme does Government have to rescue and give relief to the people of Isingiro as a whole as far as water is concerned? We have cried our lungs out over and over again.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised a very important point on the post Millennium Development Goal target and what Uganda is doing about it. Actually globally, the whole World is now focussing on what happens after 2015. Are we going to have a repeat of the Millennium Development Goals or are we going to build on the experience that has been acquired so that we can refine and even have additional goals? 

It is true Uganda is playing a centre stage because of the fact that one of us, hon. Sam Kutesa, is the President of the General Assembly and these will have to go through the General Assembly. Uganda has used every forum possible to make contributions on the new shape of the goals for development and I believe that the relevant ministry will be coming to this House to get the views of Uganda endorsed so that Uganda can stand on strong grounds when we are negotiating with other countries. So this House cannot be left out in shaping the destiny of Uganda and the destiny of the World.

Isingiro water stress; definitely, I know that the ministry responsible is doing everything possible to ensure that the waters available in Isingiro are optimally utilised for the benefit of the people and that an appropriate response for water stressed areas, not only Isingiro but other water stressed areas in the country, is worked out. 

Again, it would be right that the minister responsible for Water could, at an appropriate time, reassure this august House and the country on what Government is doing to meet the challenge of water stressed areas in the country. So Government is doing everything it can to handle Isingiro and other water stressed areas.

4.22
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question goes to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. What is the government’s plan regarding establishment of technical schools given that in Kigulu North in Iganga District, a contractor was tasked to build Kigulu Technical School in 1994 and abandoned it? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is sad that 20 years ago, a contractor was given a contract to build a technical school in Kigulu and nothing has been done. I think this is an urgent matter and I propose that the honourable member of Parliament urgently takes it up with the ministry and I am also going to be involved in this to see why a contractor should abandon work and 20 years later, the matter has not been rectified.

Secondly, technical education is at the core of the development plans of this country because it is these skills that will help transform Uganda and make it a developed country. Therefore, technical education is at the heart of BTVET and as you know, Government has passed the necessary policy instruments and the law has been passed by this House showing clearly that the country, the government and the House are together to promote and ensure that technical education is at the core of our planning programmes.

4.25
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Friday, we got information that a number of Pokot from Kenya had crossed with several guns into Uganda. On Saturday, six of them attacked a village in Acegeretolim in my constituency and made away with about 16 head of cattle. Four of them were rounded up and entered the ambush of the UPDF. This morning, we have got reports of more armed Pokot entering into Uganda particularly in my constituency. 

Three weeks ago, Turkana attacked Nakwanga village in Tapac Sub-county and this is becoming increasingly common and causing fears. What is the government of Uganda doing to contain the armed Turkana and Pokot pastoralists who are seemingly entering the country with their guns?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as a result of the very successful disarmament programme that Uganda has carried out in Karamoja, this has attracted some bad elements in the neighbouring countries to try and take advantage. Fortunately, as you heard from the honourable member, UPDF is there to defend the people. 

I know that our brothers in Kenya are also doing whatever they can to contain this situation. Therefore, a combination of improved defence of our people through our security forces; Police and the Army and also our neighbours in Kenya carrying out a disarmament programme on their side, will help reinforce peace both in Karamoja and in the region.

4.27
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Acholi War Death Claimants Association is a legally registered association standing to represent a good number of claimants who lost their property during the war. They dragged Government to court and Government pleaded that the matter should be settled outside court. To that effect, the government started doing some work but later, they stopped the matter and requested that a full verification should be done. 

In 2011, many of us were involved in verifying the claimants but unfortunately, until today the report is still stuck in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. My question is: when shall that report be made public?

Secondly, for your own information, hon. Rugunda, many people are saying the government does not seem to be committed to what they promised to do and they are now making it part of their campaign. Can you save the situation? I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of claims in the war ravaged areas, especially Northern Uganda, is a very complicated issue in the sense that ascertaining the losses of individual families has its own challenges. 

I think the point of Government sorting this matter out of court is a very correct way and by the way, Government started making good on this situation under the restocking programme where a substantial number of our compatriots in the affected areas have already benefited from quite a number of things including cows. 

With regard to the verification report, if the report is accurate, I see no problem as to why it should not be available. More importantly, we should focus on sorting out this matter so that the people can stop hanging and waiting for Government to do x and y but instead direct their efforts on developing their areas, rehabilitating themselves and leading normal lives.

4.31
MS SARAH TEMULANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. People have been encroaching on road reserves and they have always been forced to vacate the land. Unfortunately, when they leave, they go and settle in the areas around the lakes. My question is, since we have road reserves, don’t lake or river reserves exist?

Secondly, why do we allow people to go and settle there yet it will be hard for the government to ask them to leave that land? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has raised a valid point. I think Government and the country need to better manage road reserves, lake reserves and river reserves. Because of improper management in some cases, we have caused a lot of erosion and other complications. So, the point is well taken and the government is invigorating itself in dealing with this matter so that the reserves and the environment are better protected and the future of Uganda therefore is better protected.

4.32
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a bridge that connects Kween and Bukwo called Siit Bridge. This bridge is collapsing any time and Madam Speaker, you know this because you have crossed that bridge. It has become a threat and it becomes worse when it is raining.

Madam Speaker, when we complained we were told it would be handled when Kapchorwa-Suam road is worked on. When is Government coming to this august House with a proposal to borrow money for this road? Where is the problem and how long are we going to sing this song of the Kapchorwa-Suam road? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the sister’s concerns about the bridge are very well taken. I have specific information from the minister responsible that the bridge is going to be done as part of working on the road and the minister has already identified the money, which is going to be coming from the ADB. So as the loan processes are completed, you will have the bridge and road done. 

4.34
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one question but it has part (a) and (b). In part (a), I wanted to ask the honourable Prime Minister my question -

THE SPEAKER: Please, you are wasting time. Just ask your question. All the questions are for the Prime Minister, just ask.

MR MBOGO: Last year, we passed a loan for the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kamonkoli road but there is nothing on the ground. When is the work beginning on that road?

Secondly, last year the then honourable Prime Minister promised that the capitation grant for primary schools under UPE and secondary schools under USE was going to be given 100 percent but up to now, some schools are getting less than 50 percent. What is the ministry doing about that? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleague, the loan for the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kamonkoli road was passed by this House and we are now in the process of procurement. As soon as the procurement process is complete, obviously you will see people on the road doing some work. As to the specific details, you can pick them from the Minister responsible for Works.

With regard to UPE capitation grant and other - yes, there has been concern about payment of capitation grants on both the amount and the timing. What I am certain about is that Government has decided that capitation grants will be paid in time instead of delaying until the latter parts of the term and the like. 

Secondly, I expect grants to be paid 100 percent. If they are not then the Minister responsible for Education will have to explain both to the House and the country in a transparent manner as to why there is a reduction in the capitation grant. I think the minister should be spared and she will come in her own time to give a full account on this matter. 

So, Madam Speaker, capitation grants should be paid both in time and the full amount.

4.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, thank you very much for answering the questions. I will not complain this time because I already raised my issues last time. 

However, on the question of the youth fund, I think this is a very emotive subject. All MPs are bothered by the youth fund. We do not know what has happened to it and we definitely need a report from the minister on the youth fund; how far it has gone and where it has gone so that we can answer the questions in the villages.

On technical colleges, yesterday I visited a technical college in Lwengo and they are doing a good thing. I think it is among the nine technical colleges Government is building and it is well done. However, I noticed something very strange in Lwengo, that this good technical college has one dormitory. This means it is either going to be a boys’ college or a girls’ college.

Another strange thing is that there is a good kitchen but no dining hall. The contractor told me that the design does not include a second dormitory nor does it include a dining hall. This good idea is being spoilt somewhere. Maybe the Minister of Education or the Prime Minister could explain.

The previous day, I visited Isingiro and the Millennium Village. When I was on the Committee of National Economy, our committee visited the Millennium Village and we recommended that the Millennium Village was a great idea and that it should be replicated in every constituency. We also approved money for the one in Ruhiira. However, two years down the road, they have not received that money. 

This good idea is again being undermined by Government when they do not remit money in good time. It is a good idea as they are helping people in the mountains. Actually, this is in hon. Alex’s constituency. 

This was a mountainous place without water. They just had a pond, which they were sharing with animals. They have since constructed a good water source there and the peasants are paying for it. It is piped water using gravity. It is a good idea, which I think the government should encourage and as we said and should be replicated.

Lastly Rt hon. Prime Minister, the President was recently quoted, I think when he was in Kenya, saying that our country is going to pull out of the ICC. We would like to know the position on this. This Parliament ratified the protocol of ICC and we would like to know whether the President has the mandate to withdraw or whether he is coming back here so that the decision is taken by us. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, either last night or the other night, I was happy to see the Leader of the Opposition on TV in Isingiro with the people, seeing what development challenges or progress is taking place. I thought that was a good thing. I want to commend the Leader of the Opposition and his team. 

I just wondered whether it was usual for the Leader of the Opposition and some members of the Opposition to go alone or whether it would have been a combined team. But I suppose I will discuss this matter with the honourable Leader of the Opposition but it was good being with the people.

Secondly, on the question of the youth fund, I completely agree with the Leader of the Opposition. Regarding the problems that he has pointed out; dormitories and the kitchen without a dining hall and other related issues, if these have been properly planned government structures, then definitely there is need to address this matter so that corrective measures can be taken.

The last comment the Leader of the Opposition raised was about the ICC. It is true that Uganda has been a strong supporter of the ICC. In fact interestingly, as you perhaps may know, the first case ever recorded in ICC was that of Uganda; where Uganda Government took Joseph Kony and Lord’s Resistance Army to the ICC. Subsequently, we have cooperated closely with the ICC. The ICC has held some of their major conferences in Uganda, in fact at Munyonyo. 

However, Uganda, like many African countries, has been very concerned about the way African leaders have been handled - [HON. Ssemujju Nganda: “Have overstayed in power”]- Madam Speaker, I am being told how African leaders - I did not realise that, that was one of the mandates of the ICC, unless my brothers in the Opposition want to amend the ICC Statute, which will require quite a bit of work to do. 

To cut the long story short, what caused big stresses recently was the way the ICC was handling a case involving the leadership of Kenya. Many African leaders, including from Uganda, believe that this is a matter that needed to be internally handled by the Kenyan leaders because they knew the problems and they could more reasonably and more ably deal with this matter.

I am very happy that President Uhuru Kenyatta, who is not one of the leaders that have stayed long in power for my colleagues to - I am glad that his case has been dropped. I am also hoping that other cases that are still pending will be –(Interjections)- Uganda has handled the case of Kony so there is really no problem. I am referring to those involving some of the leaders. 

President Museveni is quoted in the media to have made some comments about ICC. This matter has not yet come to the organs of Government. When the matter comes to the organs of Government, the matter will be discussed and Government will take a position on the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used more than the necessary 45 minutes but I want to appeal to honourable members to ask one question. You know, we take so much time and take opportunities for everyone. 

Honourable members, about the technical institutes, I thought that the case of Nawanyago in Kamuli was an isolated case. They had built a facility with no girls’ dormitory so I told them, I will not allow you to open this institution until there is a girls’ dormitory and I thought it was a joke. 

So if now there is a case where there is a kitchen and no dining hall and one dormitory either for boys or girls, I think we need to instruct our Committee on Education to check all these facilities. We may find that they are designed in the same way. In the 21st century, how can you have a tertiary institution with only one dormitory for boys?

So Chairperson of the Education Committee, please take – Yes, minister and I hope you are going to build my dormitory soon.

MR BATARINGAYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I want to inform you that we are building 25 technical institutes in the country under different programmes. The one we are mentioning and the one the Leader of the Opposition mentioned in Lwengo, the one in Kamuli, Amuria - they are actually nine – are under OPEC. That is phase one. The second phase, which is also going to start next year, has an extra dormitory. That is the design that was made -(Interjections)– I have said that we are building in two phases. The first phase has what you saw. There is an additional phase for an extra dormitory and also the other things which are missing.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, does that mean we postpone the admission of either boys or girls until we get the second phase. Who is going to use the dormitories now? Is it boys or the girls or both?

MR KAMANDA: You raised the matter, Madam Speaker, when we were with you in Kamuli and we said that very soon, the other phase - This money was approved by Parliament here; you are the very people who approved this loan.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I respect the minister very much and he is even my good friend. However, you and the Leader of the Opposition have raised a pertinent issue but instead of answering what you have asked about, that is, the gender sensitivity in these institutions, he is continuing to tell us how they are getting us more technical institutions. This is despite the fact that our interest is about catering for both sexes. 

Is the honourable minister, my good friend with whom we attend church together, - (Laughter) – in order to continue failing to give an appropriate answer to your inquiry about the dormitories for both males and females? Technical institutes, wherever they are, always do not have only a single sex.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want to know what we are going to do with which sex. Should we take girls and leave out the boys, should we take boys and leave out the girls or mix them up?

MR KAMANDA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I want to assure you that those technical institutes have a dormitory for boys and one for girls. I was just explaining that in the constructions that you saw, we started with the first dormitory and the other one will be built next year in all the nine technical institutes. That is when the second phase will start. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think there is still an outcry.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek your indulgence and that of the House. 

Last month, selected members from the accountability committees had an interface with the budgeting monitoring section of the Ministry of Finance. The revelations from that section were very startling. In Mityana and Mubende, for example, there were contractual obligations entered with contractors to construct houses for health workers. However, when it came to implementation, instead of the six houses, you would find the contractor renovating one house. 

There is a lot of contradiction between what Government procures to do here on the Floor and what exactly is taking place on the ground. I therefore wish to interest Members of Parliament to specifically pick interest in the budget monitoring reports which have been published. They expose a lot of contradictions. 

Unless we follow up - Like you are directing, Madam Speaker, the Committee on Education should pick specific interest, visit and compile a report. You may find that there is a lot of connivance between the contractors and the supervisors, beyond what they are required to do. Madam Speaker, that is what I wanted to say.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Mine is a point of procedure. We have been raising a lot of issues and we have continued and will continue raising them, especially during the Prime Minister’s Question time. 

Madam Speaker, some of the answers that the Prime Minister gives here are answers of commitment, therefore committing Government. Would it not be procedurally right that for every commitment the Prime Minister makes, we take record and there must be an audit because some of these questions will not be repeated? In the next session, we should first take the audit of what the Government committed to and also the Committee on Government Assurances should interest itself in these issues. This is because some of these are pertinent issues and they should not really be lost in just mere question and answer sessions. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I trust the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances has been noting the commitments.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whatever the Executive says here, even when they breathe and it constitutes a government assurance by the definition of a government assurance globally, we capture each and everything. We even go ahead to indicate the page of the Hansard and the date on when such a commitment was made. 

I think what is more important to us, Madam Speaker, is that as the committee gets itself to invite these ministers to come and appear before them, they should prepare themselves with appropriate responses. Some of these commitments that have been made by Government have lasted for three or five years. 

In terms of money, the value of the commitments that Government has made to the people of this country is in trillions. We can only say that the Government of Uganda would go without a budget for two or three financial years to implement some of those commitments. (Laughter) They are there in large amount. 

We therefore need, as a country, to regulate and be responsible enough not to just make pledges for the sake of getting yourself out of a tight corner or just because you want people to clap for you. Be serious when you are making these commitments because they are really embarrassing us. 

Last week, the Committee of Government Assurances went to the field; we were in Adjumani, Yumbe and Arua. If you look at the returns and the documents that the district leadership gave us, it is so amazing in terms of amounts of money. I do not think it is polite for us as leaders to just continue making these pledges for the sake without even looking back to see whether we have fulfilled them or not. 

In spite of all that, we are handling the commitments. All we want is for the ministers to come forward with their technocrats and explain to the country, through this committee, what plans they have in terms of fulfilling these commitments. If there are challenges, let them be open to us so that we, as a committee, can make appropriate recommendations to this House to see how best we can address them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MS KIIZA WINIFRED (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had an issue with the technical institutes. The minister is saying the next dormitories will be constructed next year. I do not know the programme that Government has for the facilities in these technical institutes; when do they think these facilities will be ready for public use? 

I image if we are to embark on the second phase next year, then that means these facilities will be ready for use maybe in 2016 and yet society out there is waiting seriously to use these technical institutes. For how long should we wait to use these facilities, honourable minister?

MR KAMANDA: First of all, these technical institutes are based in specific districts and we have recruited the instructors first, who are undergoing courses in Abilonino and Jinja. Some of these constructions delayed; as I told you, they are 25 but under different programmes, for example, OPEC, the Saudi Fund, Kuwait, BADEA and the Islamic Development Bank. 

I will give examples; we expect construction in Bukedea and Adjumani to be completed in March. Once they are completed and the instructors are there, then we shall have to open and allow students to use them. (Interruption) 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always find it a little bit painful to rise on points of order, and I am at pains to call my brother to order at this moment. 

The minister is saying that the instructors are undergoing training. He also says that they envisage opening by March next year and yet we are sure that the second dormitory and the dining hall are not yet in place. Is the minister therefore in order to lie to the House that the technical institutes will be ready for use by March next year?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is important for you to bring us a report on the state of readiness of all those nine, including the facilities available, so that we can discuss whether they are going to start or not. It is very important, minister, because we are talking about skilling Uganda but if one sex cannot be admitted, then I do not know how you will be skilling half the citizens and the other half are not skilled. So, can we have an update when we resume in the Third Meeting? 

MR KAMANDA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, since we are coming back, according to the programme which you are going to give us, we shall be ready to give the update when Parliament reopens.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I have also asked our Committee of Education to take a week off during recess and run around all those facilities and give us a report.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, indeed I am scared because people are talking of reporting about the status but no single step, including delivery of a brick to the site, has taken place in Iganga and yet we are talking of opening. By the time we approved these loans, there was a ray of hope given that work was going to start. Two years down the road, there is nothing taking place. 

When we hear talk about the opening of phases when nothing is on ground, people will keep wondering what is happening. Koreans came on ground and they excited people and we thought they were going to start. A year down the road, there is nothing on ground and yet we are talking of opening.

As we talk about commissioning and adding other facilities, what – (Interjections) - Honourable minister, can you give me the benefit of doubt. Madam Speaker, I was asking the minister to kindly be courteous and explain to the people of Iganga, the people of Kiguli South and Iganga Technical Institute in particular what has happened to the resources that were supposed to construct this facility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have asked the minister to give an update on all those nine in the first sitting of the Third Meeting - tomorrow we already have some work - and then, of course, we shall also have a report from our committee so that we can compare it with what the minister is saying. Let us go to the next item.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER 

QUESTION 56/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

5.02
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): “i) Would the Minister explain to the House the extent of the disease burden of Tuberculosis (TB) in Uganda?
ii) What specific efforts has the Ministry made in response to the stock outs and shortages of TB drugs in Health facilities?

iii) What strategies has Government developed to step up community awareness and the capacity of health workers for effective treatment/management of the disease?”

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, if you could just use seven minutes and then three minutes will be used supplementary questions.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mrs Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is one of the 22 high-burdened TB countries in the world according to a WHO report. The 22 high-burdened countries in the world contribute over 80 per cent of the global TB cases. 

Currently, we do not know the actual burden of TB in the country and this has been a challenge. However, according to WHO reports, it is estimated that for every 100,000 people, we have 166 new infections. When you translate this, it implies that we have about 60,000 new TB patients each year of which 5,000 die annually despite that fact the TB is treatable.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is also a very high TB/HIV co-infected country, with 49 per cent of the TB patients being HIV positive. We also currently have the challenge of the multi-drug resistant TB which is actually on the rise. There are currently 426 patients with multi-drug resistant TB on treatment. However, the national drug resistant TB survey estimates that at the current rate of reporting, we might have up to 1000 cases annually. 

The most unfortunate bit, Madam Speaker, is that for every case of the multi-drug resistant TB, Government needs approximately Shs 10 million for treatment. I have a detailed statement or report which I sent to Member’s iPads. So, I am just speaking on the key issues that I feel Members should know. 

So in regard to issue two - the efforts in place to address TB medicines and supplies which are out of stock - I want to report that we do not have stock outs of the TB drugs. The ministry streamlined and integrated the management and distribution of the TB medicines and supplies under the National Medical Stores. With support from the Global Fund, we have been providing all drugs both for the MDR TB and the other TB to the health facilities countrywide.

To facilitate this process, Madam Speaker, the national TB programme liaises with the pharmacy division to timely quantify the medicine needs for urgent procurement. This is documented in a procurement and supply management plan. I want to reaffirm what I indicated before; for the last two and half years, we have not had any stock-out of TB medicines. The ministry has built capacity for MDR TB diagnosis and we have treatment sites, actually 14 in number. The details are in that report which you all have.

To prevent the development of TB, we have continued to ensure the availability of the BCG vaccine at birth. It is important for us to ensure that the children are actually delivered at a health facility so that they can benefit from this free vaccine.

Madam Speaker, you recall that when hon. Ondoa was still Minister of Health, she did present here one of the awards that we received. Uganda National TB Reference Laboratory received the distinguished World Health Organisation supra-national reference laboratory certification. She presented that award here.

Madam Speaker, on a positive note, despite being one of the high-burden countries, we are noted among the seven countries that have achieved the TB related MDG goals on TB prevalence, incidence and mortality. Recall that in the year 1990, out of every 100,000 people we had 496 being infected. Currently, the figure has dropped to 166. By 1990, we also had 90 people losing their lives out of every 100,000. This has also now dropped to 15. 

The third issue was: what strategies do we have in place to step up community awareness? We have been working closely with the civil society organisations, CBOs and NGOs which are already involved in the fight against HIV/AIDS or TB for efficient utilisation of the resources and improved access. 

We have been training members of the civil society organisations and CBOs in TB control and supporting activities of these organisations. 

We have been commemorating the World TB Day every 24th of March. We use this day to create awareness amongst the population. This year, we commemorated this day in Iganga District. 

We have conducted a number of outreaches and we have also trained all the district TB and leprosy focal persons, ward managers and health workers to be able to sensitise clients as they visit the health facilities.

The last issue, Madam Speaker, was about the capacity of health workers to manage this challenge. The national TB programme has been conducting training of the health workers countrywide in TB case management, diagnosis and prevention. We have currently over 1000 trained health workers. 

Mentoring and support supervision is also being done on a quarterly basis by the national TB control programme in conjunction with partners. 

The Ministry of Health and its partners procured and deployed over 60 GeneXpert machines in 34 districts and trained over 100 laboratory technicians to diagnose the multi-drug resistant TB.  You will note that this is not sufficient because we have 112 districts and currently, these GeneXpert machines are only in 34 districts. 

The country also introduced Isonaizid preventive treatment, which is used among the most-at-risk groups, to prevent the progression from TB infection to TB disease. We are going to train health workers in January 2015 and orient them in this new initiative.

Madam Speaker, I just want inform Members of Parliament that TB is curable and treatment is available at all the health facilities and it is free. I only want to appeal to you, as you go to your constituencies, please inform the population that any person who is coughing beyond two weeks must go to the health facilities for a check-up. Thank you. 

5.11
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for the answers that she has given, and especially for trying the INH intervention, because it has been lacking, in order to prevent those who have the predisposition to develop TB, especially HIV positive patients. 

Madam Speaker, certainly, as the minister has mentioned, we are a high-burden country and it will depend on proper diagnosis at health centre level to confirm TB and put people on treatment. However, the minister knows very well that even in those health facilities, many of the health workers are lacking. What specific intervention are you taking to ensure task shifting so that even other cadres can take his up? This is because you will not find doctors or even clinical officers in many of the health centres III. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us get a final response from the minister. This is not for debate, honourable members. Minister, answer very briefly in half a minute. 

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I did indicate that we have trained over 1,000 health workers and these are spread across the various health facilities in the country. The training is continuous, so it is not going to end now.

Madam Speaker, we believe that we should promote prevention rather than look at the treatment. As I did indicate earlier, I want to appeal to colleagues, Members of Parliament, to please complement our efforts as Ministry of Health to spread the message so that we can stop the spread of TB in this country. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECRUITMENT, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (KCCA) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Fr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, the Minister for the Presidency, who is also in-charge of KCCA, got an engagement just late this afternoon and asked me to request you to allow him present this response tomorrow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us go to the next statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SALE OF EXISTING IVORY STOCKS 
AND THE PROGRESS OF INVESTIGATIONS ON THE LOSS OF IVORY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just use five minutes because we had a general debate on this issue.

5.14
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. First I want to correct the records; it is not the sale, because there has not been any sale, but it is the alleged theft of ivory from the stockpiles at UWA headquarters. 

Having said that, two weeks ago, I was here and I read a statement and I actually made two statements. I want to say, Madam Speaker, that since that time, there has not been much change in terms of progress. 

As I told this House, investigations had been initiated and there are three kinds of investigations. One was by the IGG, who has already embarked on investigations. She has not given me a progress report on where they are and I do not expect it because it was a directive from the President. 

The second investigation is by Ministry of Defence. I got communication that they have started investigations and they are proceeding well but I have not got further details. The third investigation is by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, by the Police. The IGP has communicated that they are investigating but their report has also not yet been availed to me. So as of now, I have no addition to what I supplied two weeks ago. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MOBUKU YOUTH INSTITUTE

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Gender, please use five minutes

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Rukia Isanga): Madam Speaker, I want to say that the report is not yet ready. It will be presented tomorrow. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SPREAD OF RABIES IN THE COUNTRY

5.16 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you. Madam Speaker, Members can access the statement on their iPads. 

I wish to state that rabies is a disease that affects all warm-blooded animals, including man. The main route of rabies transmission to humans is through bites or licking of open wounds by rabid dogs. Rabies is nearly always fatal when left untreated and most of the deaths occur in the absence of rabies Post-Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP). 

Although it is a vaccine preventable disease, rabies still poses a significant health problem in the country. The key challenge has been: who is in charge of the prevention and control of animal rabies? I want to inform the House that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is responsible for the prevention and control of animal rabies, which includes vaccination of dogs and cats and the control of stray dogs.

The Ministry of Health is mandated to ensure human health, including the prevention and control of rabies in humans. The Ministry of Health’s minimum healthcare package considers rabies as an important disease whose control is handled through community education and sensitisation and provision of rabies post exposure prophylaxis. This is done through the regular purchase of human rabies vaccine and hyper-immune sera - the biologics or the medicinal products. 

The procurement and distribution of these biologics to the national and regional referral hospitals, general hospitals as well as the lower health units is done through the National Medical Stores, and of course this process is well known. The vaccine is given free of charge at health facilities. 

However, Madam Speaker, we still lack adequate dog vaccination coverage. Currently, our coverage stands at 20 per cent, which is below the set standards by the World Health Organisation. The World Health Organisation recommends a coverage of 70 per cent and above for a country to be able to break the transmission of rabies. 

The demand for human PEP is much high than the supply by the National Medical Stores. This is because of the constraint of funding. Currently, there is just Shs 500 million that is budgeted for the purchase of the vaccine. This also affects the community sensitisation, advocacy, information communication and education through the media houses. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

5.20
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the issues that was raised by the Minister for Health is community education and sensitisation on the prevention of animal bites, particularly bites from rabid dogs. I do not think this was considerate, given that rabid dogs are usually stray dogs. To advise people to prevent themselves from being bitten by stray dogs, I do not know how you are going to effect that. 

I would rather the Ministry advises the public to kill stray dogs. Kill a stray dog and prevent people from being bitten by these stray rabid dogs and you will prevent a very big budget which is spent on buying rabies vaccines. That is from the Shadow Minister for Health.

5.21
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the minister for being well prepared. In fact, when we come to power, we might take you to our government because of your good arrangement. 

Madam Speaker, I want to find out from the minister when dogs are vaccinated in Uganda. When I was in primary school, they would take us for vaccination and there would be a section for animals and human beings. That was when I was in primary school; these days, it is not done. 

Secondly, you say the vaccine is there, but it cannot be accessed at our health centres. Whenever you go there and ask for this vaccine, they say that you have to go to Entebbe. What can be done about that?

Finally, as my minister has stated, the Animals Act is very clear; when you have a dog, you must keep it at home. However, when you go to Kampala streets, we have so many stray dogs moving around and even in our villages. It is unfortunate that the Minister for Kampala is not around. What is being done about this? It might not be your question, but we need something done about these stray dogs, otherwise we are spending a lot of money because these dogs are moving freely. Can we get vaccines in time, and you wait for my government to come.

5.22
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement she has just delivered to this House. 

The minister has said that the control of rabid dogs is supposed to be done by the Ministry of Agriculture and their part as the Ministry of Health is to control and provide treatment to human beings. I have always heard announcements from Kampala Capital City Authority, one of the authorities around, asking people to bring their cats and dogs for vaccination. I would propose, since we have local governments, that Government provides some funds in the budget for local governments to carry out the exercise the way it is done by Kampala Capital City Authority. I think we would do a good job if we did that.

Secondly, I recently visited Uganda National Medical Stores and I want to say that it is not true that we do not have the vaccines. The vaccines are available but when you go to the health centres, we do not have the facilities to store the vaccines. That is what is lacking. 

If we could provide facilities so that the vaccines are near the community, it would help fight this disease. When somebody is bitten by a rabid dog, sometimes they think that he or she needs to get the treatment from Entebbe, which is not true. Let us provide facilities at the health centres so that the vaccines can be stored and people are attended to.

5.25
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for her good report, but I have a very big concern with the post-exposure prophylaxis or the treatment that is offered. The drugs that treat rabies, in my opinion, are the rarest in this country. If you go to any health centre even in the towns where they have refrigerators and ask them about this drug, nobody seems to know. 

One time I called Entebbe and I was told the drugs were available but Mbarara District is not asking for them. I called Mbarara District and they said the drugs are not available at Entebbe, and people were dying. When a child starts barking like a dog, that means the end of the child, and when they call you as a Member of Parliament they expect you to have solutions. You cannot tell an ordinary patient to come to Entebbe and that is the belief they have. 

I would like to ask the minister to take interest in how and why this drug is not demanded for by the districts and yet people continue to die. One of the Members has said that these drugs exist in National Medical Stores. So, please honourable minister, take interest and find out why this drug is not available. People are dying and barking like dogs and the parents just watch. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.25
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As a physician, I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker, colleagues in this House, including the Prime Minister who happens to be a doctor like me, that the mortality rate of rabies is 100 per cent. I have rolled very many patients in Mbarara Hospital after being bitten by rabid dogs. 

Ideally, when you are bitten by a rabid dog, you should be given some prophylaxis and treatment. If you are not given the drug, you die. Right now, I have just come from a ward before I came to this Parliament. I was at Mbarara University Teaching Hospital and I was teaching internal medicine. I was the one handling the rabid people - (Laughter) – and I wish you could give me time and I tell you the truth. 

Madam Speaker, I think the statement by the Minister of Health was written by the technocrats in the Ministry of Health and she just read it. In reality, however, the anti-rabies serum is nowhere to be seen in very many Ugandan hospitals and yet people are being bitten by rabid dogs. 

There is also another problem; when some people are bitten by stray dogs which are not necessarily rabid, they end up killing themselves thinking that they have got rabies. When you are bitten by a rabid dog, you should watch if it will live for 21 days. If it does not die, it means that dog was not rabid. That is the rule of thumb. 

There is also the issue of the cost of the rabies sera. People are given three doses but it costs more than Shs 100,000. Madam Speaker, I can tell you, my voters in Mbarara Municipality and your voters in Kamuli cannot manage this cost. 

Now, I wanted to task the Minister of Health - this is what we want and let us not lie to our people - to bring back a statement indicating the health centres or regional hospitals that have anti-rabies sera that should be given for free. In Mbarara, you can only buy it from Ruhaaro Missionary Hospital, which is a private hospital; Mbarara Hospital does not have it.

Whenever people get problems, it is MPs to pay. I am happy with what hon. Emma Boona said because she is right; honestly, we are not telling lies. So, what I want us to do is to stop lying to the people of Uganda. Let us be honest and say we do not have enough anti-rabies sera in all hospitals in Uganda so that we can put them there. 

I am going to do you a favour; if the Minister brings a statement here, I will ring all the doctors who are friends of mine. (Member timed out.)

5.26
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was dismayed as I listened to the honourable minister tell us about the lack of funds for such an important issue. Really, it is not correct because when we -(Interruption) 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, hon. Kagwera. I would like to inform you that the minister did not say there was lack of funds; she said there was Shs 500 million put aside for that particular programme. Maybe you were concentrating on the paper.

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: According to my interpretation, when we do not have drugs in the health centres, that is what I would take. Otherwise, there is no other explanation you can give. 

I was here the day this issue was presented and I would like to call upon the Prime Minister to organise the ministries. The two ministries did not know what to do. The Minister for Agriculture said clearly that the control of rabies is not under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I think the minister can bear witness. It was stated here. 

Therefore, at this point when you see a minister who does not know their responsibility – Actually, it was a tug of war because he said, “No, this is not our mandate.” I think this is why the honourable minister started by clarifying this. So, it is very shameful for a minister not to know what he or she is supposed to do.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is about enforcement. To fail to control the stray dogs as a country is not proper. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to be organised. Also, when they take the dogs for vaccination, it is just like they are calling people casually. Listen to the veterinary officers – “people, you are called upon to bring your dogs” and when they do not take the dogs, no action is taken. Really, we lack seriousness.

Madam Speaker, through you I call upon the Prime Minister to put his foot down and see that we organise these things. Otherwise -(Member timed out) 

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for their questions and advice that they have given. 

The first issue that I want to respond to was brought up by Dr Lulume. He said that we should kill the dogs. It is the responsibility of MAAIF under local government to routinely vaccinate the dogs and cats to control the diseases. For as long as they do not do this, we shall still have this challenge – (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Honourable minister, I scarcely rise on point of order. However, last week, a similar issue arose on the Floor of this Parliament and the Minister of Agriculture informed this House that the Ministry of Agriculture is not responsible for those animals like the dogs. He said that for them they are responsible for livestock and such kinds of animals. 

So, is it in order now for the Minister of Health to come up and push the responsibility to Ministry of Agriculture when the minister clearly stated on the Floor of this Parliament that they are not responsible for canines and such animals? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I can only re-state what hon. Kagwera has said, that you need to give the country guidance on who is to do what. She said it is not her duty and agriculture says it is not theirs. So, who owns the dogs; who is responsible for the dogs?

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, as colleagues have said, rabies is a very serious and deadly disease. It is true that the two ministries, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, are intimately mandated to handle this matter. 

As the Prime Minister’s Office is responsible for coordinating government programmes and implementation, I am going to call a meeting in the course of next week where the two ministers or ministries will together discuss this matter and agree on a common strategy of making sure that we confront and combat this deadly disease.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that is solved, but we will have to work also with local government and internal affairs because the shooting of dogs should also be adopted. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I do not have time for information; I have very limited time. On the drugs at the health facilities, I want to inform Members that we have a challenge; the districts are the ones that prioritise what drugs they want and the National Medical Stores sends to them. I have received various calls from colleagues sometimes when their constituents have this challenge. When we call the DHO, we then discover that those are isolated cases, they do not have many of those cases, and therefore they send people to Entebbe, which is a bit of a challenge. So, it is not a challenge of storage; we have enough facilities to store these drugs. The challenge is with the DHOs who prioritise the drugs they need. 

Hon. Kiyingi proposed that we follow the KCCA way of handling this. As I indicated, the district local governments are also responsible for this. So, we shall meet with the other ministries and agree on a way forward on this. District local governments are given funds and they prioritise. So, saying that we should send money to the local governments is not the issue. It is up to them to prioritise what drugs they need. 

Hon. Boona advised that we should take interest. That is noted. Hon. Bitekyerezo wants details of which health facilities have the anti-rabies sera. I will bring that as soon as possible; maybe even tomorrow I could circulate that information to members. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS AS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S FINDINGS

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, the responses have been posted on the Members’ iPads. We had three sets of responses. The first is the general response from the Ministry of Health and we also have responses with respect to the three councils. 

With respect to responses which concern Ministry of Health in general, the first issue was the formation of the National Health Regulatory Authority. I wish to say that a national consensus meeting has been held on the issue and a regulatory impact assessment was also completed. The document was approved and right now, principles for establishing the National Health Regulatory Authority are being drafted by the Policy Analysis Unit of the Ministry of Health. They will soon be presented to Cabinet and later on to Parliament.

Issue No. 2 is with respect to the harmonisation of the composition, appointment, performance and remuneration of all the three councils. We are currently reviewing the existing Act of all the health professional councils. This will be done concurrently with the formation of the new National Health Regulatory Authority, which will for sure harmonise the appointment, performance and remuneration of all council members.

Issue three was a concern on gender, particularly in the appointment of council members. Ministry of Health will consider this matter when appointing new members to the councils. However, as of now, we cannot do much.

Issue four was about construction of a home for the National Health Regulatory Authority. I wish to inform Members of Parliament that the Ministry of Health recently allocated land to all the councils and we shall provide funds for the construction of that home.

Madam Speaker, there were 17 issues with respect to the Uganda Nurses and Midwife’s Council:
Issue one concerned the gazetting of registered midwives and nurses. In September 2013, we obtained a quotation from the printing company requiring us to pay Shs 720 million to gazette the nurses. This was certainly beyond the capacity of the council to undertake and sustain. Now, the council is planning to gazette in phases, effective the third quarter of this financial year.

There was also an issue on governance. I want to state that council members are no longer signatories to the council’s accounts. Previously, they used to be signatories because of lack of adequate staff.

There was also an issue concerning the recruitment of an internal auditor. I want to state that the council will also recruit an internal auditor this financial year.

There was an issue of elementary accounting – lack of paid up stamps. These have been put in place. A fixed assets register has also been put in place.

There was a problem with inadequate council meetings. That was during the financial year 2009/2010. Currently, the council is holding meetings as per the mandatory number of times that the law provides.

There was also an issue of the qualification and competence of the accounting officer. This officer has since retired and a new one, who is well qualified, has been put in place.

Revaluation of council assets: A number of these issues really concern accounts. We have now hired a new accountant and most of these have been sorted out.

With respect to the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioner’s Council, there was a problem of staffing which was highlighted in that committee report. I must say that now, we have been able to fill the position of the deputy registrar, secretary finance and administration, the administrator and accountant, records officer; the staffing has improved. The report that we are talking about was looking at audit findings of 10 years ago but I must say that these have been addressed – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a point of procedure and I would like some guidance from you. As far as I know, there is supposed to be an accountability cycle. The recommendations of this House, arising from reports of the Auditor-General on different entities, would attract a treasury memorandum and this would have to be audited. 

What I am seeing here is the minister coming to respond to recommendations of this House and yet he is an interested person in that. I thought we should have gone through the accountability cycle and these matters are brought by the Auditor-General back to this House, in which case we would be able to confirm the fulfilment of the recommendations of this House. Madam Speaker, I would like guidance from you on this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are the same House that said we wanted to know what the ministry does with our recommendations. So, if we do not want them, leave them but we asked for them.

MR AMURIAT: What are we doing? Have we not erred in taking such a decision? It is this same House which said that we should go full throttle through the cycle and conclude on matters. We are commanding the ministry, as a House, to take some actions but these actions have got to be proved by an independent entity. That is why the accountability cycle was put in place.

THE SPEAKER: Now, you do not want the minister to present what they have done? You want the Auditor-General to come back here? Is that what you are saying?

MR AMURIAT: How can we prove that what the minister is telling us is correct? We do not have the means to do that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Why not? The committee remains seized of that matter. He is reporting to the House.

MR AMURIAT: What are we doing, in essence, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to hear what the Government has done or not? Just tell us. If you do not want to, then we can do other things.

MR AMURIAT: We should do it, Madam Speaker, in a structured manner. The way we are doing it is not structured. That is my bone of contention.

THE SPEAKER: Which rule of procedure are you objecting to? What rule have we breached?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, it is not spelt out in the Rules of Procedure. However, in this country we have a way in which things are done and we recognise that in this same House. If we are turning against what is really part of the procedure in government operations, then let it be known in this House, so that we now proceed the same way we are proceeding this afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: I think if you want to amend the Rules of Procedure, make your proposals but as long as there is a lacuna, we must move. You either want to know or you do not want to know. If you do not want to know, that is fine, I can release the minister to do other things. If you do not want to hear what he is saying, that is fine. 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee presented the report clearly to this House and Members debated. When we debated, issues arose out of that debate and we asked the minister to clarify regarding the areas of contention. So, I believe the minister should proceed so that if the committee has any problems, they can write again to the minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the old method, and under what rule and what part of the Constitution? That is what I want to hear. I do not want this gambling. What is the old procedure that we have violated? That is what I want to hear.

MR AMURIAT: I am not capable of citing the provisions at the moment. However, I do know, even from my own experience, that this has happened in this House; after a report is presented and recommendations are made, a treasury memorandum has to be prepared by the Ministry of Finance. This has happened here before. 

That treasury memorandum is audited by the Auditor-General in order to adduce or look through whether what Government claims it has fulfilled has actually been fulfilled and it is brought back to the House. This has been done on a number of occasions, unless we have now decided to use a different approach this afternoon. That is why I require guidance from you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were opening this sitting I reported that one of the areas that the Government has failed in is the issue of the treasury memorandum. How many have been brought here, if you can remember? None at all! So, should we also keep quiet because Government has not brought a memorandum? Honourable minister, please complete your report quickly so that we can go and do other things.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The issue of staffing for the Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council is being handled. 

The issue of the internal auditor for the council has been handled; a new internal auditor has been recruited. 

The issue of non-renewal of the operating licence, which therefore affected income, is being handled by sending out circulars. We have also increased inspections. 

We have also handled the issue of a board chairman being a signatory to the bank account for this particular council.

There were also a number of questions on segregation of duties. This has also been handled. Members can read the responses which have been uploaded on their iPads. 

On the un-gazetted names of medical doctors and dentists, I am happy to note that the council now has made provisions for gazetting these names and this was done. The gazette is available in addition to having the names on the website of the council.

The third council is the Allied Health Professionals Council. A report was made on the absence of a deputy registrar. A deputy registrar has been appointed by the Health Service Commission. In addition, other staff like accounts assistants, field inspectors, legal officer, quality assurance officer were also appointed by the council. 

There was also a problem of inadequate funds to finance the operations of the council. However, the situation is improving. The council is now collaborating with employers and Chief Administrative Officers to ensure that professionals are registered and have valid operating licences.

On the issue of lack of inadequate office space, I have already indicated that the ministry has allocated land and will soon start construction of the house for all the three councils. 

There were also a number of questions regarding accounting. Accountants have been hired and that should not be a problem now.

There was also a problem of failure to gazette allied health professionals. I must say that the gazette for allied health professionals is now in place. They were gazetted in June 2014 and a copy of the gazette is also available.

Also, this council uses the internal audit unit in the Ministry of Health and plan to recruit an internal auditor in the financial year 2015/2016. Madam Speaker, I wish to also say that we have a challenge with these councils. It is difficult to attract qualified accountants to these councils - somebody with CPA or ACCA to work as an accountant - because we cannot provide the necessary remuneration to retain them. However, the councils have tried and they have hired people with degrees in accounting and some of them have been encouraged to go for further training to become professional accountants. 

Madam Speaker, I want to invite Members to read the rest of the responses on their iPads. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, honourable minister. The committee and the members are free to use this information. I think let us now move to another ministry; we have given Ministry of Health adequate time. You can take up any issues in your committee. Let us go to next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF AKOKORO BRIDGE IN KUMI DISTRICT

5.52
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues. First of all, I just want to make one correction; it is not Akokoro, but it is Okokoro Bridge.

MR AMURIAT: It is not Okokoro; it is Okokor Bridge -(Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: I accept the pronunciation. Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues, the construction of that bridge was awarded to M/s MML Road Construction Company Limited at a contract price of just over Shs 400 million. The contract started in April 2010 and was supposed to be completed in August 2010. However, the performance of the contractor was not good and the contract, following laid down procedures, was terminated by my ministry in October 2013. 

The site was taken over by my ministry in the presence of the district engineer and the district commander of Kumi District. Unfortunately, the contractor refused to attend the handover ceremony. 

Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues, at the moment, my ministry is repackaging for a new contract. As I speak now, my undersecretary has already filled what they called the PP Form 5. This is one of the procedures before we go for procurement.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the contractor who was awarded the contract did not perform and this contract was terminated. We are repackaging a new contract and at the same time, we are initiating processes to see if this contractor cannot be blacklisted. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.55
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was the one who raised this matter but I am disappointed with the response from the Minister of Works as far as this bridge construction is concerned.

What is on the ground at the moment is that we have about two metres height of a batter done, that is the concrete that supports the bridge, and there is no other activity at all as the minister has admitted. However, this is a matter that we raised earlier on as a community and we had been told that the ministry was considering doing this bridge on force accounts, and that was the strong message we gave to the people. 

I am surprised that one year after termination, – since October 2013 when the contract was terminated - nothing at all has happened until now when the minister comes to tell us that his undersecretary has filled the PP Form 5. I would like the minister to indicate to me and to the people of Kumi who are suffering now because of lack of services, when the process of procurement will be concluded and when work will resume. I think, fundamentally, that is what my people want to hear. When will this work be restarted and when will the bridge be ready for use? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would have expected the minister to update this House on two issues. One, in the event that there was a delay in works that possibly could have culminated into the termination of the contract, he should have told this House how much had been paid to the contractor at the time the termination was effected.

Secondly, have they therefore re-evaluated the contract? To that effect, how much is the contract going to cost?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, related to the contribution of my brother hon. Nzoghu, in contracting, normally there is what is called liquidated damages- money that is paid to the employer by the contractor when he fails to honour a contract. I think it is also good for us to know whether any penalties were imposed on the contractor and what the penalties were for the failure and inconvenience that we are experiencing as a country.

MR BYANDALA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my two colleagues for the questions. 

Madam Speaker, as I said, they are filling PP Form 5. My colleagues should know that this is the beginning of the procurement process and it is where we confirm that there are funds for the work to be done. As soon as that is qualified, I will be in a position to tell you exactly when and how this is going to be completed.

Madam Speaker, by the time the contractor abandoned the site, he had done about 60 per cent of the work as you heard from hon. Amuriat. There was, as he said, an insinuation of the force account approach and this is not encouraged by the PPDA law. That is why we want to go for open tendering to get competition and ensure value for money.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UPDATE OF THE REFUGEES 
ON THE KYANGWALO-BUKIGA LAND

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Francis Ecweru): Madam Speaker, yesterday I did informally request the Chair of yesterday’s session to permit me to make this update tomorrow. 

However, I just want to request the Office of the Clerk to Parliament to re-write the item because it is written here as, “arrest of refugees” but it should be, “eviction of encroachers”. So, it is on the update of eviction of encroachers and not arrest of refugees. I promise to bring the statement tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Really, the Clerk should capture what we have agreed on.  As hon. Junjura comes up, join me in welcoming a delegation of leaders from Kapchorwa, Tingey County. They are represented by hon. Chebrot and hon. Chemutai. They are here. You are welcome.

MR JUNJURA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I am sorry you had already ruled on this, but this is a matter I raised on the 4th of December. On that day, there was a serious eviction and you directed the minister to give a statement on the 9th and that was Tuesday. 

We are talking about people who have been evicted from areas where they have been staying, scattered all over areas like churches, schools and others. Remember, I raised a question about their whereabouts. On Tuesday, the Deputy Speaker was in the Chair and the honourable minister did not turn up. It was later on 10th when the honourable minister came, and that was Thursday. 

What was the issue? The issue was that since this matter was so serious and grave and would involve a lot of work, the then Chair referred this issue to the committee responsible for refugees; that is the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

I, therefore, rise on a procedural issue. We know how our committees work here; this could take a month or two or even three. This is because it will involve visiting the sites and getting evidence from the affected persons, ministry officials, all of us MPs from the affected region and anyone who would want to give evidence. So, the procedural matter I raised on that day was: where are these people who have been evicted and scattered everywhere? Secondly, those ones we have identified around churches and schools, how are they surviving? 

The then Chair directed the minister to bring a statement yesterday to give a status of their survival. Madam Speaker, the challenge is that it looks like we are getting a comprehensive statement from the ministry. This is a matter the minister can even say in one word. He can say that yesterday, we gave posho. 

We are not talking about tomorrow or the other day; this is an issue of survival of those people. So I do not expect a two-page or four-page statement. I just wanted to hear a simple answer, even if it was just one word.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought it was you who came here and said that there are people who cannot be accounted for, whose whereabouts cannot be accounted for and you wanted Government to tell us where they have taken these people. Don’t you want to know where they are? 

MR JUNJURA: Madam Chair –(Interjections)– I am sorry, Madam Speaker – but it is all the same -

THE SPEAKER: No, when I am here, I am the Speaker and when I am down there, I am the Chair.

MR JUNJURA: I was saying it is the same office. It is unfortunate that -(Interruption) – Please, stop interrupting me because this is a matter which is at my heart.

Madam Speaker, unfortunately, but I never wanted to use the word unfortunately because it is the same office, if you were here last week you would know exactly how and why I still insist on raising the issue even after you have ruled. The issue of the whereabouts of my people was answered; I now know where they are. They are at the church and at schools. I can even tell you where they are and the minister is also aware.

What remained, and the issue that I raised as a procedural issue that day, was how they are surviving. This was a matter that was raised on 4th and today is 17th. So, the issue is for the minister to either say that yesterday he gave three bags of posho or tomorrow he is planning to take 10 bags of beans there. Ii is not a matter of coming here to say you this or organise that -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are no longer interested in this statement; you want to know about food. Is that it? Minister, tell us whether you have sent food. We have got other business we want to do. Have you sent food to the churches?

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, my habit is to give this House comprehensive statements and not just half-baked statement. I will bring that statement tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable Minister of Energy, please use only five minutes. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GLOBAL OIL PRICES

6.41
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. My statement on global oil prices and static local pump prices is posted on the members’ iPads. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a net importer of petroleum products and operates a liberalised market where prices are determined by forces of demand and supply. The sub-sector is guided by the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. On the international scene, there has been a relatively stable crude price for the period January up to September this year. 

In the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) basket where most of the Uganda products originate, crude prices per barrel dropped from US$ 94.15 in September to US$ 82.88 in October to US$ 74.14 in November, and in mid-December it had dropped to US$ 58.26. When you analyse this, it corresponds to a decrease of about 38 per cent. 

Now, the drop in global crude prices has been largely occasioned by oversupply of crude oil as a result of production of petroleum from shales; this is a rock in the United States of America. The production resulted in substantial reduction of US imports of crude oil, which in turn resulted in over supply of petroleum in the international market. 

The oversupply would have been checked if OPEC had responded by proportionate reduction in its production as it usually does. Nonetheless, petroleum prices do fluctuate and as such, it is difficult to predict the likely trend and therefore, the impact on activities in the oil sector in Uganda.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, with the drop in global crude oil prices, the actual impact would have been felt on the local market after a period of about four months. Therefore, the products being consumed now were procured earlier before the prices reduced to the current extent. Moreover, the local prices are determined by a combination of various parameters such as international prices, transportation and handling costs on the seas and land, as well as the US dollar exchange rate. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, when I talk about the lead period, I am talking about the whole supply chain - crude converted into petroleum products, shipped over the seas, through land up to where we are. That is what I mean.

On the local scene, the pump prices per litre have remained relatively stable, at an average of Shs 3,700 for petrol, Shs 3,200 for diesel and Shs 2,800 for kerosene. The peak month was in September when the local pump prices were Shs 3,800 for petrol, Shs 3,400 for diesel and Shs 2,900 for kerosene. The current prices, therefore, reflect a drop of 2.6 per cent for petrol, 5.9 per cent for diesel and 3.4 per cent for kerosene. 

From the trend, it would appear that the drop in international prices is not commensurate with the expected drop in the local prices if the US dollar to Uganda shillings exchange rate is held constant. However, during this period, the US dollar exchange rate showed the Uganda shilling depreciating against the US dollar by 2.8 per cent, from Shs 2,709 in early November to Shs 2,785 in mid-December. 

If other factors were to remain constant, the depreciation of the Uganda shilling against the dollar would have triggered an increase in the pump prices. Therefore, the current modest drop in the local pump prices is in response to the inter-play of the drop in the international prices and the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. 

We have done a comparison of the pump prices in the East Africa region. This is shown in the table, which you can clearly see. However, I can read out the petrol prices across the region: if we look at Tanzania, in Dar–es-Salaam, the pump price of a litre is at the equivalent of Ushs 3,246. In Mombasa, at the coast, it is the equivalent of Ushs 3,165. In Nairobi, it is Ushs 3,267. In Eldoret, it is Ushs 3,322. In Mandera, which is in northern Kenya, it is Ushs 3,690. When you come to Uganda, in Kampala it is Ushs 3,700 and when you cross to Kigali in Rwanda, it is Ushs 3,850. 

We look at diesel: in Tanzania, Dar-es–Salaam, it is equivalent to Ushs 3,054; Mombasa, Ushs 2,790; Nairobi, Ushs 2,892; Eldoret, Ushs 2900 -(Interruption)- Thank you, Madam Speaker; it is important that Members appreciate what the prices are in the region. In Kampala it is Ushs 3,200 and in Rwanda, Ushs 3,850. 

The realisation of the modest drop in the local pump prices has been facilitated, among others, by the measures we have put in place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products in a competitive environment. The measures include: decongestion of Mombasa Port through the use of the open tender system and allocation of dedicated space in the Kenya pipeline system for Uganda’s products. This is in addition to implementing a robust licensing regime and monitoring framework that anchors fair competition in the downstream petroleum subsector. Furthermore, the reserve facilities like the Jinja storage tanks play a key role in stabilising supply during scarcity.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and colleagues, the interplay of the drop in international prices and depreciation of the shilling amidst the steady supply in a competitive environment have been reflected in the local prices that are comparable in the region. With the measures put in place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products and fair competition in the downstream petroleum subsector, my ministry will continue to monitor the subsector to ensure that the citizens do get value for money from the consumption of petroleum products. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We just have two clarifications. One minute each.

6.14 
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, District Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, listening to the honourable minister, I just want to say that fuel prices in this country have never gone down. Even though the global prices drop, in Uganda the factor remains the same. I am wondering whether the minister is more concerned about having the dealers maintain their prices even if the global prices drop or in Ugandans who are not getting value for money. 

Madam Speaker, with the technologies which we now have, it is already projected that the price of oil will go even lower. How is the ministry getting ready to get value for money for Ugandans on this pump price instead of cushioning the dealers? Probably, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out_)

6.16
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you, honourable minister, but I seek some clarification from you. 

You tell us, under point No.4, that the reason we have not seen a drop in prices being reflected on our pump price is because the current fuel we are consuming was procured when the prices had not dropped. However, when you go to point No.6, you tell us that it is because of those variables of the exchange rate that the prices have not fallen. So, I want you to tell us exactly why the pump price in Uganda has not fallen; is it because the products were procured before or is because of the exchange rate variations? 

Secondly, I want to say that the business community always profiteer from Ugandans whenever there is a drop in prices. We do not have real responses from the business community by way of reduction of prices and we do not expect it either. Even if the exchange rate was to be stable –(Member timed out.)

MS IRENE MULONI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I explained to my colleagues the value chain of petroleum products - how they reach this country. When you buy crude oil from wherever it is in the OPEC countries, you have it processed into products and those products are shipped, - we are now doing the open tendering system jointly within East Africa, where we go to tender openly in Nairobi - we then place the order and then transport them up to where they get to our countries. 

The lead period in estimate is about four months and so if you consider the period where we are right now and then you consider the prices -(Interjections)- let me explain because I am trying to explain to you and you want to clarify to me. Why don’t you allow me to explain so that you can understand the issues that you are seeking clarification about? So, these products give us that lead period and so for the private sector that is involved in the value chain, when they make their orders for these products, by the time they come here, there is a lead period that has to be put into consideration. 

The issue of the prices and that is why I gave the example that if the dollar rate was to remain constant, then possibly we would have expected further reduction in the pump prices. But while the oil prices are going down, you would expect the pump price to subsequently also go down; you have the Uganda shilling depreciating -(Interjections)- yes exactly, not so much but the issue is what portion of the depreciation -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: I just want to seek clarification from the minister. This aspect has been here for the last one week and I just want to ask you, have we imported fuel in this country for the last one week or not? If yes, how are you monitoring the reserves that we have in this country to ascertain that actually what we are buying now is what was procured some time back?

MR BAHINDUKA: I have a statement from a daily business newspaper in Nairobi and this is the statement. Starting Friday midnight, a litre of diesel will retail at Kenyan shillings 94.52 in the capital after the Energy Regulatory Commission cut fuel prices. In the review, a litre of premium petrol will cost shillings 4.09 less on average at shillings 106.80 Kenyan shillings and it goes ahead to say, that the ERCO - Energy Regulatory Commission attributed the drop because it did, it is speculating that by Friday it will have cut these prices as a result of the lower global prices of crude oil which have plumbed in recent months below 80 dollars. So what does that mean? That in Kenya, the regulatory authorities have already taken action and cut the prices of petrol to the current and they are claiming that in Kenya they are going to enjoy the lowest prices in the last two years. So how come in Uganda nothing is going to change?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker and colleagues, in Kenya the regulator sets pump prices; in Uganda, it is a liberalised market. It is the supply and demand that dictates. We do not, all we do is regulation. We do not set pump prices. So, depending on what the world oil prices are - as the trend keeps dropping, if the exchange rate does not change for the worse, then we expect a down one trend. So the market forces here dictate -(Interruption)

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR WAFULA OGOTTU): Honourable minister, thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, I talked to an oil dealer on why the fuel price has gone down  to about 40 percent and the Ugandan consumer is not enjoying any benefits and he told me that the government would like it to remain that way because of taxation; because of the revenue government gets out of tax. Is that true? 

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of that and I do not think it is true because taxation is a mandate of the Ministry of Finance and I am not aware that Government has really had any intentions of keeping prices high so that it can get higher values of taxes from that.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to item 9.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR BY THE PARLIAMENTARY AD HOC COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe you had a debate on this matter and what was remaining was the issue of the recommendation. But I understand there was a minority report, although I have not seen the recommendations from that report so I do not know how you think we should proceed. Hon. Kyanjo, can you move your recommendations from the minority report? I do not know how many they are, if you could use five minutes.

6.25
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Five minutes will not be enough, they are 12. One of them is irrelevant because it has been overtaken by events but the rest are all relevant and are still standing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use 10 minutes.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Page 6 was captured by the main Report. I have to start on page 7.

The duality of the role of the chairperson of the committee

Recommendation

    1. It is our sincere view that when an opportunity comes in future for such investigations, members of the probe committee should not directly or indirectly be involved in the sector being investigated.

    2. In order to have public confidence in the Legislature and its committees, members of the committee must be accorded chance to declare any interests that they may have and in the event of non-disclosure or false disclosure, appropriate sanctions be provided for in the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

Excessive time lag in presenting the report of the committee

Inadequate depth and width of the investigation

Recommendations

    1. It is our view that the time lag made this report to fail to serve its purpose because it lost relevance and it was outpaced by the dynamics of the oil sector.

    2. For future investigation, Parliament should be mindful of the past and current policies and pieces of legislation which the Government has failed to implement and to hold Government officials accountable for losses incurred due to such failures.

    3. The PPDA must be involved in scrutinising procurement and production in the oil and gas sector.

    4. The salaries and wages component of the cost elements must also be scrutinised.

Reliance on secondary information from the executive agencies.

Recommendation

    1. Parliament should resolve to enact appropriate legislation and amend its Rules of Procedure requiring any public officials who may be a subject to an official parliamentary investigation or a commission of inquiry instituted by Government to step aside from their positions until they have been cleared by such an inquiry or until the inquiry is concluded. 

    2. Good judgement cannot be passed based on secondary information; hence, parliamentary committees and investigations must be clothed with the powers to compel production of documents and to order the discoveries of documents and failure to provide such documents should be punished.


The negative impact of the constitutional petition and the role of the Attorney-General

Recommendations

    1. Parliament should consider appropriate legal framework to strengthen and protect the independence of the Office of the Attorney-General.

    2. The Office of the Attorney-General must work independently from the Executive to ensure that it works for the people of Uganda and defends all institutions of state in the discharge of their duties within the meaning and context of the doctrine of separation of powers as enshrined in the Constitution.

    3. There must be a clear demarcation between the functional roles of government official who at the same time also serve as the party official. 

    4. No. 4 was dealt with by the time.

The role of the Bank of Uganda in ensuring effective governance of oil revenue

Recommendations

    i. The current laws governing Bank of Uganda with particular emphasis to its autonomy and independence and an expansion of its mandate to ensure effective governance of oil revenues must be reviewed and clearly defined.
 
    ii. Appropriate proposals to amend the existing laws should be presented to this House as a matter of urgency if oil revenue is to be managed in the interest of the people of Uganda now and for the future generation.

Transparency and accountability in the oil and gas sector 

Recommendations 

    1. Government should immediately commence the process of subscribing to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and a report on the progress being made to Parliament on a quarterly basis. Parliament demands that the report be presented before the end of the year 2013.

    2. Parliament should immediately amend its Rules of Procedure governing vetting of appointments to make the process more open and transparent and allow citizens to present testimonies regarding the integrity and conduct of persons proposed for important leadership positions.

    3. Parliament should ensure that a separate piece of legislation is enacted as a matter of urgency for the management and governance of oil revenue. It is timely for Parliament to address this matter while debating the Omnibus Bill under the proposed public finance legislation. In view of the importance of this matter, the Budget Act must be strengthened to track public spending and be detached from the Omnibus Bill.

Land rights and compensation must benefit indigenous people

Recommendations

    i. Parliament should pursue a constitutional amendment to place oil and gas minerals, water and foreign reserves, resources within the scope of the resources protected under the public trust doctrine and to reaffirm the position that the state manages such resources as a trustee for the benefit of the citizens and the people of Uganda.

    ii. Parliament should demand from the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources a comprehensive list of persons or companies who have purchased land in areas where oil or mineral depots have been discovered in the last five years. On this matter, we ask the people of Bunyoro, Acholi, West Nile, Karamoja, Lango and Teso to cooperate because their areas are already known to have a wealth of mineral resources.

    iii. Parliament should further demand a list of indigenous persons who have been compensated where oil is either being mined or prospected.

    iv. Parliament be provided with evidence of Ugandans who are working in oil companies operating in Uganda and a list of local service providers who have contractual obligations to serve the oil companies.


The President’s directives on matters of technical nature

Recommendations

    1. The President be advised to respect the views of the technical personnel in the procurement process for the cost effectiveness.

    2. The President further be advised to adhere to the constitutional provisions which stipulate that all public spending be approved by Parliament in accordance –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR KYANJO: I have only one left. The President further be advised to adhere to the constitutional provisions which stipulate that all public spending be approved by Parliament in accordance with the laws and also to follow procurement rules.

The President be advised to avoid issuing verbal directives as they are prone to misinterpretation or abuse by those who implement them and do not give room to hold anyone accountable hence facilitating corruption.


Sourcing for jobs for relatives

Recommendations

    1. Parliament must be furnished with a list of all Ugandans employed in the sector in order for an assessment of local capacity and contribution to the sector.

    2. Ugandans should consider themselves fortunate to have fellow Ugandans employed in multinational companies.
    3. All leaders in their various capacities have a moral obligation and responsibilities to provide for their families. Finding jobs for relatives or involving them in any business transactions in areas which do not directly or indirectly fall under the supervision of the leader should not legally constitute influence peddling or abuse of office. 

That is what I have, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, of course a number of them may have been over taken by events. So, we shall ask the clerk to note those which have been handled by the legislation. Otherwise I put the question that the recommendations be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Let us have the main report.

6.38
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE INVESTIGATING THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have a list of recommendations which were extracted by the clerks. So, I will just go through the list quickly because a number of them have been implemented or they are being implemented or they have actually been overtaken by events. So, in the report;

Procurement of licensees in the sector

The committee strongly recommends that the ministry responsible for oil and gas and other relevant MDAs adhere to the PPDA Act and other relevant laws in sourcing for competent oil companies to ensure competitiveness and transparency. This one has been covered 

Procurement of local service providers by licensees

I do not know whether I should read or I should just mention -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think just highlight the headings and inform the members that it is on the iPads and then at the end we shall ask the clerk to include all of them on the Hansard. But, just read the headings.

Procurement of local service providers by licensees

a) Action needs to be completed. It is being worked on, I was told by the honourable minister. It still stands but it is being implemented. Maybe the minister can make a comment on that one.

6.43
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, this recommendation is already covered by the PSS in the new regulations that we are putting in place. That is what he is saying.

MR WERIKHE: b) The existing procurement laws should be amended to enhance and safeguard the participation of indigenous service providers in the oil and gas sector. This is also covered, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, under Section 125 of the Petroleum Act, 2013.

The involvement of the Uganda Investment Authority in the procurement of licensees 

After discussing it with the ministry, we thought this was not necessary and I think that we can skip it.

Signature bonuses 

These ones are also covered.

Cost recovery

This one is also covered.

Advisory Committee

This one is also –(Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I do agree that the bigger part of 4.5 is covered already in the PSS but there was one part where the recommendation was that Government should start factoring the recoverable cost in the national budget as part of the national debt. And here we are saying that recoverable costs only arise when you have made a discovery and you have gone into production in the contract area in question. And so, it is until you have actually gone into production that you are able to – yes, recoverable costs are going to be recovered after production - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Under the financial procedure which you are very good at, it becomes contingent liability. It only becomes a debt after. So, we need to have a framework for it.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I do not see how this is going to be factored in since it is not a direct debt to Government. That is why I was explaining that it makes it difficult because you only recover after you have gone into production. But to make it part of the national budget, what are you going to asses? And the other thing is that some of the costs which are incurred by those companies are actually not recoverable. It is until they have confirmed commercial reserve and actually gone into production. So, for us to start factoring them in our budget is not good.

MS KWAGALA: Madam Speaker, I one time visited the oil region and the issue of recoverable costs was really pertinent. This aspect is just guidelines. Much as the recoverable costs are to be paid after the processing has started, don’t you think it is wise to have guidelines so that we avoid issues like those in Nigeria. They might put recoverable costs which are too high. For example, when we ate the food, they told us that it was $80. We asked quietly and they said, but that one is put on recoverable cost. So, how many visitors go to those regions and they are already computing recoverable costs which they will put after we begin to process the oil? So, maybe it is relevant that guidelines are put. Thank you.

6.46
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I think the point she has raised is very important. We discovered that the oil companies deliberately make the salaries of their personnel very high and some of the costs are deliberately high and nobody cares to scrutinise because it does not have direct impact on us now. But in the future they will claim for it. So, it is important that at this stage, we scrutinise all the costs, procurements and even the salaries of the personnel so that we can capture all the costs to make sure that they are genuine. If we do not do it now, then they are going to claim very highly in the future and we will be mandated to pay.

THE SPEAKER: Ok, let us go to 4.6.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we did actually contact the honourable minister over this issue, Madam Speaker. We agreed just as honourable members are observing that we need actually guidelines and regulations. I think that is what the minister is working on; that is what she confirmed to us.

THE SPEAKER: So, go to 4.6

MR WERIKHE: Advisory Committee; This one, Madam Speaker, is covered by the Act we have under Section 10.

Arbitration

The committee recommends that arbitration be conducted in accordance with Ugandan laws. Normally when there are disputes, traditionally there are countries that have been named as countries where arbitration can be conducted, namely; the UK and the US. However, during the investigations, we thought that Ugandan laws could be first of all apply. In the event that there is no agreement, mutually the investor and the internal party or the Ugandan Government could agree on any other neutral country rather than tying us to the UK and America. That is actually the import of this recommendation. 

That is why we said that the Ugandan laws provide for negotiation between the investor and the Ugandan Government in the event that there is no mutual understanding rather than tying us to the UK. Should the company come from the UK and it is automatically implying that we should go to the UK, there is no room for us to negotiate. That is the import and I thought the minister could accept this.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I request that the Attorney-General say something about this issue of arbitration.

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MR Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I want to reinforce what the chairperson has said and add a few remarks. The practice of international arbitration has developed so as to allow parties who are contracting from different legal and cultural backgrounds to resolve their disputes generally without the formalities of their legal systems.

More often than not, they are preferred because they are quicker and because with arbitration proceedings, there are rarely any appeals and the decision that come out of any arbitration is binding. We should always note the difference between arbitration, mediation and conciliation.
Normally in arbitration, the determination is binding while in mediation and conciliation it is consensual agreement. It depends upon mutual understanding. 

And of course normally these parties particularly in business related areas prefer neutral grounds than in domestic jurisdiction where the transactions are concluded. Of course normally, they are also preferred because the industry experts can be chosen as arbitrators more than generalised judges.
So, the argument that the chairperson is putting across for purposes of record is that any negotiator should take the preference for national laws to apply. Now, as a negotiator, I can certainly negotiate and attract an investor or a business person to invest here and apply our laws. That should be the first preference. And then as a last resort, if need be, depending on certain circumstances, if it is agreed that we use international arbitration arrangements, then we negotiate that way. 

However, I also hasten to add that we should also get focussed on arbitration centres which are relatively cheap. These days as we speak, there are regional arbitration centres: we have one for East Africa, we have the International Bar Association; they are also arbitrators, the Permanent Court of Arbitration. So we can always safeguard our interests through those fora. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you support the proposal?

MR RUHINDI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to 4.8. Stabilisation.

MR WERIKHE: Stabilisation, Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is also in the interest of Uganda whereby, we need each and every agreement to be scrutinised when the Government is considering a PSA and this actually going on; they are implementing it.

MR WERIKHE: 4.9. Management of natural and associated gas. This one is covered and it is being implemented.

THE SPEAKER: 4.10

MR WERIKHE: 4.10. Training and capacity, Madam Speaker, this one is covered.

THE SPEAKER: 5.0

MR WERIKHE: 5.0 is covered, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: 6.1

MR WERIKHE: 6.1 is also covered.

7 is covered except 7(b). I think the minister can comment on that. We were advised that it is being implemented but I think I would like this confirmed by the honourable minister.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The regulations are being finalised by my ministry to operationalise the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act which requires licensees to submit statements of recoverable costs which are audited by the Auditor-General on an annual basis. And also this is a requirement of the PSAs. So, it is only the costs which are approved by the Auditor-General that are recoverable. So, it is being implemented.

THE SPEAKER: 7.1

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, all the way up to 7(g) is covered.

THE SPEAKER: 8.0

MR WERIKHE: 8.0. Land Rights and compensation; Madam Speaker, all these are covered.

THE SPEAKER: 8.1

MR WERIKHE: 8.1. Local Content, Madam Speaker, it is well covered by the Petroleum Acts - upstream and downstream.

THE SPEAKER: 8.1.1

MR WERIKHE: 8.1.1. Yes, Bunyoro Kingdom, even under the Public Finance Act, they are well covered.

THE SPEAKER: 9.0

MR WERIKHE: 9.0. Environmental - Yes, Madam Speaker, I think this still stands.  The Minister for Water and Environment can make a comment on that.

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This recommendation is well taken by my ministry and I would like to inform the House that the ministry is already undertaking the review of the legislation of the National Environmental Act and the regulations there under to ensure that the concerns are taken care of.

When we go to (b) - before that there is also capacity strengthening. NEMA has completed the staff skills and technical equipment capacity building plan and this plan has already been approved and it is with Government. We are awaiting the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that it is implemented. This will strengthen the capacity for monitoring of oil and gas. 

And also the plan 6 - technical equipment for monitoring air and water quality given the importance of oil and gas to our economy, we believe that the Ministry of Finance will release the logistics for the procurement of the equipment.

9(b) regarding modalities for waste management and disposal, there are in process of making a new regulation for waste management and that is on-going. Also, other initiatives are taking place to ensure that the waste is properly handled.

Regarding 9(c), the recommendation for inter-ministerial and interagency corporation in addressing environmental concerns.

Oil for development is fenced on three pillars: the economic, resource, and environmental pillars. So, the Ministry of Finance is responsible for the economic pillar; the Ministry of Energy is responsible for the resource pillar while the Ministry of Water and Environment is responsible for the environmental pillar. So, already three ministries are participating.

Under the environmental pillar also, there is a sectorial participation with NEMA playing the coordinating role. The National Forest Authority - wetland management, water resource management and environment and each is having a part to play. So, the recommendations, Madam Speaker, are well taken. 

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, just an addition to make is that the inter-ministerial and interagency corporation already exists and we have a Cabinet committee on petroleum.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, 10 (a) is covered under the Public Finance Bill. b) and c); these have been actually taken. The process is to have them implemented. 10 (1) this one is also in the process of being implemented. 10 is also noted by Government. They are actually in the process of having this implemented.

I wanted to make a comment on c) which appears - of course many of these also appear in the minority report. For example, the issue of 10(2)(c) joins the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and adheres to the principles therein. I think this one was recognised by both reports. It is a very important issue and the ministry is also in the process of doing that. Otherwise, the rest are in the process of being implemented, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Honourable members, again we instruct the clerk that where the recommendations have already been addressed either by legislation or by other policy measures, we note them. Otherwise, I put the question that we adopt the recommendations as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Finally, honourable minister, on the issue of the extractive industries, you know that recommendation is really old. One day I went to a meeting with the auditors and they were asking me- and I did not know what to say- Why haven’t you joined the Extractive Industries Initiative?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, the process of joining EITI is very comprehensive. There is a format of data that you have to submit. I have had the opportunity to be taken through in preparation for us to join. One thing I realised was the financial path. Now that we have passed the Public Finance Bill, it is going to make our life very easy so that we can submit this information which has to be validated and then we will be able to join. We do not have a problem with joining EITI. I think we are now in better place now that the Public Finance Bill has been completed. Thank you.

MOTION A FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS SDR 157.6 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO US$ 243.8 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE PROPOSED NORTH EASTERN ROAD- CORRIDOR ASSET MANAGEMENT PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Finance here? But it is his property. I think let us get the chairperson to give the report. 

7.02
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow special drawing rights 157.6 million equivalent of US$ 243.8 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank group for financing the proposed North Eastern Road- Corridor Asset Management Project call it NERAMP.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table:

    1)  The original report.
    2)  The committee minutes of the same loan request.
    3) The agreed minutes of the negotiation. 
    4) A copy of the financing agreement - the Draft Form.
    5) The project approved document. 
    6) The brief by the minister to Parliament with the resolution attached.

Introduction

The committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 157.6 million equivalent to  US$ 43.8 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank for the financing of the North Eastern Road- Corridor Asset Management Project in accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. 

The request was presented to this August House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 July 2014 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and we now beg to report, Madam Speaker.

Below is a methodology and with your permission, Madam Speaker, I request that I move to the next issue on the next page.

Background

National Development Plan 2010/11 to 2014/15 details the country’s current development challenges and opportunities. It stipulates the country’s medium term strategic direction, development, priorities and implementation strategies. Among the sectors that were given priority was the transport sector, especially roads because of the strong bearing on rural agricultural production and hence poverty reduction.

In addition, the government’s 2002 National Transport Policy and strategy hinges on the promotion of less costly, efficient and reliable transport services as the means of providing effective support to increased agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services.

The National Transport Policy Strategy places emphasis on the provision of the technically sound, economically justified and financial sustainable transport infrastructure through the active participation of the private sector.

The North Eastern Road- Corridor Road stretches from Tororo up to Kamdini, an equivalent of 340 kilo metres and is located in the Eastern and North Eastern part of the country respectively. 

There are two road corridors from Kamdini; 

    i. One to DRC through Goli and Vurra and onwards South Sudan through Oraba in North Western Uganda. 

    ii. And another one to South Sudan through Nimule in Northern Uganda. 

Thus, this project road feeds traffic from the Mombasa Port to South Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. The infrastructure bottleneck is a major constraint to Uganda’s sustainable economic growth, trade competitiveness and regional integration.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I think 1 to 5 members can read. You should go to the components.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, let us go to the components on page 4. The project comprises of two components; one is road rehabilitation, operations and maintenance worth US$ 2.1 million. This component will finance long term output and performance-based road contracts for Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamdini Road.

The works and services under OPRC contract will include the design and rehabilitation of sections of the road corridor, routine and periodic maintenance of the whole corridor and operations which will include management of traffic, road safety and axle road control measures. This component will also finance consultant services for the project management unit that will be responsible for administering and supervising the OPRC contract. 

Component 2, Madam Speaker, is institutional support to UNRA at the cost of US$ 14 million. To ensure sustainability, this component will finance technical assistance to UNRA and will focus on designing, awarding and managing the output and performance-based road contract in adding to local stakeholders including regulatory bodies, auditors and local construction industry will be supported in order to help them build awareness to be able to contribute towards the change process in the way the road network is planned, developed and maintained. 

The following will be provided as a package to bring about sustained and lasting culture change to deliver the benefits of the OPRC.

a) Asset management and road safety
b) Support in contract supervision and management of OPRC; and 
c) Operating cost. 

Madam Speaker, project cost and financing arrangement 

The total cost of the project is estimated at US$ 255 million and the share of IDA financing amounts to US$ 243.8 million which is an equivalent of SDR 157.6 million and the remaining US$ 11.2 million is financed by the Government of Uganda. The proposed lending instrument is investment project financing which is summarised in Table 1. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise. On this table when they were printing, the last copy I saw had only duties but some headings were left out and when the headings are left out, the figures become meaningless. So Madam Speaker, with you indulgence, the first money column, where we have 241.14 totalling to 255, the heading should be “Total project cost” then the left money column where we have 94.51 and below we have 5.49 totalling to 100, the heading should be “Percentage of total cost.” The next column should be, “Percentage of IDA financing.” But again, I apologise; the first figure in the last column of 95.35 should be 94.3. I apologise for those hiccups.

Madam Speaker, having said that, the total costs are in column 1. Column 2 shows the percentages of those total costs but the third money column shows what is financed by IDA of the total. It means that the balance will be financed by government.

On page 7, we have project costs by source of financing; we have different items of the different components and the column showing the total cost but again in the last two columns, one is showing what will be financed of each component by IDA and what will be contributed by Government.

Average unit cost of the loan

Typically, the US$ 230 net of a weighbridge cost is to be channelled for activities indicated above on the 340 kilometre which is equivalent to US$ 680,000 per kilometre inclusive of the rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance for the period of nine years. 

Madam Speaker, here I need to state that compared to a situation where we have been having a contractor who would go on a road project contracted and after completion goes away, in this case, under OPRC, the contractor must remain on this road for the next nine years after completion meaning that, UNRA will not be spending on it. All these funds we see here will be responsible for that. 
In contract, it would cost UNRA, US$ 790,000 per kilometre to rehabilitate the corridor plus the annual maintenance cost for a period of nine years to achieve the same service.

Loan terms and conditions

The terms of the loan are as follows: loan amount as I have already stated above, the loan period is 40 years but the 40 years will include the 10 years grace period where we will not be paying interest.

Then a service charge which is an equivalent of the interest rate is 0.75 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding amount which is very concessional and the commitment charge will be 0.5 percent per annum on amount not withdrawn starting from 120 days from the date of credit agreement. So this would call for the Minister and UNRA to ensure that once all the prerogatives have been done, then the implementation should be on schedule.

b) Other conditions

The financing has conditions attached including submission to IDA of the legal opinion of the honourable Attorney-General on the legal validity of the loan document to the Republic of Uganda, then Government to ensure that UNRA adheres to the procurement and disbursement guidelines as required under the financing, then submission to IDA of quarterly progress reports and annual progress reports in a format and content as required under the financing and channelling of the funds from the credit to UNRA through the grant subsidy financing agreement approved by the financier which is IDA. 

Madam Speaker, table 3 below indicates the interest costs of the loan at 0.75 percent annum as already highlighted on the loan outstanding and disbursed, is lower than the standard discount rate of 5 percent which is recommended by the IMF and the World Bank. This implies that the present value to the loan is US$ 101.53 million which is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan of US$ 243.8 million, which implies that the country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in present terms. 

The Table shows those indicators and Madam Speaker, I request that I go to 8.0 which is projecting institutional implementation arrangement. The executing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Works and Transport with UNRA responsible for project implementation. The Executive Director of UNRA will be the accounting officer for the project and would have overall responsibility for the project funds and implementation of the project.

Observations and recommendations

New approach to road maintenance 

The committee observed that this project will introduce a new approach to the National Road Asset Management System and its operation through the long-term commitment of maintenance financing to a single corridor as opposed to the conventional approach currently practiced where available resources are similarly distributed to all roads.

Performance-based maintenance as contracting is premised on the results achieved not on the methods for performing the work. This binds the contractor to ensure that both the quality of input and the road works stand the test of time.

The committee further notes that as this is a new method comprising a brand of work, activities indicated in table 2 already seen for this report, it may not be possible to make a direct comparison with recently completed or on-going projects which have one activity to be implemented in a very short period of time, normally two to three years. It should also be noted that OPRC project costs which are inclusive of the maintenance cost for the duration of the contract. Whereas the road authority will incur the cost of maintaining the rehabilitated road annually once it is handed over by the contractor.

The committee recommends that Government should devise mechanisms that will provide lasting solutions towards the establishment of a long-term asset management practice through sustainable road financing mechanisms. 

It also recommends that Government should consider the establishment of a well prioritised road development plan that will minimise the increasing rate of growth in the backlog of road maintenance. UNRA should as well ensure the use of quality input in the implementation of this project.

Road construction costs, Escalation and Risk of Price Fixing and Collusion

The committee observed that the high unit cost of road construction that make road project costs unpredictable, this new approach for road network management and conservation as an output and performance-based contract will mitigate the construction risks by transferring responsibility to the contractor. 

This is in consideration that the contractor will have to stimulate innovation and cost effective application of resources in order to achieve measurable outcomes.

The committee therefore recommends that UNRA should effectively carry out due diligence to ensure that an experienced OPRC contactor is awarded the contract in order to realise value for money to the road users of this road project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I think you just read the subject and recommendation; the others, members can read.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. 

Integration of Malaba–Mbale Bypass in the project

The committee recommends that Government expedites efforts of appraising and designing the Greater North road bypass along the Tororo-Mbale Road and ensure that the required funds for its construction are mobilised during the implementation of this project.

Resettlement Action Plan

The committee recommends that Government ensures timely provision of counterpart funds for this project in its annual budget during the implementation of the said project. 

Diversion of Road Funds

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that UNRA adheres to the World Bank policy prohibiting the diversion of project funds.

Limited Number of Contractors that have Experience in OPRC

The committee recommends that UNRA should prioritise efforts of deliberately building the capacity of the local contractors in implementing OPRCs.

Capacity Assessment for UNRA Technical Department

The committee recommends that Government reviews UNRA’s current staffing structure in order to improve its efficiency in the implementation of road projects.

Further, the limited technical knowledge and skills needed in implementing OPRC contract should have been budgeted for and financed by Government other than borrowing finance UNRA capacity gap which is not sustainable.

Project Implementation

The committee recommends that the government should provide adequate budgetary funds to UNRA to enable the authority to continuously build the capacity of its staff to take on supervisory roles for the future road projects that are mainly outsourced through procurement of expensive consultants whose impact is sometime not realised.

OPRC Monitoring 

The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure proper performance monitoring and strict application of penalties for noncompliance and they will be critical to the success of OPRC under this project.

The Construction of Tororo-Mbale 49 Kilometres and Mbale-oroti 103 Kilometres by Dott Services Limited

The committee recommends that in light of the mismanagement of the above observations, Government should carry out a forensic audit of the management of the Tororo-Mbale and Mbale-Soroti projects in order to establish the main cause of the delays in execution of the work that resulted in the court overruns with a view of taking punitive actions onto the responsible party so as to deter similar future occurrences.

Encumbrances as a Result of Continuous Work by Dott Services Limited

The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure that Dott Services Limited expedite the work on the Mbale-Soroti Road so as to pave way for the NERAMP project contractor.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, in conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the above recommendations, the request by Government to borrow SDR 157.6 million an equivalent of US$ 243.8 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing of the North Eastern Road corridor Asset Management Project be approved. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members. The report is duly signed by the necessary one third and you are free to debate. Honourable chairperson, I did not see our new programme for sanitation facilities to be constructed on the road. I did not see it in this report.

7.26
Mr HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for this wonderful report well summarised and you have very good recommendations. I therefore want to urge the minister that you have listened to these recommendations; implement all of them because they are good. 

Honourable minister, I do not know whether it is a strategic plan in your ministry that you intentionally plan to leave some of the areas in this country when you are planning for the country because when you see this Northern corridor, it is a very good thing which has connected almost the whole of Northern Uganda to South Sudan. But there are parts in the country that you have left out completely. I just want to give you a very small example; now that you are tarmacking the road from Vurra to South Sudan and this one connects from Nimule also up to South Sudan - but you do not have any plans to connect from Moyo to Koboko so that Yumbe is covered. In any case, is Yumbe part of this country because we know time will come that you will think as a government you have done your part, that you have connected the Northern part to the international border, aware that - (Member timed out.) 

7.28
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today we are here again to pass another loan to finance the proposed North-Eastern road corridor which I will support once my concerns are responded to. I have looked at this report; I want the minister to assist me because we are faced with environmental concerns. 

And today, as Uganda prepares to start producing oil, I have not seen any component regarding the environmental and climate change management issues. I have not seen any component concerning planting trees. I know there are roads which have been completed but when you pass through, you do not see trees along the road side and yet we are facing climate change challenges. I want the minister to assure me that the issues of environmental management are going to be put right.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, some few months ago we passed a loan for financing the construction of the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima road. The information that we are getting is not good for the people who are supposed to benefit from that road. I want the minister to assure us that if we pass this loan today that the money is going to be put to the use which it is intended for, and we want to know what happened to that loan which passed for the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima road.

Lastly, I have not got anything concerning access roads to communities. Most roads when they are constructed and when the contractor -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I think that was an important point, you have half a minute to conclude.

MRS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In most cases when the contractors complete the construction of the road they leave without putting in place access roads to communities; the communities suffer in accessing their homesteads and plots. So, we want to be assured that the accessibility to communities, trading centres and homes that are along the roads, it is going to be put in place. Thank you very, Madam Speaker.

7.31
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, what happened to the Ishaka_Katungulu Road? It was in the budget last year; it is in the budget this year, half the year is gone and there is nothing on ground. Can we be told what happened to the Ishaka_Katungulu Road?

Secondly, in table 2, I was looking for contingency and I have not seen it. This is a unique project and it is the first time I do not see any provision for contingency. It is hidden somewhere. I think we should know it because the last project we had, the contingency had gone into 17 percent. So now to see a situation where we do not have contingency is interesting.  

Thirdly, the socioeconomic cost; I think, Madam Speaker, you are talking of sanitation but we had also agreed that the each of these projects should have an element of gender, environment and the role of local government. These are not coming out; are they also hidden costs somewhere?

Lastly, on the capacity of UNRA, Madam Speaker, we see on the Mbale-Soroti Road an increase in the contract cost from $46 to 108 million. This is a big thing and the whole thing goes back into failure to provide proper graphical data, delay in contracting, procurement, failure to provide designs in time and increased scope of the road. What is happening in terms of the capacity of UNRA? Are we safe to continue to procure loans with a staff which has no capacity and we end up with an increase to contract sum from $40 to 100 million. 

Madam Speaker,  the minister should assure the nation that we have the capacity to implement the loan. Thank you.

7.33
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report that they have generated. I have one pertinent question, how many loans did we pass to the extent that they are now being issued out and some of these loans are idle and not being implemented? I know of one that we passed in 2012; that loan was meant to upgrade some technical institute for Kalongo Technical Institute but since the time we passed the loan, no work has been done. The school is still like that and then you wonder; you are getting loans, some loans are idle and it is not being used and we are applying for more loans. 

We should not be attracted maybe because of the interest rates; it would be good for us to get a loan which we know we are going to pay back. We will not be stealing if we get the money and put it to use - for example, like you have put in your report, Dott Services have spent all the money; they have been extending the period of time and yet at the end we Ugandans are the ones who are going to pay for this. 

I think it is high time for us also to scrutinize some of these things so deeply. Otherwise we shall be approving many loans.

Worse still, you have been advising us that if we are going for a loan, remember other things; there are things that we need not to borrow money for. For example training; when you look at component number 5, 1, 2, - those components you are talking about like building institutional support of UNRA with $14 million; it is just building support. I do not understand. A loan is a loan. You cannot just borrow a loan for a workshop, paper - really we have all borrowed money; you sit your family down- (Member timed out.) 

7.35
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very, much Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this very good report and also to support their recommendation. However, Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of this House to table No. 2. When you look at table No. 2, you find that there is some kind of lack of Government commitment to its project and it is so worrying.

Madam Speaker just to scrutinise that table, you will find that the areas which are not very important to the project are to be funded 100 percent from the borrowed money. These areas are project operating costs; that means when we get the loan 100 percent, the project operating cost will not suffer if the Government of Uganda does not get the core fund.

Look at b (2) support in contract supervision and management of OPRC, it is a 100 percent funded by IDA. This means that Government will not bring anything and if Government does not contribute, this area will not suffer. 

Look at a (1) which is very important; output and performance-best road maintenance. The Government of Uganda is going to contribute; meaning that if Government fails to contribute, then this area will suffer.

Madam Speaker, I am not happy about this. At least we would have put all these money to areas which have the key result areas instead of putting it in building our capacity, operating costs and the likes. 

I want to appeal to the Executive that next time when you are trying to spread these costs, at least show some  kind of commitment that you can build your own capacity, meet money for operating costs and then push at least all the money to the most important output of the loan. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.37
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the chairman on the report and recommendations. However, I have only two issues on this report. Firstly, there is a road from Arua connected to Odramachaku via Lina border to Ariwara. We were there recently with the area MP hon. Benard Atiku and in this report, the chairman could have included that section; it is not very big but very crucial, between Uganda and Congo.

Secondly, Madam Speaker I have another serious question about our roads. My colleague, hon. Jalia Bintu talked of the road from Kigumba-Hoima up to Kabwoya but there is another section from Kabwoya-Kagadi up to Kyenjojo. That road was supposed to be worked on earlier on. Actually, we had even secured some assurance from JICA but later on JICA pulled out and Government promised us that they are getting money from World Bank. Whenever I meet the chairman and even the minister, they say we are coming to visit the place and approve the loan. Up to now, Madam Speaker, the chairman and his committee have not visited that road from Kyenjojo, Kadagi up to Kabwoya and it has appeared in all budgets I think for 16 years now but there is nothing going on. Every time we are home in Kyenjojo or Kagadi, the people almost attack us. They ask us, what is happening, are you part of Uganda?

There are so many trailers and so many vehicles carrying commodities such as tea from those areas because we are a tea-producing area up to Kampala and other areas. It is really very serious. Even tourists from Murchison Falls going to Fort Portal they use that road but they are always stuck. Can I get assurance from the minister that they shall release some funds for the committee to visit the areas and bring a report here so that we pass the loan and maybe we can also have something to tell our people in those areas. Thank you very much.

7.39
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do thank the committee for the very good report and for that matter, I really support that Government gets this loan for the road; it is quite a very good strategy. At the same time, I have moved to many of our districts to the extreme end of our country and I really feel happy that at least when you move from Kisoro to Kabale and continue up to Kampala, you really go on very well. You feel like you are traveling on a very good road. Also, as you proceed from Kampala to the North, the roads are also getting very okay. 

Now, my main point here is, there are some areas as my sister mentioned, that seem to be forgotten as we are planning. First of all, I am also happy that at least, Madam Speaker, you are really very concerned about the Karamoja side. Yesterday, you said that you were in Karamoja and I was very happy. I was seated here and I was very happy to hear from you. 

Now, there is the Soroti-Moroto Road. Most of us use that road when we go to Karamoja and when it rains, it is really terrible. All of us are witness to this. But when I contacted the Ministry of Works officials, they told me that the road designs have already been done. People are happy about it, we are also happy about that but that is not enough. 

My concern now or the point to get from the minister is, since the road designs have already been made, where do you expect to get funding for this road so that we can really feel happy that at least something is going to happen because just road designs are made and left like that - they are left for years and years before anything happens. I would like to from the minister. Thank you.

7.41
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently, I told the House that whenever we pass a loan here, the people who are more excited are the ones who sit at the back of these benches- (Applause) - and you will see when we pass this one. The reason I am raising this is they are the ones who do the project designs, who go into the process of negotiations, who get the money, who will advertise for procurement, who will be the project managers and implementation. Now, they will come to Parliament for approval and the Auditor-General will only bring a report that either the project was done successfully or not. And in most cases when there is a financial audit, you would not know because Shs 10 million is equal to Shs 10 million. 

The reason I am raising this is the issue of training, which I want to start with. Over $14 million for training; we are going to advertise the road, the contractor will be “X”; maybe a Chinese, a Sudanese company will come with their engineers and people trained to do the project. UNRA comes here - I do not know, the vote is No. 54 or something - we pass money for them to go and maintain them; salaries, workshops and whatever. We pass money for them. Now, this $14 million is a direct kick-back and we are going to pass it. That is why I said when we pass money, they are happy and their minister now will be the happiest because they know they are completely covered.

Recently in Eastern Uganda - I will give a specific one, Namagumba-Budadiri, Budadiri-Sironko; there were Mvule trees. Nabumali-Rwakhakha, there were big Mvule trees. Madam Speaker, they came and said we are cutting these trees because we are going to make the roads. They cut them in 2009 and 2010 and they sold the trees. The trees were planted by Kakungulu without getting even a loan. Now, here we are talking about loans to plant trees. They were cut and the roads have never been made and the cost is simple; $15 million will be enough for one portion. So, it means, the one which would have gone for training would have done one road.

7.44
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report and I want to say that I stand to support the approval of this loan.

Madam Speaker, our people in the East and the North have suffered with very bad roads. Up to today, Dott Services Limited has not completed the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road and we have been through it for over five years now with a lot of inconvenience. 

But Madam Speaker, you realise that the volume of the traffic along that road now is increasing on a daily basis. The number of trailers on that road is growing every day and so far, the work done by Dott Services Limited cannot be sustained. Even if you look at what they have done now, the road is getting destroyed even before they hand it over to the Government. I think this one will go a long way to improve on that road. Madam Speaker, the only thing I want to caution on is that I hope this is not going to be another loan approved which will go the way the Katosi Road loan has gone. 

That is where my problem is, Madam Speaker. It hurts; it is annoying, you get so disappointed. And I want to warn that this time round, we are going to be on alert, Mr Minister. I hope you are not going to play around with this particular loan because then we are going to drum everybody and you will get them on the way there waiting for you because when you approve a loan here and you expect a good road for our people and then you see what is happening in Katosi, where people are now suffering, and the money has been eaten by a few individuals, that is so disappointing. 

I am happy there is a bypass - the Malaba -Tororo but equally, Soroti needs a bypass seriously because when you look at the way the trailers are destroying the town, it really needs a by-pass for Soroti. So, I want to beg that the minister takes into consideration Soroti for a bypass. It will help us so much. That is what I wanted to say. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

7.48
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, my concern is on gender issues. In the last report, we deliberately debated and said that gender issues should be considered. However, I do not see anything in this report. So, I find it very difficult to support the loan when those issues were not addressed.

Madam Speaker, like my colleague has said, the capacity of UNRA in monitoring the project has been questionable, including their capacity on local roads. Government keeps on borrowing money but not strengthening UNRA in terms of capacity. I do not know whether the minister is interested in that authority or the fact that it is an authority, he has kept a deaf ear to monitoring what is taking place in there. This is because the committee is saying since 2008, the starting level has been below yet we continued borrowing to give to an authority, that does not have the capacity to monitor all these projects, such a lot of money. Are we really getting value for money in this project?

Honourable minister, I want to give you a scenario of Kagamba-Ishaka Road that passes through my district. If you could look at what those service providers are doing, I do not know whether you are going to get the contractors to do this work. Those service providers have failed completely. There is no value for money and even when you go there, you realise they are just playing around and raising hope in people that they are doing a tarmac road yet not. So, are going to contract people who cannot even manage to give us value for money? 

Madam Speaker, I think the minister needs to interest himself in UNRA rather than coming here to tell us he wants to build the capacity - he has to actually train. What type of training? Why don’t you recruit capable people who have the skills to manage and monitor projects of Government of Uganda that take a lot of money -(Member timed out.)

7.50
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is important to develop this corridor and that is the very reason we should borrow money for it. But, with the exception of the $14 million to create awareness about a road, I think that it is not fair to this country and to the taxpayers that $14 million will be spent, in the words of the committee, on the change process and to build awareness about a road? I think that segment should be stayed by this House.

Secondly, I see there is a segment on road safety, which I am passionate about - $ 7.5 million. But the issues of road safety are very inherent in road construction; you build the roads with two lanes: oncoming traffic with one lane; outgoing traffic with one lane. That road is inherently unsafe because the lights of the cars moving next to each other are going to cause problem. 

The world is moving towards building roads that are four lanes separated in the middle. This Parliament has been doing benchmarking. I know the physical infrastructure committee went to Ethiopia. Their roads are big. People are building roads with 30 to 50 years in mind. I do not know what you are planning to build before you sensitise people about road safety. I hope you are thinking of building roads the way Rwanda and Kenya are building; two lanes on each side but separated in the middle with no possibility of a head on collision. That would be road safety, not just these workshops. 

I thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker.
7.53
MS ANGELLINE OSEGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by emphasising the fact that Soroti really needs a bypass. Probably the opinion of the engineers can do it, but a bypass is very necessary because of the heavy traffic that passes in the middle of the town and the road is very narrow, causing many accidents.
 
Madam Speaker, while I want to say categorically that I support - because we need this road as Eastern Region and Soroti in particular - I have a few questions to raise. I know that right now the maintenance work has been going on that road since 2010. We do not know, as we speak now, when it will be completed. I am sure that all the work that is going on as maintenance came from a loan. Would the minister want to tell us why we borrow first of all to maintain and the maintenance take so long? I think the services we have been crying about in regard to this road for all these years - the recommendations the committee is giving, are very weak. We need to unveil those services. Who owns those services? I think it is about time we blacklisted those services as a company in Uganda.
We would also like to know how much we have borrowed, as a country, so far in comparison to what we consume. A member just lamented that the money we borrowed a number of years ago has not been put to use. But Ugandans are paying interest. For how long are we going to do this? Can the ministry tell us so far what we have borrowed and how much has been put to use and how much is not yet being utilised?

Thirdly, when does this construction begin if we approve this loan given the fact that right now the maintenance is still going on? We do not know when it will be completed. Actually, sometimes they go to sleep and they wake after one or two months and start doing small bit of work and go back to sleep -(Member timed out.)

7.55
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to use this opportunity to appreciate the work done by the Committee on National Economy. But, I have a number of issues to address to you too.

First of all, in the report, you have talked about maintenance being incorporated into the system, which is very good. This is because when you look at the system in Uganda, the biggest problem we have is about road maintenance. Now that we have incorporated these, I think there will be some better research as far as road construction is concerned. 

But, I have a number of other issues here. I want you to tell me why you chose nine years because in your report, you have not indicated the right time for this road? How long is it going to last in terms of its lifespan? You see when you talk about a nine year’s maintenance period it means that this road is going to last for the next 20 years or so.

Madam Speaker, previously I talked about the road from Kampala to Masaka. This road is not yet commissioned, but a section of about 80 to 90 percent of the road is already being patched. I do not know what the problem is – I can see the honourable minister shaking his head but this is the right information. If you want to prove this, drive along that road one day; the road is being patched yet it is not yet commissioned.

As the previous speakers have said, we also need to be updated on the loan status -(Member timed out.)

7.57
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the chairperson too for the good work done. 

Madam Speaker, we have a big challenge. I hope the government could be clear on policy issues. We need to borrow money to do budget support. Colleagues have talked about borrowing money for projects but I thought we moved away from that. Project support is very dangerous. It leads to middlemen, corruption and very high costs.
Because now we are going to borrow this money, people already know that the road from Malaba to Corner Kamdini is going to cost this without advertising, but if you borrow this money as budget support, it would be cheaper - we need this money for 10 years.

We have taxes that we raise annually. If we borrow this money and use it in the next two years we will have to pay interest. But, part of this money is going to stay in the World Bank accounts for some time yet we shall be paying interest. So, what the Government of Uganda needs to do - this project support is a loan approach that the world has abandoned. 

Uganda’s rating global is so high that we can borrow money for budget support for a given project to be done within a specific time - even if you read this, Madam Speaker,  unfortunately the Attorney-General has gone. But one of the conditions is that the Attorney-General must comply with the World Bank procurement guideline, but which contradicts and violates the PPDA Act and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. If some of us raise this document with the World Bank kind of investigation, we shall be called saboteurs. 

I also find myself in a very difficult position but I would like to thank the chairman for recommending the construction of bypass from Malaba, which is my constituency. I want to thank you very much because if you went to Malaba now and the network is off, you can take five hours to cross to Kenya. Therefore, this is a very good initiative but the government policy needs to be handled properly because -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the decisions we take in this House on all these loans - the Minister of Finance, Minister of Woks and Government in general need to come back here to update Parliament. We are willing to give you budget support so that you do our work. We are already approving a budget for UNRA through this and so tomorrow you cannot question our ability to support you. 

So, please come back to us with a clear policy on whether you want $22 trillion; we will give you budget support. Otherwise, I want to thank you for the bypass in Malaba to reduce congestion on that corridor.

8.00
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan request. Like members have indicated, the quality of roads that we are constructing in Uganda need to be revisited. Honourable minister, you have been in so many countries and you must have been to countries where roads have stayed for 20 years. 

Our roads – look at Kampala-Masaka Road; a road that has not yet been completed but full of potholes! Recently, Madam Speaker, I was in Kamuli. This road is yet to be completed but where they started potholes have already begun developing yet the road has taken Government years getting it constructed. What are we doing? Shall we keep rotating around that all the time? These are issues that we need to consider and reflect upon seriously.

Madam Speaker, the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road has been done to some level. It is not clear whether this money is going to be used again for the reconstruction of that road or not because we are talking of maintenance. 

This reminds me of one borehole in Omanyima in Lamwo District, which was being claimed by a number of contractors like AMREF, the District Local Government and the Red Cross. I am sure this particular contract may take us to the same point because Tororo has been done and there is that stretch from Lira to Kamdini, which still has potholes.
 
So, as we approve this loan, we need to get further information before we could say –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I think we need to be careful with this loan. I was trying to find out what exactly we are borrowing money to do? Under component one where we are paying Shs 240 million - I think colleagues, let us be a little more careful. We are borrowing money to design and rehabilitate the road from Tororo through Mbale and Soroti to Kamdini. However, unless anybody has not gone through that road - we are not talking about construction; we are talking of rehabilitation and maintenance. We are also talking of routine and periodic maintenance for nine years and then traffic management, road safety, acquisition and so on.

When I looked at the unit cost of this road, just below Table II in the report, you have a section called ‘average unit cost’. Using this loan for those 340 Kilometres - on average the loan money will help us to rehabilitate and maintain the road at an average unit of $ 680,000 per Kilometre. 

This is where the committee becomes very useful to us. They point out that in contrast with UNRA for the same road, for rehabilitation alone, UNRA would use $ 790,000 per Kilometre in addition to maintenance for the nine years. 

Madam Speaker, it means if we get the contractors, these foreigners for the same number of kilometres, we will use $680,000 yet using our own staff of UNRA only to rehabilitate without the periodic maintenance and traffic management, they want us to spend $790,000.

In my view, I think we have reached a stage where we need to inquire a little more as to what we are doing with this loan. We are not talking of road construction but rehabilitation, patching up a few places here and there and then training and routine maintenance.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that we really become a little more sober on this loan. I think there is a lot hidden in the request.

MR MUWUMA: Like I was saying, none of us intends to block this loan but -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, you complete your sentence.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are looking at is specifically what this loan is going to do? How is it going to benefit Ugandans? This is important because if we are considering a road from Soroti to Amuria to Katakwi and Moroto, we will study the value for money to be realised.

Looking at the Dokolo-Amolatar Road - we assume that it is adding value. But just mere maintenance and we are getting to spent all this colossal sums of money, I have reservations. 

I pray that we ask for further information from the responsible minister so we can understand this loan request better.

8.07
GEN. PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I see a missing link in the procurement of this loan.  I am happy with what the Committee on Finance has done. But, where is our Committee on Physical Infrastructure in all this? What are we going to borrow this money for? Does finance know the kind of roads we want to build between Kamdini and Malaba? 

I think we need to go through a process where the contractor does not have to design the road for us. He can propose but we agree with the contractor; suggest the kind of road we want which will last 20 to 60 years and so on.

I was told that there is a poor man’s road and that there is no rich man’s road. Many of you have travelled outside the country. The kind of roads we see there are not anywhere in this country yet every day we procure a road - when are we going to procure a rich man’s road that will last and serve us longer? 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give, for the benefit of this House, is that maybe possibly when committees are coming up with such, they should also move because some of us have moved along those roads, part of the roads are worked on so we would have procured money for parts like the Tororo bypass, which is not worked on and this other money would be used in another place. 

Recently, we went for celebrations in Soroti and part of the Soroti Road is really good. That is why I am saying we should not really borrow money to do roads that are clear. Thank you.

GEN. KATIRIMA: Last but not least, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Works to lay on Table, a document on the capacity of UNRA to absorb all this money they have at their disposal including these loans, which I think are belatedly being borrowed. I know we are about to go for recess. So, why do you bring a loan request at the last minute? Why didn’t you bring this loan early for the many stakeholders to get involved in procuring it? 

8.09
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA	(NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson and the committee on National Economy for having considered this loan because it has been pending. 

As members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we asked why they made the road as it is and we were assured that it was for only the rehabilitation of Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road; that there is another programme for adding on two layers to strengthen it so that it can hold the axle road of heavy trailers that come from Mombasa, Kenya up to South Sudan.

So, I implore members to support this. But the minister should clarify on the issues that are not yet understood. I support that the design be made by somebody else other than those who are going to make the road. They should now consider the other bridges - Manafwa and Fika Salama because in this on-going programme they never considered those. What we are asking is: why did you contract all that amount of money without considering these? What if Manafwa Bridge breaks now, what will be the use of the road? 

So, Mr Minister, clarify to us and what is the design? Have you finished the design and if so, when is it coming out? Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I support the loan though with a caution to the minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I just want the minister to tell us the lifespan of our roads. I am asking because some time back we were invited to Ghana for the Golden Jubilee celebrations but on every road we were driving, we were told “This road was built by Kwame Nkrumah.” (Applause) He is long dead but the roads are still as good as new; you know! 

Second, minister, when Government constructed the Northern Bypass, we were told it would help the people going to the east, but what happens is that, you brought many channels into one, meaning that for us it makes no difference. We are still congested. I want to know the roads you are going to build, how many lanes they are going to be? This is important because if it is the same one lane, I think there is nothing you are doing. 

8.12
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also very sincerely thank my colleagues for the excellent and brilliant comments they made before we take this loan. 

I will start with yours, Madam Speaker, about the lifespan. I want to say that the lifespan of a road is determined by how much money you have. Yes, because when we are designing roads, the parameters we look at are the NC to CBR (Californian Bearing Capacity) of the soil where you construct the road. The second one is the lifespan of the road and the third is the actual numbers it is going to carry.

So, when you manipulate those to fit within the budget - if I have very little money, but the actual numbers are high, I will have to reduce the lifespan. But what we have done in the ministry now is to ensure all the major corridors -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I wish she could leave me to explain. Can’t you be patient for a minute? (Laughter) So, that explains how we manipulate –

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain before you come in.

MR BYANDALA: Please give me a chance –(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, he has left those things of CBR, which I do not understand yet I needed him to have me on board. He cannot take my interest for granted.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you speak in English?

MR BYANDALA: I said CBR is Californian Bearing Ratio and I told you it is the strength of the soil on which you are building the road. That NC to CBR plus the lifespan together with the actual numbers gives us the materials and the thicknesses of the different members of the road. When we get those, then we play around and see what the thickness of the road should be. That is how it comes in. 

Another issue you touched on, Madam Speaker, was the number of lanes. Also a number of colleagues here like my sister, the hon. Alice Alaso, talked about it. I would like to mention that if you have one lane going this way and the other one there, such a road is prone to accidents. 

Madam Speaker, the number of lanes is not determined through guess work; the number of lanes is determined through calculations. I cannot go to the World Bank and say I am going to have four lanes: two here and two there, when the traffic count does not dictate that because before I go there, they have to know - there must be value for money to talk about. So – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if there are potholes on the road, will he calculate that too? Definitely he won’t. The traffic is according to how the road is. In Kampala you get somebody shunning roads because of potholes. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for a Minister of Works, who knows that traffic on a road is determined by the goodness of the road -(Laughter)- in fact there are many members of Parliament who, instead of going every weekend to their villages, they ignore due to the bad roads? Many prefer to go there after two or so weeks yet if the roads were okay, they would go every week. 

Members from, for example, Masaka would be going to their constituencies every day. But because the road is bad, they go once every week. So, is the Minister of Works, who has also ever been the engineer of Kampala City Council -(Laughter) - where there are many potholes, in order to say that the road lanes are determined according to the traffic?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should be sensitive to the reality of what is happening on our roads. A few weeks ago, I came and complained that I had spent two hours in the traffic jam despite my lead car, trying to get to Jinja at a distance of about 10 miles; that was I in two hours. But I found people there and so left them there also. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, you are totally right and that is why at the moment we are trying to build another road from Jinja to Kampala. 

What my colleague, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi says that it is the traffic - you go and build a four lane road from Luweero to Nakasongola and tell me that you will get vehicles to fill it. It is not there. Anyway this is a scientific -(Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is: we have had a lot of accidents in this country to the extent that it is now very difficult to drive on Ugandan roads at night. I personally drive - I love driving - but if you look at Kampala–Jinja-Iganga Road, you realise it is so narrow that at times if you are meeting another driver who is not disciplined and/or they do not dim, it would be very difficult for you to bypass that vehicle. That is why we are having a lot of head-on-collusion accidents. The minister has talked about Gulu. But almost on a daily basis, Madam Speaker, we are having head-on-collusion accidents on Gulu Road. 

The clarification I want to seek from the minister is: is he not seeing even those head-on-collusion accidents and does it mean we do not need a dual highway? I am asking this because my understanding is that if we had one, we would not be having head-on-collusion accidents at night. Can the minister clarify to me and the House at large, whether those accidents we are having do not necessitate a dual high highway in this country?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, whenever we are going to do road construction, we take a traffic survey. This helps us to determine by how much it is going to grow. We also take into consideration, what is going to be diverted to this road. This is how we get to determine how much traffic would circulate on the lanes. And if traffic is anticipated to be growing, we make the road dual. 

My colleagues said they should be two lanes on each side of the road. Why didn’t they say ten on each side? All I am saying is that these things are not determined through guess. We calculate to determine whether the two lanes are required. 

My colleague, the hon. Stephen Ochola has talked about accidents. When you gauge all the studies done on road safety, most accidents are not caused by the size of the road; they occur through human error, reckless driving, people who drive while drunk and those who drive without permits - (Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the minister speaking is a person who lives in this country. When you look at our roads, for example, Masaka highway, Entebbe, Gulu, Jinja and all the other major highways and you see how difficult it is to drive along there, then the small traffic you are talking about does not stand. 

So, is the minister in order to continue trying to convince this House that we still have very little traffic to necessitate dual highway road construction? 

We cannot ask for ten lanes because you have not even made two. We are just trying to say that can we just have two. So, is the minister in order, Madam Speaker, to continue derailing this House when we are trying to save the lives of Ugandans and trying to catch-up with the rest of the world? How can even the neighbouring countries like Rwanda beat us? Even DRC, which was behind is now beating us. So, is the minister in order, Madam Speaker? (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: No he is not. Please, honourable minister, I do not know how much time you take when driving to attend Cabinet meeting in Entebbe. I am sure you spend hours on the road and you meet so much traffic. So, please!

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, this is exactly why we are having those programmes. From Jinja to Kampala, we are planning and we are in advanced stages for an express four lane highway. When you take Entebbe Road - we are right now building an express way from Kampala to Entebbe. We already have a programme for doing a dual road from Kampala to Mpigi. We have a programme to do a dual road from Kampala to Bombo and all these will be done after doing a traffic count.

All I am saying, Madam Speaker, is that this is done scientifically; it is not guess work. I am not happy with the accidents which take place all the time. I am the person who is most hurt but we are trying our level best.

Madam Speaker, let me try to answer the questions, which came out in regard to this road. Under this programme, we are going to convert this road from class 2 to 1. This means the geometrical parameters are going to change not only horizontally but even vertically and this one -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him first answer because these are questions you asked. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think the way the minister is proceeding is going to make us miss the real point about this loan. This loan has been distributed very carefully according to the components. How is this money - if we allow it to be borrowed - going to be spent? That information is very clearly shown at page number 5, component 5. 

But now the minister is telling us about bringing this from certain class to another class, which is of higher level yet that is not indicated in this report. Even in this report the committee stated very clearly -(Interjections)- can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

MR AMOS OKOT: The committee indicated very clearly that the Mbale bypass in this project report has been left out. Many members were saying they are happy because the Mbale bypass has been included but the committee has indicated it has been left out. 

So, the way the minister is talking about converting this road from a certain grade to another yet that has not been indicated in this report is really not in order. So, is the minister in order to begin bringing things, which have not been indicated here, just to confuse the whole House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the project proposal different from what you are going to do because this says ‘rehabilitation’ it is not upgrading a road to a different class.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda is borrowing this money to work on this road and I am telling you that we are upgrading it from class 2 to class 1. That means, the cross section of the road is going to –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need this information; let us get the information.

MR BYANDALA: We have talked about these roads; the road from Tororo-Mbale and Soroti has been and will be worked on by Masters Dott Services. What has been done, the wearing course, in this new project it will be a layer below - and there are other layers which are going to be up after even widening the road.
 
When you take the section from Soroti-Dokolo-Lira that was constructed not many years ago, and at the time I was the Chairman of the Physical Infrastructure Committee. I recall advising my colleagues then that they were making a mistake given the way they were doing the road because the traffic count they were working on were those determined when South Sudan was still under war. After the war, the traffic volume increased hence the action numbers. They did not say anything but when I went to the ministry I put my case to the funders, the World Bank, and they agreed with me. They even agreed to give us more money to put on more layers for it to withstand the action numbers.

Then we set the section from Lira to Kamdini, which needs total reconstruction because we have not done any work on it. So, those are the three. 

The other issue, though upon which I came out very clearly, that came from my colleague is this $14 million, which they said is too much yet it is for workshops. If we go into the report, Madam Speaker, of the committee, you realise that there are three components to that: One is about asset management and road safety, which is going to cost $7.5 million and that will cover development or output specifications for the longterm contract, monitoring and evacuation and reporting on the performance of parameters.

The second is about consultancy services that will prepare asset management contracts for future projects. The third one is about road safety audits, monitoring and evacuation. Then there is part (b) under that, that is about support in contract supervision and management of OPRC and that will cost Shs 5.5 billion. This is covering many items. I wish to implore members with copies of the report to see part (b).

And then there is component (c), which is operating costs and it costs Shs 1,000,000. There is a breakdown down there.  This is a question of workshops or training - it is really in the report. The chairman was very kind. He elaborated them and it is not fair for somebody to come here and say that the $14 million is for workshops, no, it is not! The report is here. This is not my report; it was written by the chairperson and it is here for everybody to read.
 
THE SPEAKER: There is some information from one of the committee members.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you so much. The information I would like to give the House is that we changed in the report what was in the original document. There was a lot of money allocated to workshops for capacity building and the committee managed to reallocate that money to operations. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Huda Oleru, asked why we had forgotten some parts of Uganda. I pointed out a number of roads we are handling in central, western, eastern and northern Uganda. 

We are also working on a loan from ADB for a road from Atiak to Moyo via Afoji that will pass near her place. This road will help link a few areas she has talked about. 

Hon. Jalia Bintu from Masindi put -(Interruption) 

MS OLERU: Honourable minister, the road you are talking about ends in Moyo. It doesn’t go from Moyo to Yumbe and Koboko. Last week, I was with your acting ED for UNRA - the road is not there and it is not even in any of your plans. Therefore, please can you begin to plan - (Laughter) – to include it? Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, my sister but I have just said we are borrowing money to build a road from Atiak to Moyo via Afoji. I also said we shall get those links she has talked about and see how to fit them in. That road will pass near those areas she is talking about.
 
Madam Speaker, my sister, the hon. Jalia Bintu from Masindi was concerned about the environmental impact assessment. I want to state that there is no project we undertake at the ministry without doing an environmental impact assessment.  World Bank can never release funds to you unless you have done environmental impact assessment.

She also wanted to know something about the Kigumba-Masindi-Kabwoya Road. Madam Speaker, I want to inform you and the House that we have already gone very far with the procurement process in regard to that road. It is being funded by the ADB; we submitted our evaluation report seeking any objection to ADB. They wrote back with some queries and they are the ones we are working on now.
As soon as we agree then we shall be in a position to award the contract and the construction of the Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road will start. There are two contracts there.

Maybe let me also talk about the continuation of that road from Kabwoya to Kyenjojo. From Kabwoya to Kyenjojo -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: On environmental impact assessment, hon. Jalia Bintu was concerned with the planting of trees. You have some money for capacity building and we have environmental specialists in UNRA who are eating money for nothing. Environmental assessment is environmental assessment, but then how do we keep the environment and how do we keep the encroachers off? Why don’t you have a deliberate plan within the project to take care of tree planting along our road reserves? That is her concern. So, we want a deliberate plan that will see construction take place while tree planting is going on either by another contractor or consultant. 

MR BYANDALA: Point noted.

MR EKANYA: You see, honourable minister, the Speaker maybe cannot say it because she is in the chair; but has been leading a campaign among the youth to fundraise money to plant trees along road reserves. Why do you want always to put the Speaker in a very difficult situation? So, kindly take this matter very seriously.

MR BYANDALA: Point taken. (Laughter) I was talking about the second section of the road from Kabwoya to Kyenjojo. 

Madam Speaker, that road is going to be funded by the World Bank. That bank passed the loan in their board meeting of April and the ministry is now in advanced procurement stages. We are just waiting for the government to bring a request here for Parliament to pass it. But, as I speak, we are at pre-qualification stage and as soon as the loan is passed, World Bank will give us a no objection for us to proceed to go on. So, I want to assure Parliament and the country that the road from Kigumba to Masindi and Hoima to Kabwoya and Kyenjojo will be started on in 2015.

Hon. Magyezi asked something about the Ishaka-Katungulu Road. On this one, I want to report that we are doing procurement now. It is going to be rehabilitated in the same manner we are doing the Kawempe-Kafu-Gulu Road. We are in the procurement process. I would like to appeal to hon. Raphael Magyezi tell his people that government is aware and is coming to work on their road.

Capacity of UNRA 

Madam Speaker, UNRA is just over five years ago. That is when it came into formation. And, since I went there, we have embarked on the process of restructuring; not only restructuring but also putting a new structure, which can handle the work they are supposed to do. 

I was consulting my chairperson of the board last week, and she told me they have gone a long way. As soon as they are through, they will submit this to the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance to see whether they concur and then we can recruit more people. But, in the meantime, we use the services of consultants. We also use services of technical assistance, which are in UNRA and the Ministry of Works.

Hon. Okot Amos, talked about how much money we have taken. But on that I want to inform you that Ministry of Finance will answer that. He also talked about the $14 million, which I have explained; it is not about workshops.

Hon. David Muhumuza said something about the Kyenjojo-Kabwoya Road, which I have already explained. Some members asked something about the when we are going to work on the Soroti-Katakwi-Iriri-Moroto Road. I am very happy he knows that we have already designed the roads; we will start on this road as long as money comes. I am happy to report to the House and for those who did not know, we are already going to borrow money to upgrade a road from Muyembe to Nakapiripirit and that is part of the road going to Karamoja.

On Mbale-Bubulo-Rwakhakha Road, Madam Speaker, I want to remind the House that we came here for a loan from the ADB. As I speak, we are at the pre-qualification stage. We are getting money from ADB to upgrade the road from Mbale to Bubulo and Rwakhakha though this is the same loan we are going to use for Rukungiri-Ishasa-Kihihi-Kanungu Road. Those two roads are on course. 

On Katosi Road, as I have been telling you, this road was started in 2010 when I was here as a backbencher. The biggest mess on that road - they found the best evaluated contractor that American firm, which actually never even bided. All these were done in 2010 while I was not there. 

But what I can assure you, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues and the country, is that the Government of Uganda is determined to construct that road. I hope by the end of January, we will have got another contractor to finalise that road in time for the people to use it.

On the Kagamba-Ishaka Road, some work is going on -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has just stated that another contractor is coming to the Katosi Road. According to what we know, the first contractor had taken up the road at Shs 165 million. So, is it in order for the contractor who had won the contract to overlap him with another contract? Won’t it result into litigation against government? According to what we have heard even the price might have increased to Shs 255 from Shs 165 billion. Therefore, was he in order to change the contractor in the middle?

THE SPEAKER: I think let the minister explain. I do not know the details of what he is doing.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, we got legal advice from the Office of the Attorney-General who analysed the contract and his conclusions were, in summary thus: That the American company does not exist, hence there was no contract; you cannot have a contract with nobody. Second advice was that, the Chinese company – CICO – we do not have any relationship with CICO because, they were claiming to be there as sub-contractors. And as you know, Madam Speaker, to be sub-contracted, the client must give approval. We never received any communication from the so-called main contractor about sub-contracting. Hence, that Chinese company is there illegally. So, we are going to procure a new contractor by the end of January to do that work.

MS KWAGALA: Madam Speaker, can I seek clarification from the minister? I have 60 relatives on Katosi Road, in Nkokonjeru. I went and looked at the documents, which the contractors gave them for compensation. But they had nothing like a rate. They were just open letters. 

So, Mr Minister, about this Katosi compensation, what will happen to my relatives, especially those in Nkokonjeru and in the towns where the road is supposed to pass? The contactors gave them documents and part of the area to be graded forms part of their graveyards, but the documents do not carry any figures. And now that you are saying the first contractor was a ghost, have you made arrangements for people to be compensated by the new contractor? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But, is the compensation from the contractor or from the government? I think that is the government’s responsibility?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda compensates the PAPs - the Project Affected Persons. They are paid off by government. As I speak, there are some PAPs who have already been paid on that road. I want to assure my sister, that each and everybody person affected by this project will be paid. The Government of Uganda follows the Constitution. We will not fail and we will never fail to compensate people on that road. But, they should also know that we get this money in quarters. When money for the first quarter gets finished, we have to wait.

So please, I appeal to all my colleagues to go and talk to our people that the Government of Uganda will pay them. Explain the mode of the release of money to the ministry so that they can know and remain calm.
 
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I only want to seek a clarification from you. How do these people come to sign an agreement without the consent of the Government of Uganda? I believe the Government of Uganda has technocrats. So how did this agreement come into being? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we are diverting from this loan to Katosi. I think our committee is handling that matter and I expect a report. Let us leave the Katosi’s issues for now and deal with the Northern Corridor.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Now, I can go to my sister, hon. Rose Nyakikongoro on the Kagamba-Ishaka Road. Yes, we apologise that there has been a delay in the execution of this work. But there are problems of the contractor and the clients. However, we are doing all our best to see that work is finished.

You need to know that when you contract somebody and you do not pay them in time or you cannot supply or give solutions to all their enquiries - but we are working around the clock; that road will be finished. You remember, Madam Speaker, how many times I stood here and assured people that Tororo-Mbale-Soroti Road would be done and people were saying it would never be done? I am sure you have passed there and seen for yourself. So, I want to assure the people who use Kagamba-Ishaka Road that it will also be finalised within the time set.

What we are going to do with this loan will be to have a road that will last for 20 years. What we have done in this OPRC - we are now putting the contractor, he has to be more responsible. The normal way we have been working was that the contractor would finish the work before being given a one year defects liability period to be off the hook. But now, you are there for nine years and if you do bad work, you will suffer with it. This is important because by the end of ninth year, we are going to take measurements to know what the residual strength of the road remaining is. If it does not take us to 20 years, we ask for compensation. 

This is a good method because it reduces my burden to look for money for maintenance. I would have even gone for other roads by that time. ADB wanted to do the same on some roads in Mbale and Rukingiri; it is me who said no because this approach is new to everybody: it is new to my technical people, our contractors here and even most consultants. 

Madam Speaker, what we are doing is to put it in a lay man understands; it is like a relationship between a girl and a boy. If my girlfriend annoys me, I can –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, I was hesitant to put the minister on the point of order. But, when we are discussing this matter that is important to all of us, is it in order for him to compare roads with women? What does that mean? Does that mean your experiences are around women and girlfriends? Are you in order to compare roads with women and girlfriend? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he had just started, so I do not know what he was going to say. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I wish my sister had listened. All I was saying is that for people to grasp what it does - because I said this is something new to the contractors, the clients and the consultants and they have to learn. This is what I was saying; if you have a girlfriend and she messes up, one day you can tell her to go. But if it is your wife, you have to tolerate many things; you have to bend so that you can stay together. And this is not a one-year relationship; it is nine years. You are in a contract for nine years; your approach with this contractor is different from this contractor you have been - so there must be a change in the approach. Our road is going to be for 20 years. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, you talked about roads in Ghana as having stayed for 50 years. That is true. There are roads we can design to last for 50 years and beyond. But the roads they talked to you about are called rigid roads. Rigid means are reinforced concrete; they are not flexible. The ones we are building here are flexible roads and I do not know anywhere they have built flexible roads and can last for 50 years but we keep on reinforcing, putting on more layers. So, the ones you were talking about are rigid roads and not flexible roads. Flexible roads are the ones we are building here in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you build the rigid ones?
 
MR BYANDALA: Yes, that is a very good question, Madam Speaker. A rigid road is very expensive compared to these roads we construct in Uganda. It means this money we have borrowed to cover over 200 kilometres, if we went in for a rigid road, may cover only 50 kilometres. Which one is better? Should we go for a 50 kilometres rigid road or the 200 kilometres flexible road and when the economy grows, we can do more? That is why it is exchanged.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister is trying to confuse this House. We are talking about long lasting roads, thereby decreasing the cost. Look at the kind of roads that we are building. After five years we are borrowing another loan. Before the lifespan of the loan expires, we need to borrow another one to do the same road. 

So, is the honourable minister in order to say it is not about time we started building rigid roads in this country? Is he in order to be short-sighted? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. (Laughter) Honourable minister, you know there have been a lot of concerns in this House about how much we are borrowing and about how many loan requests are brought here. What the members are saying is that why don’t you plan properly so we borrow serious money to build rigid roads, and save ourselves from loans for the next 30 years? 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, that is a very good suggestion, but we should also remember that our borrowing from the World Bank is limited. You cannot go and say I want billions and billions of such and such money. No, there is an envelope; there is an allocation for Uganda and an allocation for the world.
 
And talking about these rigid roads, Madam Speaker, even those developed countries, if you go there the percentage of rigid roads compared to flexible roads is very small. So, that is why –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable minister, just as a matter of procedure. If you look at page 15, this thing of flexible roads and long term roads and seeing where you are taking us, in terms of this debate - just look at paragraph (xi) “The committee however notes that those services were still carrying out civil works on the Tororo-Soroti stretch and planned to hand it over by December 2014,” which in the committee’s observation appeared next to impossible.

We are looking at the saying, let us do the simpler roads then later when the economy improves, we can do the stronger roads. Is this what you are calling class 2 to be upgrade from class 1? This road has not even been handed over. So, we are not even talking of doing this then after some time upgrade it. You are talking of a road that is not yet finished but you are here looking for another loan to rehabilitate it. 

This is where I thought in terms of procedure the Speaker has guided although through a question. Why don’t we also do the strong roads? What kind of country are we that plans to only have a flexible road and before it is even handed over we are now looking for a loan to rehabilitate it?

Madam Speaker, in terms of the way we are proceeding and really talking about whether we are here to approve this loan or not, wouldn’t it be the right time for you to put the question to determine whether Parliament will move with the minister or with the chair of the committee? I think it is time for us to say, “Honourable minister, yes we see what you want but in terms of this particular role there is something still lacking” or not. I thought that looking at where we have reached, the minister is simply running around in circles rather than actually answering our questions.
 
Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance whether it is not time to put the question on this report.

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister was more or less concluding. Is there anything else you want to say, minister, before we take a decision? 

MR BYANDALA: Yes, Madam Speaker. First, I must thank you for chairing this House on such a hot topic because this is the first time in Uganda we are going to build a road under OPRC.  You have really handled it very well. 
I also thank my colleagues that I have heard your concerns. You should remember a few years ago, I was sitting at the back like you. I am one of you and I have not changed.  I am a Ugandan. I cannot be in the ministry and wish this country something bad. I am patriotic. 

Let me inform the House that we have already identified the section though it had been worked on. We have already measured what residual strength we have and how much we have to build on to get to the level we want? So, we are using it; we are not abandoning it. This is like stage construction. You have seen even in Kampala people putting up six storied buildings but first doing two and finishing up the rest later. That is exactly what we are doing here. We had little money there - and by the way let me correct this. Somebody said that we borrowed money to do the Tororo-Soroti Road via Mbale. That is not correct. All that is being done by Government of Uganda money; there is no borrowed money on that stretch of the road. It is being done on Government of Uganda funds. I thought that should be recorded.

This is stage construction. I understand the concept is confusing you. That is why I have put a lot of emphasis on it. I have sent my technical staff in UNRA to all these countries where this is being practiced. They have been to Australia, South America and other African countries in West Africa. I am also sending more to internalise and understand the new relationships that we are going to have with this contractor.

So, as I conclude, I thank the chairperson of the committee –(Interjections)- what you are asking about has been looked at already and now they understand it. That is why they are saying, please approve the loan. We are going to look at all the issues that have been raised very seriously to ensure the best is got out of this loan.

I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do not forget the sanitation facilities. We do not want people urinating in other people’s gardens all over the road.

MR BYANDALA: Oh yes! Madam Speaker, this is an issue where we are going to have a discussion with other sectors. For me to go and build a toilet there must be continuity. How is it going to exist there? Who is going to look after it? So, I am going to sit with other sectors within the government to see how it can work both at the national and local government levels. This is because if we just build and live it there, it will not function.

Maybe we shall think of providing land along the roads for service areas where vehicles can stop for people to do their business, for example, selling food – 

THE SPEAKER: But, that is not what we are talking about.

MR BYANDALA: That one we will do but building a toilet in an isolated place, Madam Speaker, cannot work –

THE SPEAKER: No, minister what we are talking about is that place where you can find a shop and drink some coffee. If you have not been to Sri Lanka, as you drive on the road going to GOA, you will find such places.

MR BYANDALA: I totally agree with you, Madam Speaker. My sector will make sure they provide that piece of land to the intending developers to make it easy for them. This will be good not only for our people but for government’s image in the public.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I put the question that this House do approve the request. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Now, honourable members, we have more or less done what we were supposed to do today except one item. I want to just announce that tomorrow the main business is the Registration of Persons Bill. The reports are on your iPads. Please read them because that will be the main business for tomorrow. House adjourned until 2.00 O’clock. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 9.06 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)




 












