Wednesday, 21 December 2016

Parliament met at 10.51 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, members of the Cabinet and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to the final sitting of the Second Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament. We will try to work expeditiously so that we can deal with the issues on the Order Paper. I want to begin by amending the Order Paper to allow for the presentation of a loan for maternal health and another one for the Uganda Development Bank.

I would also wish to inform you, Members, that in respect to the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, although I submitted it to the committee, on closer scrutiny we realised that the Bill had been assented to on 19 November. Therefore, I have written to the President to advise that if there are amendments he wants to make, the Ministry of Finance should come now with separate proposals because the Bill is already law. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill is already law, so we do not have to worry about it. 

I would like to welcome the parliamentary sports team back. They will be speaking to us shortly. They did a very good job this time in Mombasa; they thrashed everybody and brought all the medals to Uganda. Thank you so much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

10.54
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has been seconded. Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implication?

MR BUTIME: The certificate is here and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, it was this House that demanded that the minister brings this law before we go for Christmas. However, following scrutiny of the Bill, the issue of the women council elections has not been catered for, and the timeframe within which the elections would be conducted and the display of the voters register is also completely inadequate.  

Therefore, I would like to allow the committee to look at the Bill and speak again with the minister. You can report in two weeks. I can call a special sitting just to complete this law. Therefore, I send it to the committee and they should report within two weeks.

STATEMENT ON THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY INTER-PARLIAMENTARY GAMES, 2016

10.57
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present a statement on the Seventh East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games Tournament held in Mombasa, Kenya, from 6 to 11 December 2016.

The 2016 East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games Tournament was hosted in Mombasa by the National Assembly of Kenya and seven parliaments participated. These included the Parliament of Uganda - Madam Speaker, allow me to invite all those who participated to stand up for recognition. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, I will be explaining in detail what that noise is, but that is the sound of happiness and jubilation. 

Other parliaments that participated included the National Assembly of Kenya, the Parliament of Tanzania, the Parliament of Rwanda, Parliament of Burundi and the East African Legislative Assembly. The games that featured included netball, football, golf - it was our first time as Parliament of Uganda to present participants in golf - volleyball, athletics, tug of war and walking race.

Madam Speaker, for the record of Parliament, because this is an activity that is carried out by all parliaments and endorsed by the Speakers’ Forum, I would like to note and recognise these Members so that they can get onto the Hansard: 

    1. Hon. Alum Santa – captain, netball team 
    2. Hon. Amero Susan - shooter 
    3. Hon. Sarah Babirye - goal attacker 
    4. Hon. Agnes Kunihira - defender 
    5. Hon. Franca Akello - defender 
    6. Hon. Connie Galiwango - shooter 
    7. Hon. Sarah Najjuma - wing attacker
    8. Hon. Esther Anyakun - defender 
    9. Hon. Prossy Mbabazi - wing attacker 
    10. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde - wing attacker 
    11. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi - athlete 
    12. Hon. Oliver Koyekyenga - athlete 
    13. Hon. Evelyn Chemutai – athlete
    14. Hon. Christine Achen – athlete
    15. Hon. Mourine Osoru - athlete 
    16. Hon. Ann Adeke - athlete 
    17. Hon. Catherine Ndamira – volley baller 
    18. Hon. Viola Akurut - volley baller
    19. Hon. Evelyn Asiimwe - golf captain
    20. Hon. Dorothy Nshaija - shooter 
    21. Hon. Lucy Akello - tug of war.

Madam Speaker, from the women’s side, we had our staff of Parliament: 

    1. Ms Shallon Atuhaire
    2. Ms Rebacca Kamega 
    3. Ms Florence Nankabirwa - Nurse
    4. Ms Agnes Kainengoma 
    5. Ms Olivia Nabifo
    6. Ms Annabel Nyinamahoro
    7. Ms Lillian Aduka
    8. Ms Florence Awori

We also had Mr Fred Mugerwa, the coach of the Uganda netball team, whom I am privileged to introduce and I beg you, Madam Speaker, to recognise his presence here, and Mr Bachu Raffi, the coach of the parliamentary volleyball team. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, from the men’s side, we had:

    1. Hon. Odonga Otto - manager of the men’s wing 
    2. Hon. Ogwang Peter
    3. Hon. Ssewanyana Allan 
    4. Hon. Obua Denis Hamson – captain
    5. Hon. Mugema Peter Panadol
    6. Hon. Pentagon Kamusiime 
    7. Hon. Kaluya Andrew
    8. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa 
    9. Hon. Francis Zaake
    10. Hon. Johnson Bagoole 
    11. Hon. Bernard Atiku
    12. Hon. Kafeero Robert Ssekitoleko 
    13. Hon. Christopher Kipterit
    14. Hon. Joshua Anywarach 
    15. Hon. Fred Angella 
    16. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko 
    17. Hon. Robert Musoke 
    18. Hon. Abbas Agaba 
    19. Hon. Alero Tom Aza
    20. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga Aja 
    21. Gen. Ivan Koreta - golfer 
    22. Hon. Katoto Hatwib
    23. Hon. Simon Oyet 
    24. Hon. James Acidri 
    25. Hon. Julius Acon

Among the staff, we had:

    1. Mr Nsimbe Kassim 
    2. Mr Sekidde Daniel 
    3. Mr Obed Agaba 
    4. Mr Edward Mubiru 
    5. Mr Olok Geoffrey 
    6. Mr Tom Lwanga - team coach 
    7. Dr Jonas Mwesige - team physiotherapist. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to present the individual performances. This was the first time Parliament of Uganda presented participants in golf. Gen. Ivan Koreta emerged as the best golfer among the men and won a silver medal. (Applause) Capt. Evelyn Asiimwe emerged the best golfer from the ladies’ side and she won a silver medal. Hon. Sarah Babirye Kityo was the best shooter and the best volleyball setter; she won a golden hand. 

Hon. Muhammad Nsereko emerged the best scorer of the entire tournament and I know he won the golden boot. Hon. Andrew Kaluya emerged the best volleyball blocker. Hon. Christopher Kipterit emerged the best volley ball setter. Hon. Mourine Osoru emerged the best female athlete and won six gold medals with 34 points. Hon. Oliver Koyekyenga was the gold medallist in 200 metres. Hon. Francis Zaake won the gold medal for 100 metres. Hon. Franca Akello won the silver medal for the walking race. (Laughter) 

Hon. Julius Acon won silver medals in athletics. Hon. Mbwatekamwa won silver and gold medals in athletics. Hon. Anna Adeke won a silver medal in athletics. Hon. Christine Achen won silver medals and gold medals. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi last year won us gold medals and even this time, she won a silver medal in athletics. Jalia Bintu won the gold medal in the walking race. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the East African Legislative Assembly recognised the exemplary service provided by different leaders within the region. From Uganda, hon. Winifred Kiiza was awarded a medal for her exemplary service in East Africa and in sports. (Applause) Hon. Odonga Otto was also recognised as an exemplary leader in the East African Inter-Parliamentary Games. 

Mr Fred Mugerwa, the netball coach, was recognised for his exemplary leadership in the inter-parliamentary games. Mr Tom Lwanga, the coach for the men’s side, was also recognised for his exemplary leadership in the inter-parliamentary games. Madam Speaker, I was equally awarded that recognition for exemplary leadership in the inter-parliamentary games. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda Parliament sports team was on 10th December declared champion and overall winner of the seventh edition of the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I have the honour and privilege to present to you and lay on the Table the seven trophies, which the Ugandan team won during the inter-parliamentary games in Mombasa. I would like to lay on the Table the overall athletics winner trophy, the athletics women trophy, the overall winner of the tug of war women and tug of war men’s trophies. Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the overall winner trophy for the women’s netball. 

Allow me to invite hon. Nsereko to come and lay on the Table the trophy for the winner, football. (Applause)

10.11
MR MOHAMMED NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to lay on the Table the winner’s trophy for the Seventh Edition of the Inter-Parliamentary Games of East Africa, football, for the Ugandan Parliament for the fifth time. I lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, we won the best setter, volleyball-These trophies go to the individuals. We also won the best golfer, lady. We won the best athlete, women. Allow me to lay on the Table the overall trophy for the country that performed best. (Applause)

Whereas we performed excellently, I would like to point out some of the challenges that the team experienced. It was not all easy. First of all, there was a challenge of team selection. The travel was also not good because we travelled by road due to lack of resources. Several players did not go because the team travelled by road to Mombasa. It was a very long journey that took a toll on the team. All the same, we made sure we did our best. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, it is on this note that after participating in the inter-parliamentary games, the team would like to make the following recommendations to this Parliament:

    1. That Parliament should adequately budget for the games. The budget for the inter-parliamentary games should not be in isolation. 
    2. Parliament should increase on the budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports since that is where we get talents developed.
    3. Government should construct outdoor and indoor sports facilities in various regions of the country for the young people to develop their talents. 

Madam Speaker, we were hosted in the province of Mombasa. They had indoor stadia like Lugogo Indoor Stadium. I doubt whether we even have one in Uganda to that standard. We were challenged and this is why we are recommending that the Government makes a deliberate effort to develop these facilities in different regions so that our young people develop their talents from there.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the Parliamentary Commission. Amidst all these challenges, you made sure that the team went and participated. We are very grateful to you. (Applause)

I would like to thank all the Members, including those who were there by virtue of their offices. You came and cheered us, together with all the Ugandans who travelled to Mombasa. I would like to assure you that we had Ugandans who came to support the Parliament of Uganda. I would like to thank you and request that we keep that spirit, especially where it necessitates you to support Uganda. I would like to also thank all the sports ladies and gentlemen. Thank you very much. I wish you a merry Christmas. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, team manager. On behalf of Parliament, I would like to congratulate our entire team. However, I am more excited about the netball team because we have been coming second for the last five years. Finally, we were able to win the netball cup. I really would like to congratulate you. I also congratulate you for the inaugural athletics games, volleyball and golf. 

Honourable members, what I would like to pledge is that we are making efforts to adjust the budget. Actually, in our proposed budget, we are catering for all those. I would like to ask for the support from the Budget Committee because we propose but they cut.  I would like to appeal to you, Budget Committee; see what we have done with very little. If we had more, I think there would be better representation.

I would also like to thank Members for the enthusiasm. I attended some of the trainings and they were packed. I would like to thank you all for your enthusiasm in practicing, which has enabled us to keep our flag flying. Thank you very much and congratulations again.

Honourable members, I had rejected issues of national concern but there is a matter which has disrupted the people of West Nile. Hon. Atiku, if you could raise that issue.

11.17
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and timely intervention. I rise to raise a matter of national importance in regard to the disruption of transport at Arua Park.

You are all aware that Arua Park is second to none in terms of transport operations in this country. It is a bus terminal or park that was established out of necessity. We have buses, which operate internally and across borders to South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo right from Arua Park.

Madam Speaker, just a few weeks back, a directive from the Transport Licensing Board (TLB) was issued directing all buses from Arua Park to move to Namayiba, which is way off in Old Kampala. This directive was immediate for buses which go to Gulu, Lira and parts of West Nile. Those that go to Arua, Koboko and other parts of the region were directed to vacate Arua Park by the end of this month.

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that this is a period when people all over the country are travelling to their various districts to celebrate the festive season with their relatives. Arua Park has always been a point of convergence for our people who work in the central region. When this directive was given, people have been disturbed to the extent that some have lost their savings that they would have wished to take to their homes. We have had three cases of burglary and assault as people were making their way to the new terminal where they have been directed to go to.

Madam Speaker, this is to inform you that this directive has caused a lot of pain to our people. These complaints did not stop there; the bus operators and some of the passengers met me and some of my colleagues from the region to find a solution to this situation.

We took time to investigate and we went up to Namayiba Bus Terminal and inspected it. I would like to give an example of one of the terminals. Gaagaa Coach has about seven routes with about 12 buses leaving daily; KKT has about seven routes with over 10 buses leaving daily; Nile Coach has about five routes with about five buses leaving daily; and California Bus has two routes with four buses daily. There is also Baby Coach, which goes to Koboko and South Sudan, with over six routes and six buses daily; Zawadi Bus Services has two routes with four buses daily; and Homeland has over six buses and four routes leaving daily on that route. 

Madam Speaker, all these buses were directed to move to Namayiba where they have been provided with one container each. You know what this means when the sun is up. Secondly, the sanitary facilities are not enough. Gaagaa used to provide sanitary facilities, stores and rest areas for passengers waiting for their turn to travel. There is nothing like that at Namayiba. 

We have buses, which operate at night from 8.00p.m. up to midnight. Imagine the security situation down in Old Kampala, the former Kiseka Market, at night for old women, women with kids and people who are not frequent travellers. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we found this directive in bad taste, particularly, for the people of West Nile and northern region. We have already seen some people are at the verge of losing their lives. 

When I consulted the Minister for Kampala, she told us they have no directive of that nature. Transport Licensing Board is mandated to inspect buses, monitor their movements and also the routes while on transit. Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) is the owner of the infrastructure and also provides these bus terminals. Whatever has been done at Arua Park has to have been done with the advice and full compliance and directives from KCCA. Therefore, we find it difficult because the terminals that have been established were inspected and have licences from KCCA. We now question how TLB begins to interfere or take over the work of KCCA. 

If it is about decongesting the city, buses carry people who would be carried by five taxis. These buses only come to the terminals to drop people and they go to their parking yards, which are out of the city. They only come to the city centre to load. When it is time to load, they come and load passengers and then leave the city. In other words, these buses have actually been decongesting the city. 

I do not see any reason as to why people should be inconvenienced at this moment. I would like to appeal to your good office, Madam Speaker. I think it is only Parliament which can prevail over Ministry of Works and Transport and KCCA to do the right thing. If such decisions are to be made at this critical moment, it is important to involve the stakeholders. I do not think these buses are operating without the authority of KCCA and TLB.

I would like to request your office to first and foremost stop that illegal directive. We think it is illegal because it is not the authority of TLB - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the information I have is that the bus companies have associations and actually, they are threatening to go on strike over this directive. That will have a very bad multiplier effect for the people of the north and especially West Nile because the buses, which he has named, are the ones that go to West Nile. We do not have other buses and if they choose to strike, it will be more dangerous for our people. 

Besides, the fight to go to Namayiba has been taking place for the last three years. We have been interfacing with KCCA; the first time they wanted to have these buses moved away, they agreed and said as long as they are in line with the licensing rules and inspections, then there was no need for them to go to Namayiba. I do not know how TLB came up later. 

You know, for Gaagaa to come on board, it was actually hon. Nasasira who helped us. Otherwise, they did not want to give a route to Gaagaa, whose owner is a West Niler from Arua and they wanted to provide us services there. They totally did not want to give us licences. It took the intervention of hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Nasasira to help us. I think there is some bad faith we notice all the time against West Nile. We really ask your office and the Members to let your indulgence prevail. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think with that information, I do not want to take much more time because the point has been made. We need urgent intervention from KCCA and TLB so that we can have open engagement. You know, the transport sector has been privatised; if we have private service providers, we should take them as people who are helping Government. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Kampala – I do not see the Minister of Works and Transport - the timing of this activity is disruptive. It is true that they have been moved to the terminal without planning. There are very many people travelling this week; how will they sit in the darkness there near Kiseka Market?

11.27
THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Atiku for raising this matter. It is true that directives were given by the TLB under the Ministry of Works and Transport to buses operating in various terminals, for example those in Arua Bus Park to move to Namayiba Park in Old Kampala.

I discussed this matter with the honourable member yesterday when he raised it with me. I need to inform the House that this falls under the docket of the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, in the spirit of co-ordination, I promised him that I would – 

Kampala City Council Authority has got a responsibility of administering the city. What happens is that KCCA gazettes terminals that have been inspected and approved by Ministry of Works and Transport. It is the ministry that sets the standard of how a terminal would look like. I promised the honourable member that we would communicate with him.

I must admit a bit of lack of co-ordination between the two ministries. However, I promised him we would take it up with the Ministry of Works and Transport. This morning, I had a meeting with the Executive Director of KCCA who has already raised the matter with the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

What I learnt unofficially, but which is being investigated, is that actually, Arua Park operates in the middle of a road. It is the responsibility of the Ministry of Works and Transport to decide to close a street or not to close it. Therefore, my information is that Arua Park operates in the middle of a road and disrupts transport and other activities. However, I do appreciate the suffering and discomfort that the directive is causing. I cannot promise that a directive can be given - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have seen the Minister of Works and Transport.

MS KAMYA: The minister is here. Madam Speaker, I will ask the Minister of Works and Transport to say something. I said KCCA has some responsibility to gazette a terminal that has been inspected. I will now hand over to the Minister of Works and Transport.

MR ATIKU: I would just like to comment on something the minister said, that Arua Park operates in the middle of a road; I think that is wrong. There are two types of transport systems there. There are people who operate cargo transport. Now, these ones line their lorries either by the roadside or gazetted areas like Lira and Nebbi parks. They operate on the side of the streets. I do not want to interfere in that.

The buses that I am more concerned about, which deal with passengers, were moved three years ago from the streets. If you go there now, honourable minister, you will not find any bus on the street. Baby Coach has its own bus terminal where about ten buses can fit; Gaagaa Coach has its own terminal where over 10 buses can park at a go; KKT has its own terminal, which accommodates more than 10 buses; Nile Coach has its own terminal, which accommodates more than five buses. (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I did not want to debate this matter but as a bus owner, I would like to inform the minister that it is not true that the directive came about because some buses were operating on the streets. 

My buses, for example, operate from the Kisenyi Bus Terminal that is fully licensed. However, we were also directed to leave Kisenyi for the buses that are going to western Uganda and yet Kisenyi is at the centre of business in Kampala. We were moved to Namayiba Bus Terminal near the Aga Khan offices, which is very far. We went ahead and questioned the motive of a directive like that. We wondered if it was discrimination against buses that are going to the north. There is something that is missing –(Interjections)– Good Luck Bus Services has three buses that go to Lira. 

Basing on the above, we want that justification to be laid here. We tried to meet the ministers but this was not possible. This is a very big problem that needs to be addressed. Therefore, I felt the minister should know that it is not true that the directive is based on buses that are operating in the middle of the road. Even buses operating in terminals that are legally licensed by KCCA and the Ministry of Works and Transport are also affected. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong is a bus owner. Tell us your issues. (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to declare my interest as a bus owner who has been operating in that park since 1997. Of recent, there is something happening that we do not understand. The Transport Licensing Board has become a demigod. They decide what they want. The minister must know that the board itself has been compromised. We have been told that the owner of that park paid the board – it is just an allegation – Shs 300 million because they wanted business to move from the centre of Kampala to that place. 

I have been operating in that park for over 20 years. I met the President last time and we wanted to know why the transport system in the centre of Kampala was being disorganised. They sold all the bus terminals in the centre when people were seeing; Uganda Transport Company (UTC) terminal was sold and Buganda Bus Park was sold. 

We questioned what sort of Government we were running when public facilities are being sold to private people to build shops and whatever. Now that there is no parking, they are telling us to go to hell. What kind of Government are we running where there is no planning? I am talking like this because I am an affected person and I wish to declare my interests. 

Madam Speaker, it is now Christmas time and people are planning to move but they are now disorganising our flow of income that we use to pay back our loans to the banks. Are they going to pay us when we fail to pay the banks because they are distressing our businesses? Now that we are going to a private terminal, everything has been privatised including myself –(Laughter)– because I now have to go and bend low in front of somebody. Do you know the amount of money that we pay every day? We pay Shs 100,000 for every bus that loads. If you have 10 buses, that is Shs 1 million. This is how I have been privatised. I am owned by somebody else I do not understand. The KCCA minister is looking at me and she is confused as to why I am privatised. (Laughter) 

I would like to appeal to this House on the need for a formalised transport system because we are operating like we do not own anything. Honourable members, apart from the loading fees, you still have to pay fees for every stage and district you drive through. I do not understand what type of Government we are running where there is no system.

When I come to run this Government next time –(Laughter)– I would like to appeal to Members to bring order. In the agricultural sector we need order; in transport, governance, administration or even Parliament we need order. You elected me to be your representative to the Pan African Parliament and whenever I am there, I see order. Our Members just cry silently but we are at pains because there is order elsewhere but nothing like that back home. Things here happen in a manner that I do not understand. 

My last appeal, Madam Speaker, is that we need to have a stakeholders meeting on this matter. We would like KCCA, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the bus owners and the representatives of the President to meet so that we can tell people that we need order.

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Works and Transport, is it a matter of life and death that these transfers should take place this week when people are going for the Christmas break? This is about the ordinary people who do not have Government cars. Must you do it now?

11.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My voice is not good today but I will try to do the needful – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed. 

MR BAGIIRE: The issues that have been raised by Members this morning are of great consequence especially to our people who are travelling this season, but they are also affecting our business people.

I may not be in a position right now to say anything that is convincing to the honourable members. I would like to request the House to allow my colleague, the Minister for KCCA, the government apparatus through the Prime Minister and myself to organise a meeting tomorrow with all stakeholders. (Interjections)– Today is not realistic because we cannot mobilise the stakeholders. 

We can organise this meeting tomorrow and be able to report back before midday to the House about the decision –(Interjections)– If we are adjourning for recess like the Members are whispering, I want to promise this House that we are going to act; tomorrow at 9 o’clock, we will hold a meeting. I submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we suspend the directive while you hold your meeting? (Applause) 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, that is one of the resolutions that may come out of the meeting tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable minister, this matter concerns the people of Uganda; they are planning their travel and there should not be uncertainty. Therefore, we are going to suspend and then you hold your meeting. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I promise this House that we are going to take action in that direction. However, I want – (Interjections) – I need your protection, Madam Speaker, so that I put my point across – (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We still have time and both ministers are present. We can give them time to go and consult and then after lunch, they can make a statement on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, we are here the whole day and this is very important for the population; we cannot have uncertainty. So, I am directing you to go and sit and report to the House at 2.30 this afternoon.  

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to take action on this matter and this afternoon, I will come back to brief the House on the matter. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

11.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we beg for your permission to lay the Budget Framework Paper on the Table within one hour from now. Thank you. 

11.44
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to make one remark before I lay on the Table the report of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly that was held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 22 to 28 October 2016. 

The theme of the assembly was human rights and we focused on our roles as parliaments in defending the rights of the people. We also focused on the role of IPU in defending the rights of Members of Parliament. 

The Ugandan delegation to the IPU Assembly was led by the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. The delegation included hon. Latif Ssebagala Sengendo, hon. Mourine Osoru, hon. Francis Mwijukye and hon. Raphael Magyezi. One of the outcomes of this assembly was election of some of our colleagues to key positions in the IPU. Hon. Latif Ssebagala Sengendo was elected member of the standing Committee on Peace and Security for the IPU. We congratulate him on that. 

Our Speaker, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, was elected President of the Bureau of the African Geopolitical Group of the IPU. (Applause) I observed the respect she holds in the IPU, the stature, the experience and no doubt the serious responsibility and recognition, and she has sold the good name of Uganda outside this country. (Applause) In terms of parliaments of Africa, for this year the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga is the President of all parliaments of Africa. (Applause) Congratulations, Madam. 

Having said that, I take the opportunity to lay on the Table the report of the Ugandan delegation to the 135th IPU Assembly, which was held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 22 to 28 October 2016. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. It will be discussed in the Third Meeting of the First Session. 

11.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angeline Osegge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of the Public Accounts Committee to the Second Annual General Meeting and Conference for the African Organisation of Public Accounts Committees (AFROPAC) which took place in Nairobi, Kenya, from 28 August to 2 September 2016. 

This conference had a lot to teach us. It was mainly about illicit financial flows. I think the information in here will be good for this Parliament especially for accountability committees. 

Before I lay this document on the Table, I would like to gladly inform the House that at that conference, Uganda was elected to the position of vice-chairperson of AFROPAC in the person of Angeline Osegge. (Applause) Thank you very much. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations on your election. The report will be discussed in the Third Meeting of the First Session. 

11.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule I for the Financial Year 2016/2017. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I send it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

Clerk, I do not know why our TVs are not on yet we are in session. 

For the alumni of Gulu University, there will be a graduation ceremony on 14 January 2017 and the leadership wants to recognise the alumni who are MPs. So, please send in your names to the university so that you are able to get your rewards. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR SELECTED ENTITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 AND 2014/2015

11.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I present the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) on the Auditor-General – 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the honourable members to keep their medals properly; they are kind of – (Laughter) – Please, put them in your bags. (Laughter) 

MR KATUNTU: I think the champions are still in the mood. 

This is the report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts of selected statutory enterprises for the financial year 2013/2014 and 2014/2015. Madam Speaker, this is an interim report, pending the completion of all the entities, and the committee will present the final and detailed report. The committee decided that because of the urgent nature of this business that we are going to present, we have an interim report. 

I beg to lay on the Table the minutes as provided for under the rules of the committee. I also beg to lay on the Table the detailed report of the entities so far covered. However, I will present an executive summary of the business which we have so far covered.

THE SPEAKER: I believe it was uploaded on the iPads.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, it was uploaded on the iPads.

The purpose of this interim report is three-fold:
1. 	The committee is holding some property and we need the authority of this House as to how we should deal with the property, which we recovered.

2. 	When we last discussed issues pertaining to the road sector, the Committee on National Economy was presenting a report on a loan request. We informed this House that we had some information, which could benefit this House before it took a decision. That information is ready with us in this report.

3. 	We have adopted a strategy of asset recovery. We thought we needed the guidance of this House on whether that strategy is working well, whether that strategy should be adopted by other committees or whether we should continue with it. The rest will be in the detailed report.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and Rule 169 of our Rules of Procedure, I have the pleasure to present to this august House this executive summary of a partial report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.

This summary covers a few institutions that the committee has managed to cover in this short time since it was constituted. The entities covered by the report are:
1. 	Uganda National Roads Authority 
2.	Uganda Broadcasting Corporation  
3.	National Forestry Authority 
4.	Uganda Railways Corporation 
5.	National Housing and Construction Corporation
6.	Rural Electrification Agency

The committee is doing its best to clear the entire backlog that was inherited from the Ninth Parliament spreading over three financial years. The decision has been to start with a few entities and clear the entire backlog. The process is ongoing. 

As a committee, we are guided by Article 90 of the Constitution and rule 169 of our Rules of Procedure.

The Uganda Police is part and parcel of the committee’s processes. It is the committee’s recommendation that the Uganda Police should be more vigilant and act on the information unearthed which is of a criminal nature. 

The committee further observes that both the Police and the Inspectorate of Government should work closely to investigate and prosecute persons that are involved in fraud. We note that the Inspector General of Government (IGG) has no officers attached to our committee or any of the accountability committees. 

Madam Speaker, the committee used its residual powers, however, to recover billions of shillings that had been siphoned out of the country and also traded in fixed deposits. 

In all the entities so far covered, there are challenges of leadership. Decisions tainted with fraud and incompetence are daily occurrences. It is the committee’s view that there is inadequate supervision of these entities by the boards and/or parent ministries. Where there has been some “supervision”, it was seen as undue influence.

In handling the Auditor-General’s reports, the committee took two strategic decisions: 
1. 	Together with the boards and management help these entities identify the challenges they face, work upon them and operate efficiently. Therefore, our meeting with these entities has involved the entire top management and members of their boards. It is our belief, therefore, that after our sessions, these entities may never be the same if our recommendations are adhered to. 

2. 	All the money that was professionally ascertained as abused and/or irregularly paid out should be recovered instantly before other legal processes take place. We are certain that our parliamentary processes are cheaper, quicker and more effective as the other authorities take up other parts. 

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA)

For the period under review, this institution can be described as extremely sick. Whatever can go wrong in an institution indeed went wrong in UNRA. Fraud, coupled with incompetence, was the order of the day. Any achievement was more of an accident than deliberate. 

The Auditor-General uses the sampling method to identify which projects to audit. However, almost all the projects audited were riddled with gross management problems. Our view, therefore, is that the Auditor-General should audit all projects of this entity to make sure that challenges identified in those projects do not re-occur.  

The sector needs close supervision by both the Executive and Parliament. However, the Executive should be cautioned not to unduly interfere with the professional management of this entity but keep a close watch. 

The following challenges were specifically identified:

1. Awarding Contracts before Appointing Consultants

During the period under review, many contracts were awarded before appointing consultants. The effect of which is that the contractors mobilised machinery, took over the sites but could not start the works within the stipulated timeframe as per the contract. In accordance with their respective contracts, billions of shillings were paid to them for the idle time and equipment. 

All the explanations given to the committee were not tenable. Madam Speaker, I will give just one example; the rest are in the detailed report. An example is M/s Energoprojekt Niskogradnja, which was paid a total of US$ 3.2 million as idle time and equipment on the project on Kawempe-Kafu. Many other projects have suffered the same fate.

Madam Speaker, the reason is that contractors with their equipment are on the site but UNRA has not appointed a consultant to supervise. So, UNRA pays for the equipment and time without the equipment doing its work. Uganda National Roads Authority should hand over projects to contractors when all the necessary tools and equipment are in place to avoid nugatory expenditures.

2. Incompetent Consultants

Some UNRA consultants for the period under review were found to have been very incompetent. They authorised bogus payments. A case in point is when a Chinese contractor, China International Construction Company Ltd (CICO), made a claim of Shs 1.8 billion purportedly arising out of late approval of an environmental licence by NEMA. The committee was later to ascertain that indeed NEMA issued the necessary environmental impact assessment certificate in time. The consultant had, however, already passed the claim and UNRA had paid Shs 1.8 billion. 

The consultant who passed this claim told the committee that he was not well-versed with the Ugandan laws but nonetheless authorised the payments. The committee recovered the whole amount of Shs 1.8 billion from the contractor. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, UNRA has engineers and other professionals but it seems they rely more on the consultants and make payments without scrutiny. Therefore, the committee recommends that recruitment processes of the consultants should be re-examined to ensure that competent firms are selected. Uganda National Roads Authority should also have internal capacity to verify certificates for payment.

3. Procurement

Any contract that does not follow the proper established procurement laws and processes will end up having challenges. The committee is still considering the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway; however, suffice it to note that officers of UNRA informed the committee that this was an unsolicited bid. It should also be noted that the cost for the 51.4km –

THE SPEAKER: What does that mean, honourable chair?

MR KATUNTU: An unsolicited bid means that the contractors came by themselves and asked whether they can construct the road. It was not through a bid; they were like volunteers. They came to UNRA offices and said that they were sent by the Minister of Finance to construct a road for Ugandans. However, the details are about to come.

It should also be noted that the cost of this 51.4 km road project is US$ 479 million, which translates to US$ 9.3 million per kilometre. This is one of the most expensive roads in the world. 

Madam Speaker, the contractor solicited the bid, did the feasibility study, the design and eventually became the contractor of the same road. There was no competitive bidding at all and this, in our view, resulted into inflated costs, making the whole project unbelievably expensive. The consultant engineer to supervise the project was also offered by the same Chinese; the Chinese were supervised by fellow Chinese. 

The committee further learnt that UNRA had to hire another consultant in addition to the one procured by the Chinese to carry out the same supervision. This led to double expenditure. The committee is still examining the engineering audit of this road in regard to the designs, costs and whether the overall project objectives are to be achieved.

The committee, therefore, recommends that all procurements should strictly be in accordance with the law. The principle of competitive bidding should not be compromised except as provided for under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act. Any officer who compromises the above should be relieved of his duties and any loss incurred as a result should be borne by him or her.

There is need to review the cost of this project in order to lessen the burden on the tax payer. The committee on National Economy, and indeed the Parliament, when examining loan requests by Government for this sector, must ascertain that proper procurement processes are guaranteed by ensuring the following: 

    a) There should be a statement of undertaking by Government of strict adherence to procurement laws before any loan is approved. 
    b) When the loan requests are approved, they must be accompanied by the procurement plan.
    c) The minister responsible for works and transport should table a quarterly brief to the Committee on National Economy on the status of the procurement processes.

We believe that if the above three are adhered to, then the Committee on National Economy should be able to monitor and supervise the implementation of these projects. 

Madam Speaker, if our proposals are adopted by this House, then we would not have any problem in considering the loan requests, which the Committee on National Economy deliberated on last time. If the Government is not satisfied with the current PPDA law, then they should bring an amendment Bill to enable the procurement processes to move faster but also be well supervised. 

Procurement laws and regulations should be followed and adhered to avoid irregularities of unsolicited bidding. The above conditions proposed by the committee should be followed for the better management of loan approvals. 

4. Project Affected Persons (PAPs)

Madam Speaker, this was the scandal of the year. A sum of Shs 47 billion was advanced to five Chinese firms as compensation to PAPs. The firms were to open up independent imprest accounts as per the contract, which was supposed to be monitored, and transactions were to be authorised by UNRA, which they did not do, for payments to the PAPs. The firms immediately put the entire amount to their own use. 

The funds were used in their operations and some were fixed on their fixed deposit accounts to earn monthly interest. One of the Chinese firms transferred the entire amount of money to China. The details on that can be found in the main report. 

Madam Speaker, given this state of affairs, the committee ordered the return of all the monies plus the interest, which had been accruing on those monies. As we present this report, a total of Shs 32.5 billion was paid back to a special account of UNRA in Kampala. Later on, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, having acknowledged that Parliament is now a non-tax revenue collector, gave us an account where we should be putting monies recovered, which we have since started utilising. The committee was unable to recover the interest of the monies that were transferred to China because we had no evidence of the interest earned on that money. 

The committee noted fraud and incompetence on the part of UNRA management during the period under review. The committee, therefore, recommends for them to have a whole human resourced department to handle compensation of PAPs effectively after thorough due diligence. Under no circumstances should this responsibility be contracted out except by the authority of the board.

5. Payments to Non-contracting Parties

It was established that UNRA was making payments to companies that they did not contract with. The big Chinese companies would bid and indeed outbid their rival local companies and instead hire a local company here to do the job; for instance, one of the companies is China Railway No. 3 International Ltd but another company, in the names of China Railway No. 3 (U) Ltd, was contracted to do the work. All the contractual payments were made to the local company and not the company that had won the bid. Madam Speaker, it was not only this company; there were nine other companies with the same scenario. Details are within the bigger report. 

This makes UNRA vulnerable to risks, including dealing with sham companies. It also denies local firms the opportunity to compete favourably. Government should, therefore, investigate in detail all these accounts of these companies where UNRA paid the money. The possibility of corrupt payment made from these companies cannot be ruled out. These local companies could have been a conduit of corrupt money to some UNRA officers. 

A well experienced and ethical board should be put in place to have close supervision of UNRA. Parliament approves over Shs 3 trillion to UNRA from our national budget. Our infrastructure is not in a good state and yet it is one of the backbones of economic development. Government should, therefore, through an ethical supervising minister, - and the committee uses these words deliberately - make sure that UNRA functions efficiently and any contractor, engineering consultant and/or staff involved in fraudulent dealing with UNRA should be blacklisted and/or disciplined. 

All companies that are involved in these fraudulent acts should be blacklisted and banned from doing business with Government for five years. The officials who are involved in clearing payments with non-contracted companies should be held responsible for this negligent act.

6. Inadequate Planning

There were reported cases of delays in implementation of projects due to delayed procurement of consultants and preparation of road designs. These greatly affected the completion time and led to increased costs – what we call nugatory expenditure. A case in point is the Mbale-Tirinyi Road where the contractor was awarded 100kms of works but up to now, only designs of 10 kilometres have been handed over to the contractor.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC)

Madam Speaker, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation owns a number of assets, that include land located in various parts of the country, and these have suffered an irregular disposal process by use of ministerial orders. When you look at plots 8-10,12-16,18-20 Faraday Road and several other lands in Bugolobi, these were disposed of to HABA Group, as per the documents availed to the committee. Later on, this land ended up in the names of our own, the hon. Margaret Muhanga.

However, the committee, after realising the irregularities, managed to retrieve this land title. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the land title for plots 8-10, 12-16, 12-16 and 8-20 Faraday Road, Bugolobi, Kampala. It is 23.1 acres in Bugolobi and it is still in the name of hon. Margaret Muhanga. I beg to lay.

The committee, upon recovery of the land title from hon. Margaret Muhanga, awaits your direction. However, we request for opening of boundaries of the said land. Out of the 23.1 acres indicated in the land title, only 20.05 acres were available. The rest have equally been irregularly disposed of with the help of Uganda Land Commission. Recovery of the balance of the 2.095 acres awaits the directive of this House. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation was asking for this title and the committee thought that it did not have the powers to hand over the title, except under your authority, Madam Speaker. The land title is here for Parliament to take an appropriate decision.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the land reverts to Government - (Applause) - and the title should be handed back to UBC for redevelopment of the land. If there are any obligations UBC has, they should then be settled, but the land should revert back to UBC. Madam Speaker, UBC is another extremely sick institution, which needs restructuring.

Government should also investigate all land transactions by Uganda Land Commission on the land which belongs to UBC. All Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) should adhere to the principles of good corporate management and value their properties in time to reflect a good picture of their assets. 

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation has payables amounting to Shs 30 billion but it also has receivables amounting to Shs 20 billion. It does not pay its debt neither does it collect money, which is due to it. Management should ensure that suppliers are paid in accordance with the contract to avoid litigation, but it should also collect the monies that are due to the institution. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation does not make statutory deductions like withholding tax, income tax, NSSF among others - they do not. (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, we have complained about the televisions that are switched off; I do not know whether it is because we are debating about UBC that why they are off – (Interjections) - This side is off.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can you ensure that all the televisions are working. All of them are off; the front one is off and the others. Clerk, please ensure that the televisions are switched on. Hon. Katuntu, proceed.

MR KATUNTU: National Forestry Authority

Madam Speaker, the next issue to consider is National Forestry Authority. It is another sick institution. The audit noted that there is an outstanding amount of Shs 10.4 billion as payables. It does not pay its debts but it also does not collect what is owed to it, which amounts to Shs 7.5 billion. What is cross-cutting is that in all these institutions, management does not collect money. This raises a point: why doesn’t management collect money that is owed to these institutions? 

Loss of Plantation
There was loss of plantations worth almost Shs 1.3 billion attributed to fire within forests. Government should, as a priority, equip the NFA with firefighting equipment and train the firefighters to help in combating forest fires.  

Madam Speaker, there is encroachment on NFA land and as we right now, 211,898 hectares of land out of 1.2 million hectares has been encroached on and put to different use. National Forestry Authority should demarcate all the Central Forest Reserves (CFRs) and use all means to evict encroachers.

Uganda Railways Corporation (URC)

Madam Speaker, this is an institution for which Government has to decide whether it is still relevant or not. Some of the assets of URC were identified as non-core like the land in Nsambya, totalling to 23 acres, which was sold at Shs 70 billion to various people by Uganda Land Commission. However, the committee noted that the funds from the sale should have benefited URC, which is financially crippled and does not meet its obligations including paying its employees.

Government should urgently put URC management in place to secure their assets wherever they are located. Government should reimburse the Shs 70 billion as promised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for capitalisation.   

Non-Valuation of Property, Plant and Equipment

Uganda Railways Corporation reflected a balance of Shs 105 billion in its financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2014 as being property, plant and equipment. However, it was noted that the corporation last valued its assets in 1988. However, in 2014, they had a figure of Shs 105 billion reflected. The question the committee asked is how they arrived at this figure if they last valued in 1988. 

Uganda Railways Corporation should endeavour to value their assets to avoid misuse and abuse of them, including asset stripping.

Inadequate System for Tracking RVR Concession Income

The concession agreement signed between Government of Uganda and Rift Valley Railways (RVR) in 2006 requires, among other terms, that RVR should declare the income earned every month to URC upon which income accruing to URC, of 11.1 per cent, should be premised. The agreement further empowers URC to perform independent audits of the concessionaire to establish and confirm the gross revenue earned from which the 11.1 per cent concession fees are computed. 

Rift Valley Railways has been remitting funds and URC has been relying on concession income computations made by RVR as a basis to raise invoices. They rely on the person paying them to provide the figures. There is a risk of under declaration of concession income by the concessionaire, thus potential loss of revenue to URC.

The committee was informed that there are shortcomings in regard to RVR’s compliance with set timelines, targets and deliverables in the concession agreement. The performance review of RVR in 2014 portrayed an improvement of only 52 per cent to gross tones carried. However, a joint railway commission recommended an extension of up to 15 months to RVR to be able to overcome the poor performance and be able to meet its targets. The committee was informed that Government has now issued a notice of default for failure to meet contractual obligations. 

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit of the concession because this particular marriage does not seem to be working.

National Housing and Construction Company

In 2005, through a debt equity swap (debt outstanding amounted to $183 million), the Government of Uganda transferred 49 per cent of its shares in National Housing and Construction Company Limited (NHCCL) to Libyan African Investment Company (LAICO), retaining 51 per cent shareholding. The exact date when this debt arose remains unclear.

Inadequate Physical Safeguards on Land

It was noted that encroachers currently occupy a significant amount of land owned by NHCCL. Despite this problem being known for some time, there is no clear strategy to have it resolved. There is a risk that the NHCCL will continue losing its land through encroachment. 

National Housing and Construction Company Limited should continue with the approach of fencing all their land, as they did in Namungoona, in all other parts of the country.

Leases to Non-Ugandans beyond 99 Years

The committee established that NHCCL through its condominium properties was issuing leases to non-Ugandans that exceeded 99 years. This is contrary to the Constitution and the Land Act.  National Housing and Construction Company Limited should comply with the provisions of the law and those titles already issued should be regularised.

Madam Speaker, there is a lot of land owned by NHCCL, which is not on the assets register. Some of this land is in Bugolobi and other parts of Kampala. National Housing and Construction Company Limited should evict all encroachers on their land but also have an updated assets register. 

Rural Electrification Agency (REA)

There is a big challenge of securing wayleaves for the entity. It was noted that a total of Shs 13 billion in respect of compensations for wayleaves remained unpaid at the end of the year. Government should adequately finance the entity to enable it carry out its obligation and avoid possible litigation.

This entity has over Shs 20 billion in payables, meaning that they are not meeting their contractual obligations. However, they have also not collected money, which is owed to them. A case in point is a consultant company called Ferdsult Engineering Services Ltd, which owes it Shs 2.7 billion. However, this particular company does other businesses with this entity and the entity pays it on time. It does not collect money from the same company, which it owes it, but it finds it very easy to pay that very company.

It is our recommendation that REA should not enter into any other contract with this company until it settles its obligations.

Solar Programme

The above programme was contracted out to 15 companies to implement the solar subsidy programme. However, firms made claims of Shs 2.1 billion without supplying the equipment as agreed, which was a fraudulent act. Madam Speaker, this was a World Bank project and it instructed REA to refund US$ 564,000 in respect to 343 PV systems that had not been supplied. 

The committee noted that the programme was intended to provide solar power to the areas far off the main grid. The companies involved in this scam should pay back the Shs 2.1 billion. Madam Speaker, we need to give a timeframe. We did not have time to interact with these companies but if we had, we would have continued with the assets recovery process.

The committee is still considering the engineering audit report of other entities and will be reporting back to this House on the final findings in compliance with our Rules of Procedure. 

I would like to thank honourable members for the support extended to the committee. I would like to thank the committee members in particular for the team work exhibited during this short period we have worked together. We are also grateful to all the technical officers and the media for covering our committee meetings.

Lastly and most importantly, we would like to thank the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk for facilitating our committee work. We beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairman and members of COSASE. I would like to ask the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for a response to the specific proposals concerning the future management of the road sector. There were specific proposals relating to your committee work.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we had a meeting with hon. Syda Bbumba. We brought to her attention what we are proposing. She will speak for herself but in that meeting, she told us that she welcomed the recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: We need to hear from her first as the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and then I will get a few other members. 


12.34
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to thank COSASE for the very good findings they have made. As the Committee on National Economy, we welcome the recommendations because they coincide with our requirements under the new loan approval requirements. Already, for the two roads we have the commitments which they have asked for. 

12.35
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of COSASE and members for the job well done. I have also noted a new format of reporting where different entities can be consolidated in one report for Parliament to scrutinise more. I also think that it quickens the feedback we get from committees. How I wish this approach would be adopted by all the accountability committees. 

There are two things to note: One, there are gross errors in the way we handle our disposals in relation to land. I believe this is not only in the state owned enterprises but also when you go deeper into other central Government agencies and districts, you will find the same challenges. The way forward: can we quickly adopt the recommendations and task Government to come back to us immediately through a treasury memorandum, so that we get to the actions very fast and tell the country what action Government is taking. 

Lastly, the issue of valuation of Government properties is another challenge. There is an entity that he mentioned that last valued its assets in 1988 and now it is reporting other imaginary figures in its books of accounts. We would like to ask those charged with the responsibility of ensuring that Government records are up to date to ensure that they advise the people they work with to take some of these matters seriously. Madam Speaker, a financial report is misleading unless it has proper and accurate information. Thank you. 

12.38
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the chairperson and leadership of COSASE and the members for such a wonderful report. 

As you may realise, if we do not take serious note, - without opening up diplomatic wounds - we shall at one time find that this entire Africa, including Uganda, has gone back into economic colonialism using economic muscle. As we go down to bend for investments, let us not lose sight of the fact that this country has trained engineers, accountants and all the people needed to carry out infrastructural development. At this speed and from the way we want free money, we will end up mortgaging this country to the Chinese and before we know it, we will have nothing. 

Hon. Katuntu clearly said that for the Entebbe Express Highway, the future citizens of this country will have to pay dearly. If the cost of construction of each kilometre is US$ 9 million, then we are doomed as a nation. You remember that in the early 1890s, people just came and hoisted a flag and declared us a protectorate. The new wave of colonialism in this world is going to come with an economic arm and before you know it, we will not be able to make any meaningful decisions as we will always be on our knees as a country and as a nation. Let us watch out in the entire economic sphere.


Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the committee; I know you are going to come under a lot of harassment from these people. They will also walk to the media and try to take any opportune moment to destroy you, but stand your ground and let us as Parliament stand our ground. I know this thing was not over sung but Parliament now is taking a leading role in recovery of what has been lost. We should thump our chests and show this country that we are working, although some people are trying to sweep it under the carpet. 

My only question is on the issue of UBC and the land. You clearly said that you have recovered the title, which is very good, and you deserve a lot, but the issue is: where are the transfer forms; how do we know that this title is returning to Government? If we have that, then let us know exactly what was paid because there are conflicting figures. 

Some say hon. Muhanga, who is a member of this House, with due respect, paid Shs 5 billion while others say Shs 10 billion and others say Shs 30 billion. What is the exact figure and legally, if the title is returned, does she also claim the Shs 5 billion that she deposited? That is where equity comes in. Does she come with clean hands or those funds must be returned to her? This is the report that we are adopting; we have to come out clearly. 

If she paid Shs 2 billion, let that be known because the papers say Shs 29 billion and others said 60 billion. What was the exact figure paid for the 22 or 23 hectares on Faraday Road, Bugolobi? If we know that as point of clarification, then we can also know the obligation that UBC has. This is because if the land is returned, then in exchange UBC has to also return what it received. That is natural justice as a principle. 

That is the only clarification I seek. Otherwise, thank you very much. I would like to ask Members of Parliament to stand together in recovery of these funds. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we discuss, can we address what we should do about Busega – the Shs 9.3 billion? We need to address it.

12.42
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to register my appreciation to COSASE for the wonderful work they are doing and their positive portrayal of Parliament as far as its functioning is concerned.

From the submission of the chairperson, I heard that certain amounts of money - about Shs 42.5 billion – were recovered from these Chinese companies, which had received money. He also said that one of the companies transferred money to China and they could not proceed to recover interest on this money because they had no information on what rate they were receiving interest.

I would like to interest this Parliament in this particular issue because this money was Uganda Government’s money. I can say that it was actually lent to the Chinese company. They received it under the pretext of payment of those affected but they took it and used it somewhere. Ugandans are borrowing money here at a rate of 25 per cent plus to do business yet here is a foreign company which has received money from Government of Uganda, taken it and used it somewhere and is not paying interest on it.

I would like to propose that we can go ahead and demand the interest payment at the Bank of Uganda rate. They should pay the interest on this money. Why did they transfer it there if they were not trading in these funds? I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. If anything, I would like to request that we make amendments to that particular recommendation or draft a recommendation.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of affected persons who received money - these contracting companies, which received money to compensate the affected people. I do not know whether the minister is here, but I am wondering who is supposed to receive these monies. Government pays money to the affected persons; so, how does a company which got a job to do the road receive the money to go and compensate individuals who were affected? 

Finally, I know that Uganda is moving east, towards China and India, among others. However, I think we need to be very careful. It seems our transactions with the Chinese people and others are not very transparent. We see a situation of non-competitive bidding here. They say, “We are going to do this road for you; do not bid or publish it. You can just pay the money to us.” 

I think Uganda is getting raw deals in some of these contracts. Government needs to go carefully on this shift from the West to the East. It seems the transparency level is very low and Government is bound to lose more money than what it thinks it is gaining out of this. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for such tremendous work. They have certainly dampened the moods for Christmas because we only stand to lament about what is happening.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson talked of extreme mismanagement of the affairs of institutions that are extremely sick. There is a deliberate effort in mismanaging these institutions and it is also a clear case of corruption. Why would you pay an institution for work not done? Why would you hire a consultant and pay them a lot of money when they are going to authorise bogus payments as he called them? Are you a consultant? On what basis do we hire these consultants? Are they even consultants and who hires them?

We need to follow up the individuals that are mismanaging because they are causing untold loss to this nation. The consultant pays out money and claims that he or she does not understand Ugandan laws. Why did you take up that job if you do not understand the laws of the country that are supposed to apply to the job you have taken up? I think there is deliberate effort in all these.

Madam Speaker, why would we deal with people who do not understand the language that we operate in? What is our interest? We have seen them before COSASE; they cannot speak the language. Why are we using them? Why can’t they employ consultants to engage with us? In fact, the blame is on us because we hire them. We have engineers who are able to assess the quality of consultants and hire them; why do we go for these people who do not understand our language?

The same reasoning applies to the way we take on loans when we are not ready. You access money and go and do feasibility studies for the work that you are supposed to do and yet you are supposed to have done feasibility studies to lead you to what you would like to do and how much it will cost. You wonder on what basis we acquired the loan. These are very serious matters that need explanation.  

You can imagine, you pay a company that you did not even contract; for instance, if you contract China Railway No. 3 International for something, why do you pay China Railway No. 3 Uganda? These are deliberate efforts to defraud Ugandans of the money that should be carrying out developments. My heart cries for this nation. This is clear corruption –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this UNRA issue should be the test case for this Government in fighting corruption. It is just too much. (Applause)

12.51
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is demoralising for a committee and Parliament to produce such a report where the people of Uganda have lost billions of money and finally, they say the recommendations are just advisory and they are trash and thrown into the dustbin. 

Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee produced a report that said that this country lost about Shs 170 billion in compensation of markets – the Basajjabalabas and the like. One of our recommendations was that the money should be refunded. Good enough, it is the same Government and by God’s grace, you were in that chair. I would like to know whether the Shs 170 billion, which at that time would finance the budget of Mbarara District for five years, has been refunded.

Madam Speaker, we promised steady progress to the people of Uganda and we were elected. In the Ninth Parliament and this Parliament, infrastructure and roads were and still are our priority. Trillions of shillings have been lost and this is at the expense of service delivery in our hospitals and schools. When we go back after five years, we will be put to task when the people who steal the money - These people actually connive with those consultants; it is our people stealing the money. 

Therefore, as Parliament, let us take this report as a beginning point and enforce our recommendations so that the money is recovered and the people are brought to book. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As we do that, I do not know whether the Minister of Works and Transport will be able to explain some things. In the Eighth Parliament and Ninth Parliament, there was always a component of training for our engineers in all the loan requests. There was always a matter of contention here as to why we would spend money on them. If we have been training them on borrowed money, where is the expertise? Why are we still using these consultants?

12.53
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me express my appreciation to COSASE for the wonderful job they have done. Actually, you have done us proud as Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the current Executive Director of UNRA had a very wonderful track record while performing her duties at Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). However, it is rather unfortunate that ever since she took office, there is merely infighting, and it is COSASE, on behalf of Parliament, that has recovered all these huge sums of money. 

I would like to cite one grave concern pertaining to the recruitment process in UNRA. They flouted the normal recruitment process when recruiting some senior staff. Under normal procedure, the human resource management has the core function of advertising, attracting, selecting and appraising those suitable candidates for jobs. However, one Mary Kutesa, for example, who is now the Director of Legal Affairs, was the lead counsel of the commission of inquiry during the investigation into UNRA. She discharged that role with vested self-interest but she was still head-hunted and appointed director; there was no recruitment exercise that was conducted.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that recently, besides the other money mentioned in the report, this same new management was responsible for the fraudulent giveaway of another huge sum of money, which is not mentioned in this report. Instead of working to the expectations we had anticipated, it is the complete opposite. I thank you. 

12.56
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of COSASE. I suggest that besides recovering the money, the thieves should be arrested, prosecuted and dismissed on top of refunding the money. 

I would also like to say that we are always having problems in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Government land is being given away to private individuals by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is the custodian of Government land and they have the inventories of all Government land. I suggest that since it is the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development giving away Government land to private individuals, we pick a sword and begin stabbing the ministry instead of wasting time on the individuals who are getting land. We are trying to heal the wound when there is some insect inside eating away at the wound. We need to look for the insect and pull it out so that we heal the wound once and for all. Thank you very much.

12.58
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of COSASE. For your information, I am a public certified accountant and I have been working in local governments for the last 22 years. I know what takes place and I have been defiant against corruption. I am very happy hon. Katuntu has been very brave as a Ugandan and has struck his pen and affirmed what the Auditor-General found out in the current systems in Uganda.

When giving us the report, you talked about the undervaluation of the URC land at Shs 70 billion but I did not see a recommendation to that effect. I would wish that Government does another investigation of that land and when it is found that it is undervalued, those people who have acquired that land should top up money or the land be recovered from them.

On the under declaration of the concession fee, you have also not clearly given us a recommendation to that effect. I know about the Rift Valley Railway concession. 

Thirdly, I did not see a recommendation on paying back those persons affected by the road project. I need to hear about the plans to disburse money to those affected persons as soon as possible.

On payment for idle time to contractors that did not work due to delayed acquisition of consultants, that recommendation should also come out. The people who caused that delay and loss should be brought to book and penalised as the law requires.

An honourable member said we make recommendations as Parliament and Government says they are management or administrative requirements. The Public Finance Management and Accountability Act recommends that after Parliament has gone through the Auditor-General’s recommendations, the minister has to give us feedback on how those recommendations have been implemented so that it is not a dead end. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

1.01
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I also thank the chairperson of COSASE. The challenges that you pointed out are indeed the challenges that the road sector is facing. There are other very serious challenges emerging particularly on securing the right of way. We are experiencing delays and compensating for idle equipment and escalation of prices because of failure to secure the right of way and hand it over to the contractor. This is a very big problem.

Secondly, the Entebbe Expressway has four lanes and most of the roads that we are used to are of two lanes. The best parameter for comparison is the cost of a lane kilometre other than the cost of a road because we should compare similar things. A four-lane road is definitely more expensive than a two-lane road. I cannot argue that the costs detailed here are realistic, but right from the beginning, we were given a wrong impression in comparing a four-lane road with a two-lane road. Those costs are not the same. 

There are a lot of problems when it comes to RVR versus URC, with more problems on the side of URC in terms of supervision. In a final analysis, it is actually being curtailed from performing its functions because of those locations that have not been spelt out and because of the Act that needs to be reviewed or repealed so that URC can do what it is supposed to do. 

Finally, there is the matter of the UNRA consultants not doing their work and only relying on other consultants. I think this is a habit that was inherited when UNRA was being formed because its workforce was small and unable to perform. The fact is that you cannot supervise a consultant when that consultant is much better at detailed designs than you, the supervisor. I think there is need for capacity building – (Member timed out.)    

THE SPEAKER: We have been providing money for capacity building in the loans.

1.05
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the COSASE chairperson and his members for a wonderful report.

Everyone seems to be blaming the external consultants but my interest is right here. My heart bleeds as a professional accountant. Who offers these consultancies to the external people? It is the Ugandans. Who prepares fraudulent financial statements? It is the Ugandans. We have local professional accountants and procurement professionals but they are not consulted. Who pays “air” for services offered? It is the Ugandans. Who recruits these incompetent people to manage these institutions? It is Government. 

What does the Government do about this? When the Auditor-General comes out with a report, what do the ministries do about these reports? They only keep renewing their contracts and leave matters “to whom it may concern”. 

The report said that UNRA was sick. To me, all these institutions are on drip. We need to firmly come out and put everything in order. Earlier this morning, my colleague talked about the need for order everywhere and said that from the way things are moving, it is like we have been sold. This Tenth Parliament should go on record for standing firm because it is Ugandans failing the country. It is Ugandans who tell these people about the need for consultancy services. 

These people should therefore be held liable and prosecuted. We expect the Executive to evaluate these people’s performance and the non-performers should be set aside to allow for the hiring of competent staff. I thank you.

1.07
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful job because it brings out the good name of Parliament that had been in tatters. I thank God for that. 

You must have realised that corruption eats up everything that is done in Uganda, and I am afraid that the Executive is not taking keen interest in this. I am looking at the ministers here to see if they can promise Parliament and the country at large that these thieves are going to be handled with an iron hand. If the Executive is willing to walk the talk of kisanja hakuna mchezo, then let us recommend that the culprits are brought to book and made to repay this money so that whatever we speak here does not end at talking but also results into action.

Our children and grandchildren are going to pay a lot of money that is going into the hands of a few people who have decided to eat up this country and subject us to abject poverty and suffering. We must stand strong as members of the Tenth Parliament to fight this. I thank you.

1.09
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would also like to join my colleagues to thank COSASE for producing a wonderful report and for being strong and firm on the recovery of funds. The committee needs to be applauded.

I think the Government has abandoned some of its core responsibilities, based on what we see and hear. Government, for example, should be able to build internal capacity of all engineers, consultants and valuers so that they make all these bills of quantities for the projects that we want to implement. We can then have a guide before handing over these jobs to the consultants and contractors. In this way, instead of leaving it at the mercy of the consultants, as we have heard and know, we can have enough qualified engineers, accountants and economists who can understudy all these projects before they are handed over to these consultants.

Secondly, in some countries like Ethiopia, Government procures quarries for the stones, murram and sand. So when a consultant is given a project, Government provides all those materials. However, for us here, we are at the mercy of the contractor and consultant to procure all these materials. The contractors are also at the mercy of the owners of the land, the quarries, the murram and the sand. The contractor should only buy steel bars and cement but the rest should be provided by the Government in advance because the Government knows all the projects that we are going to do.

Madam Speaker, I think we all know, as the report reveals, that these Government entities have the capacity to generate revenues and operate profitably, but I think they are being run by mafias. In this kisanja hakuna mchezo, all these terrorists must be arrested or sacked; some action needs to be taken. This business of lamenting and talking should end. 

Finally, I would like to agree with my colleagues that we adopt these recommendations of the committee and demand for timely action on all these recommendations, instead of leaving it to the mercy of the Executive. I thank you.

1.12
MS ADONG LILLY (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of COSASE for the good report they have written. Indeed, it is so saddening to get this kind of report and see the rot which is going on in Government entities. Sometimes this makes people wonder whether we are really in charge of this country. How can such things happen when people who went to school and swore to fight corruption look on endlessly?

Madam Speaker, I thought we have a Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development who should get the pathways for a road, compensate the people and then hand over the project to the company to start with construction. That should be the simple procedure. It is unthinkable for the company to be given money to compensate villagers. That is why throughout the areas where they are doing road construction, compensation is not being done adequately. 

As I talk, for the road from Olwiyo to Gulu, Kitgum and Musingo, only the leaders or the people that are outspoken are the ones being compensated while the rest of the villagers are not paid. That should also be investigated. Up to now, I cannot move in my constituency because everyone is asking, “Honourable, when is our money coming?” They paid all the LCs but the vulnerable people who need to be supported have not been paid –(Interruption) 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of compensation, it has become a circus. Government makes repeated compensations for Government projects for the same pieces of land. They compensate for power lines, road construction and running water pipes yet they do not retain the titles and possession of this land which is compensated for. 

Madam Speaker, for that reason, the cost of compensation for Government projects has become a moving target and it is a big component of the money Government invests in projects. That is one of the reasons why many of the projects are not realized, because Government fails to get money for repeated compensation. Therefore, Government should be asked to procure centrally. 

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague, for that information. We are in disarray as far as compensation is concerned. Worse still, the money is given to a profit-making company with a bad record – (Interruption)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, after hearing such serious concerns and the committee recommendations, which are so good, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating when all the concerned ministers are not here?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is taking charge on behalf of the Prime Minister because this requires Government coordination. Minister of Finance, who is in charge of the Government side today?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a big concern because ordinarily, when we debate such important reports, we would expect UNRA to be here, we would expect the permanent secretary of the ministry and the ministers. It is surprising that they are taking it so casually. 

You can see from the front bench; hon. Bahati has just realised that he is supposed to take over because hon. Ssenyonga raised the matter. That should not be the way we handle this matter. We should be taken seriously. You have heard what the committee said, that there is mismanagement, but there is no one from the concerned sectors. We may have the ministers here but there should have been somebody from that area. 

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, the issues in the report are extremely grave and we need action and commitment; who is going to make that commitment?

1.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by thanking the committee for the good work done. I have been following the committee throughout and I talked to some members of the committee and I appreciate the work they are doing. 

Madam Speaker, I thought that after the committee has presented and we have debated and the recommendations are passed, then Government has to take that report and implement it. We were at the stage of discussion of the report. 

I would like to use this opportunity to assure Parliament that we will honour this report and follow the recommendations. The police will do their work and if there is need for further investigations, we will do them and at one point this House will be asking how far we have gone in implementing these recommendations. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in this debate, the view of this House is that we should not give you the usual six months for the treasury memorandum; we want a shorter period. The view is that it should come quicker than six months on these particular issues because of their gravity. 

1.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament when we passed the Public Finance Management Act, we provided for what you are talking about - the treasury memorandum. 

We know for sure that any recommendation made on the Auditor-General’s report is not an ordinary recommendation. We are therefore taking this discussion very seriously because we know we have got to come back through that route to report to Parliament what we have done on the recommendations of the House. 

We can fast-track the treasury memorandum on this issue and come back to this House. However, Madam Speaker, it is not right for my brother, hon. Elijah Okupa, to assume that there is no minister when there are five ministers here. I think it is not right. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I agree with you; this report is giving us revelations that there is uncoordinated movement in Government. This report is confirming that whereas the previous Parliament and Government appropriated money for corridors of transmission, Government is now looking for money for corridors of roads. Tomorrow, you will hear they are looking for corridors of the standard gauge railway. This Parliament cannot continue appropriating money when the same Government is not coordinated and working in parallel. It is as if one is from Juba and another from Rwanda or Somalia. 

Madam Speaker, at this point in time, if we are really talking of Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo, before we continue with any business as the Tenth Parliament, Government must audit and re-organise. The National Planning Authority is good and it is good my brother, hon. Bahati, is in charge. However, he should first come and tell us that, “We are sinners; can we reorganise and start working afresh?” (Laughter)

The UNRA we are talking about lost all its institutional memory; more than 80 engineers were thrown away after all these trainings. So, who is going to implement this project that we are borrowing for? Who has the capacity to supervise a consultant? The local content that we want cannot be achieved if UNRA does not give the sub-contracting to our local companies, even if it is 20 per cent. How shall we –

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure? (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that given this indicting report, – this report is just a symptom - can we hear from Government first of all admitting that things are not okay but they can do better? 

There are issues of policy that we cannot just discuss and then tomorrow bring another loan request. There are issues of liberalisation and privatization, for example, where Uganda Railways Corporation has been giving away land as if Government no longer exists. We are now acquiring land for the standard gauge railway. We need something more serious than just Government saying that they are going to listen. Government by now should say, “Things are not okay; can we first bring a comprehensive surgery on some of these policies?”

There are policy review and delivery mechanism issues here. I would like to say that the budget that we are about to pass may have to be reopened because we are spending on the same corrupt people. These are people who are going to steal the money for land compensation until we reorganise as Government. If we are serious that we want to be a middle-income country and that this is kisanja hakuna mchezo, then we need the Prime Minister to do an overhaul or a complete audit because currently as Parliament, I am afraid, we are not moving. Therefore, my procedural issue is: can we do something?

1.24
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank COSASE and if there were a mechanism of presenting a medal for the best performing committee, COSASE would have earned one. Maybe in the future we need to think about this because they have made us proud. I thank you. 

According to the report, they have informed us that all Government parastatals are actually sick and under intensive care. I, therefore, do not know how our Government is performing with such a fleet of ministers. If all the Government parastatals are dead, then what are we doing in this country? [Hon. Member: “You are dead.”]- Yes, it means we are dead; I am sorry, Members. In European history, Turkey was called the sick man of Europe. Is Uganda the sick man of Africa? We need to answer this, honourable members. 

Madam Speaker, I need your guidance on this issue: who blacklists some of these non-performing companies? I heard that in the previous Parliament, Dott Services was blacklisted for doing “dotted” work everywhere. However, up to now, it is the same company still doing “dotted” work everywhere in Uganda. So, who blacklists such companies? Is it the Ministry of Works - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to provide a correction because I was here in the Ninth Parliament and I was also a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. At least this Parliament has never blacklisted Dott Services or any companies under the Ministry of Works. It was only about a month ago when the Minister of Works and Transport brought a report here, which she then withdrew when she appeared before our committee. That was the only attempt from the ministry.

MR SABIITI: It is the PPDA that does the blacklisting; Parliament does not blacklist.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much. I wish they could take our recommendations. Finally, I would like the committee members to help me understand something. Throughout your investigations, did you find out what the role of Allen Kagina was? Is she a liability or an asset to UNRA? (Laughter) I also propose that we adopt the recommendations.

1.28
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for a job well done. At the same time, knowing the history of our country and what has always happened, I think we need to provide the chairperson of COSASE with enhanced security, if he does not already have, because COSASE has very important members and they have carried out an important duty. I am saying this because I know the history of our country and I feel that is very important.

Secondly, I am happy to note the observations that have been made here. Most of the problems are on expenditure but there is also the human resource aspect. At the apex of UNRA, there is total rot. Something needs to be done and if we all become shy to talk about the truth, the country will be shy to develop forever. Therefore, this is the time for us to act. We always make recommendations but we shelve them. There must be timelines attached to all the recommendations, if we are to see results. Without that, we shall stay like that, and you know what I mean.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the recruitment that has taken place in UNRA recently, there have been key positions advertised and one of them is for a procurement manager process assurance. The recruitment process for that position needs to be audited because we are not sure whether it was properly done. We have the powers because Parliament is the altar where all the sins of Uganda are brought and prayed for. We cannot just go and beg; we are going to issue orders and people should do what we are saying because this is Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the second position was that of manager vehicle load control. It also needs to be audited; was the process clean? This is because if we get the wrong staff, we shall also get the wrong output and we shall never see anything good.

You know my small car, Madam Speaker, which I always struggle with. Whenever I move on bad roads, I get punctures and then people ask me, “Are you a Member of Parliament or not?” The problem is the roads because some people have stolen the money – (Member timed out.)

1.30
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its good report. From the report, it is clear that some contracts have been given outside the PPDA rules. I would like to recommend, while emphasising what you have already talked about, that no contract should be allowed to be given outside the law.

Secondly, we should help this country and ensure that we minimise politicians’ interference because you can see a lot of influence. The other day we were told about how an individual is always being compensated because everywhere they are going to construct a new road, he already has land there. If a northern bypass is to be constructed say in Mbarara, he will have land there; if a road is to be constructed in Jinja or Entebbe, the same person will have land there. You definitely do not understand how that happens. We, therefore, need to help our ministers to get out of this.

Recently, the Chinese companies told us that they went through the President’s office. They talked about individuals who acquired plots through technical know-who. We need to help our President, the fountain of honour, because these companies are tarnishing his reputation. I recommend that we consider all these recommendations but as legislators playing the oversight role, we should ensure that the above is handled before we recommend for any other monies. I thank you.
 
1.33
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank COSASE for the interim report and by the time you finish the whole exercise, sanity will prevail in this society. Madam Speaker, it is not only COSASE we are looking at now; by the time all accountability committees present their reports here, you will be shocked. There is so much to do if Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo is to be realised. 

I do not understand what is going on with compensations. I do not know whether it is a clique, but you will find a one Gordon Bafaki with land in each and every district or place that Government must compensate them. If you went to Nebbi, you will find hon. Bafaki with land there and when the project is ready to take off, he will be awaiting compensation. Therefore, there is a big problem. Much as our work is advisory, I have also realised that we do not even have a member from the IGG on these committees. My prayer is that we should amend the law to have a member from the IGG sitting on our committees - (Member timed out.)

1.35
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very proud of COSASE and maybe next time, I will apply to be a member because the committee is doing a great job. 

I would like to build on the clarification, which hon. Sabiiti was trying to put across. We asked UNRA in the Committee on National Economy to clarify on the issue of the US$ 9 million per kilometre. We found that depending on what is used, a road can be costed per kilometre or per lane kilometre. The Entebbe Expressway, according to a document that was given to us by UNRA, costs $9.26 million per kilometre. However, a lane kilometre will cost US$ 2.31 million. This does not mean that it is cheap; it means it is very high. When you consider Thika Highway in Nairobi, for example, - the one we are proud of - a kilometre costs US$ 7.72 million and a lane kilometre was US$ 1.56 million and it is a super road.

Madam Speaker, this also reminds me about the issue of returning money. Perhaps we should start contracting foreigners because when foreigners steal, they bring back the money but when Ugandans steal, they do not return anything; we just imprison people. I wonder what we will do.

On the issue of appointments in UNRA, it is not only about the technical staff but we understand that the current Minister of Works was also a board member in UNRA. We need to investigate what she did while she was a board member - her performance and whether some of these sagas happened under her watch. Also, now that she is a minister, is she able to crack the whip? 

Finally, we have a problem of failure to retain very good staff everywhere because of the pay we give them. In the transmission company, we cannot retain the best engineers however much Government spends money on training them. Therefore, we need to consider retention plans so that once we get good staff we retain them to continue working.

Madam Speaker, we need to investigate the issue concerning UNRA deeper, including the current managers because they are not angels. Hon. Mbwatekamwa raised an important issue on whether they are assets or liabilities. It is a point for debate. I do not think that they were genetically modified to be angels; no, they can also be tempted to steal like the rest or be negligent. I thank you.

1.38
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report they have presented to this august House. 

If we are to synchronise the status quo, we must recognise the quagmire we are in, and the quagmire now is evident. Madam Speaker, this is a very important matter but you can see how the people supposed to take charge of the ministry are not present in the House. It is now “to whom it may concern”. We can continue making recommendations which will continue to be shelved.

We need to meet our own first before we go to the managers of the agencies. What are our ministers doing? What did they do before COSASE? If COSASE had not investigated these issues, would we be able, as Government, to take charge of our country? We need to ask ourselves these questions.

Issues concerning variations in costs have come up. Can we have a standard measure? If we have varying terrain or topographical features, can we have a standardised measure? Maybe then as Parliament, we can say that as COSASE looks at the variations or costs, if it is a swamp, they will know how much we need or if it is a rocky area, they will know how much we need per kilometre. Can we also consider the various skills we have and then have that standardised measure? We can then say, this is a document we have as a country and if we are to have a road in Kanungu, for example, we can get funds within a certain range.

Madam Speaker, concerning the statutory bodies, the ministries cannot supervise these bodies. How much is a commissioner in the Ministry of Works and Transport paid? An allowance of a person in UNRA can pay the salary of a commissioner in the Ministry of Works. What about the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Works; he is supposed to supervise these people but do they have the capacity? We need to come out of that lacuna as Government.

A supervisor may not even afford lunch and yet a supervisee can offer the lunch. Does it mean that they will offer that supervision? There is a problem. Madam Speaker, we have to make sure as a country that we look at this issue of compensation – (Member timed out_)    

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, painfully, I rise again on a point of procedure. This could be the first time the Tenth Parliament is debating an accountability committee report. Usually, it comes as an audit report for the interface between the Legislature and the Executive, particularly by those sectors that are being handled. 

Madam Speaker, you may realise that each Member is rising on the issue of roads and compensations. Therefore, ideally, we needed the Minister of Works and Transport to be around. It is true we shall request for a response in their treasury memorandum, but hearing these sentiments raised by Members is so critical – (Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Earlier on during the debate, the Minister of State for Works and Transport was here and he was tasked by Parliament to go on an assignment and report back at 2.30 p.m. He walked out because of that. 

Is it in order for Members to continue alleging that Ministry of Works and Transport is not represented in Parliament when the minister was asked to go out and come back to report at 2.30 p.m. on a matter that was considered to be urgent and important?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we asked the Minister of Works and Transport to handle that assignment of the Transport Licensing Board disorganizing the travellers this week. He is due to come back and report. However, I think that if we can focus on the recommendations and adopt them, then we can demand for action.

1.44
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank COSASE for the great work that they have done. Indeed, they are doing Parliament proud. 

From the observations and recommendations that have come up, I would like to observe that all this could be happening because people have forgotten about God. If we put God first, all this would not be happening. However, if people can be paid even without doing the work, then it seems that the person paying has a problem and the person receiving the money has a problem too. This is simply because we have forgotten God.

That aside, it was indicated that from the 23 acres of the UBC land, there is a land title for only 20 acres and Parliament is yet to take a position on the rest of the acres. I pray that before this debate ends, we find a way forward on that issue. 

Madam Speaker, inadequate planning causes delays. The Tirinyi Road is now a point of insecurity. If one travelled on the Tirinyi Road, you would find one hump unexpectedly and before you can even pick up your speed after that hump – you may be driving at 40 kilometres per hour - you find another hump. All these are spots of insecurity, given the times we are in now. 

Why do these contractors keep heaping work? Why do they begin on new work before they complete the old one? This makes us, the travellers and all the other road users, quite insecure, and all this is because there is inadequate planning. Surely, out of 100 kilometres, how do you hand over only 10 kilometres? This is un-seriousness of the highest order. 

I do not know who to blame but it is quite sad that all this is happening in our country. Unless something is done – If we take a stand as Parliament on this committee report, I think we shall move on. Many times the concerned people will say, “after all, they debate and that is the end”. Therefore, we must take a decision and see what can be done. 

I observed that for the Uganda Railways Corporation, 23.9 acres was formed out - (Member timed out)

1.48
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank COSASE for doing a good job for the country. I also urge all the other committees of this Parliament to emulate what has been done by COSASE. It appears to me that there are people who do not have this country at heart. For the first time, we have recovered some money from people who are trying to mismanage our funds.

From the report, the committee has come out with crucial recommendations, which need to be passed by this House as a matter of urgency. We should also give a timeframe as to when this committee’s recommendations can be implemented.

Madam Speaker, my concern is about supervision. We get foreigners to come and do work for us but supervision is lacking. How can a company take the whole country for a ride? We have the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA; what are these people doing? Why don’t they monitor these people? Supposing this committee had not come up with this report, how would we have known about this mess and the confusion that is in the ministry? 

Let us put our ministries to task to give us proper reports about what is happening in companies that are giving us services like UNRA. I understand the fact that a beggar has no choice. However, once this money is given to us, let us have our rules on how we shall use this money. 

I like the way the committee handled the Chinese that were given the money. We thank them for allowing releasing our money, which was returned to us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.49
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. 

I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson concerning encroachment on the forest reserves. I would like to find out from you, Mr Chairman, whether during the interface with the stakeholders, you tried to dig out some of the encroachers on these forest reserves? As we speak, most parts of the forest reserves have been encroached on by big people within the Government. I, therefore, would like to find out whether you really tried to come out with the names of those encroachers. 

The committee recommends that the National Forestry Authority should demarcate boundaries and evict encroachers. I feel this recommendation is quite strong. This is because I have witnessed some occasions where NFA has gone to an area and started demarcating boundaries, claiming that the area was gazetted as a forest reserve and yet they are being used by few individuals that are greedy. Therefore, the moment we give them leeway, I feel the people in the villages will suffer.

A case in point is in my district in a parish called Acwera in Amuru. The National Forestry Authority claims that the whole parish was gazetted as a forest reserve yet the community is not aware. I am afraid, Madam Speaker, that NFA will go and evict our people without clear evidence. Therefore, before evicting people, let them confirm that the area had been gazetted as a forest reserve.

Secondly, I would like to find out from the committee about the railway land. It seems the committee concentrated only on Nsambya land. However, as we speak, the privatisation department is selling off the railway houses in Gulu. I would like to find out whether the committee has tried to investigate all the railway land within the country. 

Most of the railway properties had already been given out. Sometime back, when we were interfacing with the Privatisation Unit, they testified that those buildings and land were redundant. They, therefore, decided to give them out to private individuals. Right now we are looking for land very expensively. Therefore, we need to - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen overwhelming support for this report, but we also have other matters on the Order Paper and this is our last sitting. Let me invite the chairperson to respond to a few issues and we move on. You will speak on other reports. There are many activities today.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure, given the importance of this damning report. When Parliament is doing its oversight work, Government still exists. This report has come after more than three months of protracted good work by the committee and I would like to thank the leadership of the committee. It tells us what leadership can do.

Madam Speaker, are we safe to move on and just endorse these recommendations without Government telling us in the interim what corrective measures they have been able to put in place to stop this haemorrhage and glaring –(Interjection)

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence; we shall not have helped this country or given this report the justice it requires if we do not get a written response from the Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business and from related ministries. We need this response so that by the time we make our last recommendations, Government has committed itself and is telling us that it is in charge and has taken some corrective measures. 

At the end of the day, I know that we are going to recommend, but Government will go to slumber because our advice will stop at being just advisory. The only time we have for Government to make a commitment is for them to bring a written response, which will then become an assurance, so that we take them on that. Otherwise, I am worried that we shall make recommendations here, pass the report and we go to slumber. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious report. It is not only COSASE but there are also other accountability committees yet to present good reports. 

My general comment - and I am seeking guidance from you – is that we thank you very much for protecting these committees. I know that as we execute our duties, some people are making sure that our committees are looked at as committees that scare investors. In some circles, they have even gone ahead to report to some leaders of this country that the committees are scaring away investors and yet we want value for money.

Madam Speaker, I request that as we execute our duties, you continue protecting these committees so that they come out with all the dirt. However, my humble question to the Executive is: are we on the same page? Are Parliament and the Executive on the same page in as far as fighting fraud is concerned? If the Executive is on the same page as Members of Parliament, then, Madam Speaker, continue protecting and defending these committees as you have done.

THE SPEAKER: I want to assure you that the committees will be protected. Have no fear.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those affected persons who are supposed to be compensated for the Musana-Mayingo Road. I thought it would be procedurally wrong if you did not hear from one of the affected persons.

Madam Speaker, the contractor - China Railway 18th Group - was given the contract in 2012. This is a company that did not even have a spare tyre for a grader here, but they were given that job. The ministry or UNRA had to advance money to them to buy the equipment. The contractor was on the ground seated for about two years, waiting for the equipment to come from China. 

Ironically, the two ministers in charge at that time are engineers, that is, Mr Byabagambi and Mr Byandala, but you wonder what happened. Even me, who is not an engineer, could see that you cannot just give somebody a job when they do not even have equipment. They even advanced Shs 30 billion to the contractor in 2012. In 2014, I hosted the President for the ground breaking ceremony for the tarmacking of the road but up to now, I think less than 0.5 per cent of the work has been done. The affected people have also not yet been paid. 

Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we need to come out very seriously, especially on the supervision of roads. A Member talked about Dott Services Ltd. I was a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in the previous Parliament and the consultant, who was the supervisor of Dott Services Ltd, told the committee that Dott Services Ltd does not have the capacity to finish that work within the estimated time. However, he was dismissed before he even left the committee. 

The problem is within the Executive. They need to come out; they should not just sit in those red number plate vehicles. They should save this country. Let them look at the work and the report and see if it is in tandem with what the people want. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to find out who directs UNRA to give them the contracts when they have no capacity. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Buikwe District, represented by hon. Judith Babirye and hon. Paul Musoke. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR EMMANUEL SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in reference to what my colleague has stated. If it is true that this company was advanced money by the Government but they took such a long time to get the equipment and they are now fining Government for the delay of the project, it is as if the same Government is giving away money with the right hand and taking it back with the left hand.

Madam Speaker, can we live in this kind of situation? Are we running a Government? We need to be more serious. Let this case be investigated and let us know the truth because this is annoying. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of corruption can never be underplayed. When we go into details, we shall find that there are a number of issues which are so bad. 

We are talking about compensations but if we look at the design of some of these roads, we will also unearth a lot of corruption. You will find that the design presented for bidding is different from the actual design for construction when they are awarded a contract. 

Looking at corruption in the roads sector now, as Members have already said, the changes that were made in the leadership were made to make things better but as an individual, I do not see that happening. Even the weighbridges have a lot of problems; they are making transportation more costly for our businessmen. For a trailer to cross a weighbridge, it is charged Shs 500,000 yet sometime back the Fuso Lorries were paying Shs 200,000. As of now, for you to cross the weighbridge with a trailer, you pay Shs 1 million and there is evidence to that. For a Fuso truck, you must pay Shs 500,000. One wonders whether we are really fighting corruption or just masquerading.

Recently, while at a workshop, somebody from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wondered what we are doing as Members of Parliament. He said that we make a lot of noise but at the end of the day, there is no action. This time, we must uphold these recommendations. 

It is like the corrupt set money aside to bribe; they know where the checkpoints in fighting corruption are. They know that at one moment, you must give this to skip that. The systems put in place to fight corruption have become corrupt themselves. I urge us to uphold and support these recommendations. Thank you. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman and the committee for a very good report. 

We need to deal with the causes rather than jumping onto the symptoms. A Member of Parliament mentioned that the people involved are Ugandans. Rather than taking on the foreigners who commit these mistakes, I would urge the committee to qualify the report so that these people who award these contracts fraudulently are pinned down. That is the clarification I want to make. The person who has committed the crime is here, why do you go for the witnesses? 

THE SPEAKER: No, the witnesses are part of the projects. This deceit is a common project; it is not by accident. 

MR OKUPA: Lt Col Bright Rwamirama, I can give you a living example of the Entebbe Expressway. The contractor, CCCC, approached the Minister of Finance at that time and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and said they can do the work. 

The permanent secretary, who was the chairman of the board, went to UNRA and introduced the company and asked them to give them the work, that they can do the feasibility study, costing and bidding. Therefore, all these issues involved both the contractor and a Government official.

THE SPEAKER: They are all part of a common project.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the report. 

Earlier on, Members expressed fears as to whether Government and the concerned ministries were in line with the committee and what we are discussing. I would like to assure the Members that yes, we received the report and some of us are even ready to respond to the issues, which have been raised, if time allows and if you also allow us to do so. That is why we are in the House; we take them extremely seriously and they will be acted on. 

MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the events that are happening in Uganda today, I do not see a future for Uganda tomorrow; I fear for our children. 

I would like to ask the responsible persons if it is a policy that all the big businesses in Uganda must be operated by Chinese companies. If so, I request that we review and change that policy. When you look at Chinese products in Uganda, they are not genuine. No wonder the Chinese companies are cheating Uganda. What they take from us is more than what we receive from them. 

Look at the employment system the Chinese companies have; they only give employment to local people at a lower level and a single Chinese will be given several jobs within the same company. Our unemployment rate should not be this high because we have got so many investments in Uganda, only if they opened up employment opportunities for Ugandans. 

Look at the money that was taken outside Uganda; I would like to thank this committee for the work they have done, but we need that interest refunded. We need to get back whatever interest they accrued and took away from our country.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that all the Chinese companies in Uganda be investigated. Secondly, procurement of Chinese companies to date should be stopped until we find very good companies that can help Ugandans. We do not want people who do not help Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no time for information; we need to close. The chairman was on the Floor but now everybody is taking away his time.
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for supporting our work. You have literally agreed with us on many issues. However, I would like to clarify one or two issues.

There was an issue raised by hon. Mbwatekamwa about whether the current Executive Director of UNRA is an asset or a liability. I think it will not be correct for us to condemn anybody without evidence. By the time the current Executive Director of UNRA took office, there was no institution to talk about in UNRA; it was purely chaos and fraud. 

Everything in UNRA was wrong. Anybody taking over that office I do not think would achieve any success in one or two years. Therefore, in order to gauge whether she is a liability or an asset, we just have to give her time and also look at the subsequent Auditor-General’s reports to see whether the challenges which have been reoccurring in UNRA are still going on. That is when we can make the judgement on Madam Allen Kagina.

Madam Speaker, hon. Majegere talked about compensations for the project affected persons. Shs 13 billion was given to the contractor two years ago but the contractor stayed with the money for two years and that particular contractor was trading in the money. He made a lot of money but we recovered it. This is for the Musita-Mayuge-Namayingo Road. 

He is a victim of the contractor and he is right to cry foul because the people who were affected were not being paid and yet the contractor had the money but they were just trading in the money –

THE SPEAKER: With the connivance of somebody obviously.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, in our report we have emphasised the issue about the police being more vigilant and also having an officer from the IGG attached to our office. Parliament is not a prosecuting agency. We do expect that once the police and the IGG pick up the issues, they should follow them up. Parliament will not lock up these people. We only have prima facie evidence that money was misused. It is the role of the police and the IGG to take up these issues and that is what we have recommended. 

We recommended that one, the IGG should have an officer attached to our committee and to all accountability committees to follow up these issues for purposes of prosecution. Madam Speaker, you do not prosecute these people; your role is to expose and get the facts and the Government institutions take up their roles, and that is what we recommended in the report.

Secondly, on the issue about the land in Nsambya, an honourable colleague asked what happened. Uganda Railways Corporation land was sold at Shs 70 billion and the money is with the Privatisation Unit. However, URC today does not even have money to pay its employees; they are stuck and undercapitalised and yet their assets were stripped and sold. It is not an issue of undervaluing but it is about the Shs 70 billion in the Privatisation Unit and yet the institution is crippled.

The issue of project affected persons, Madam Speaker, is a very big problem throughout the country. I do not think our people have been very good. We sampled only five projects – Ssembabule, Acholi-Bur, Musita and two others – and we found that works are going on and people’s properties have been destroyed. That is okay because the Constitution allows it, and the money for compensation has been appropriated by this Parliament, but someone is eating the money. 

The issue is not even that people sabotage Government projects but the officers of Government are misusing the money; they have stolen the money and instead they tell the powers that be, “We just need rights because our people are sabotaging projects”. Therefore, there are issues about the cost of compensations to project affected persons being high but the eventual beneficiaries are actually the officers.

Madam Speaker, there is also insider knowledge. Officers of UNRA know when a feasibility study has been done and they know where the road is going to pass. So, they go and buy land in those areas and then they come the following day with titles and start claiming money as project affected persons. There is a very notorious one. He had land at the Northern Bypass, he was compensated; he has land on the Entebbe Expressway and there is a big problem there because he has a rock; at the same time, he has already put in his requisition for Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. It is an inside job, and those are the people making very unreasonable demands for compensation. They are speculators but they are also officers of Government. Government must address this.

On supervision, Madam Speaker, we have a big problem. The boards of our institutions are very weak. These ministers who appoint these boards need to think twice. Yes, it is good to sometimes appoint some of us who have lost elections, but it does not help. You will need people who are skilled, with experience and people who are ethical; many of these boards lack those three or one of the three. They either lack the skills, they are unethical or incompetent. If they are incompetent, they cannot supervise the management. 

Therefore, we think that Cabinet, because appointing boards is a function of Cabinet, should look into the process of appointing board members. That is what we recommended here. Parliament is not involved in many of these boards. You find that these boards are operating at the whims of the managing directors of these institutions because they give them trips, few allowances and they do not supervise them. We found one of them in hon. Baryomunsi’s ministry, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The board did not know exactly what was going on. They seemed to be bullied by management. 

Cabinet, the President and you, ministers who appoint these people, should know that these guys are going to hold very big responsibilities. Therefore, you need to appoint people of a certain calibre and above all people with integrity. Some of them are part and parcel of the problem, including the supervising ministers. We did not want to cause another debate, so we tried to put it as mild as possible - ethical ministers. However, we were making a big point and allow me to stop at that.

Madam Speaker, when you view some of these correspondences like the one I laid on the Table the other day between the minister and the Executive Director of UNRA, you realise that there is a big problem. Ministers and political leaders should get out of the procurement processes. You are supervisors; do not become procurement officers. You should be hands-off and eyes-on but your eyes are on, hands are on and you even put there your legs.  (Laughter) 

There is a very big problem. Political leaders should really get off the procurement processes to make sure that they supervise the technical people who are undertaking the procurements. Once any project is messed up at procurement level, forget it; there is - (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu, the honourable chairperson. I would like to provide information for the record. National Housing and Construction Company, under the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture (PERD) statute, falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, the board is appointed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We are now trying to make arrangements to shift it so that the Ministry for Lands, Housing and Urban Development is responsible for that corporation. Definitely, we shall put in place a very strong board. I did not want the records to show that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has appointed a very weak board. I would not do that - (Interjection) - I am still for housing. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. Well, let me call it collective responsibility and I will end there. However, the point has been made.

Madam Speaker, our view is that we can do better in all these institutions if political leaders perform accordingly. I will give the example of UBC; it needs complete restructuring. It is terrible! It cannot even pay its own sweepers.

Madam Speaker, Government spends a lot of money in advertising every year on private media; just watch NTV, WBS and NBS and you will see adverts for Government institutions. Why can’t Government advertise with their own? I thought this was common sense. If Government advertised with UBC, then they would be giving it revenue and they would not be going to Government to say they needed money because the institution would be run on a commercialised basis. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation needs restructuring and money but the issues of management both at board level and top management need to be addressed.

Madam Speaker, the PPDA law has problems; we need to amend it. That notwithstanding, even before we amend it, the law is in place. However, there is a minister, from the correspondences we have seen, who even suggested that to avoid the procurement laws, they should consider this a bilateral agreement and he even put it in writing. He suggested that we should bypass the procurement laws and consider this transaction a bilateral agreement between countries. 

Madam Speaker, for some of these things, we think that even in the broad way that we have stated them, Government should be able to act on them. However, at the end of the day, we are coming back with a detailed report and in that detailed report we are going to include the names. (Applause) We thought at this particular time, we would make the point without the names, but the list is coming and it will have the names and Parliament will decide.

About the land title, it is still in the name of hon. Margaret Muhanga. However, there was a court judgement which had ordered that the land revert back to UBC, but the parties never respected the judgement. Therefore, the title remained with hon. Muhanga until we told her - We had that problem because our colleague was also a member of the committee and it was not one of the best moments, but eventually, the title was brought. Therefore, we can have that title handed back to UBC, but with instructions that it should be transferred back in the names of UBC.

There is still a crisis, however, because the title mentions about 23 acres but the land is 20 acres. The three acres are nowhere. (Laughter) That is why we would like the police and the IGG to take up this matter because there are some three acres missing. 

The 23 acres we are talking about are not in Bugweri; they are in Bugoloobi. Those who live in this town and know a little bit of real estate will know how much an acre of land costs in Bugoloobi. Tomorrow, you are going to have land titles issued by the Uganda Land Commission in the names of different people. Therefore, police, IGG and the relevant minister should be able to take up that issue, Madam Speaker, and rectify that problem.

On the money paid, first of all it is true Shs 11.5 billion was paid, but does the Government-

THE SPEAKER: The money was paid for what?

MR KATUNTU: It was paid to UBC. There are even deposit slips here-

THE SPEAKER: A deposit of Shs 11.5 billion?

MR KATUNTU: Money was paid twice actually. There was cash of Shs 5.5 billion. The bank statement is even here. The other balance was also paid in cash, about Shs 4 billion. (Interjections) That is the Uganda of today; people move with billions.

Madam Speaker, when UBC got this money, according to the evidence we have here, they bought equipment for their studio. The point here is that it is true it was an illegitimate transaction but do we, as Government, retain that money? I think that is the decision we have to make. I do not think Government should act like a businessman in downtown who says, “Since things have gone wrong and after all you are a thief, I will retain the money”. I think UBC has the obligation to pay back the money they got and under the law, they should be able to pay it back.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, because of this job, we get so many calls. People look for our relatives and friends and the clubs we go to. What is important is that we resist those sorts of meetings and be content to do the job. We do it keeping in mind what hon. Galiwango said about having faith in God. Otherwise, people are looking for us every day. You cannot really believe but they look for us every day and sometimes we want to leave office or just switch off our phones and not pick calls we do not know. This is because people are running all over us.

However, you can never do a job like this and not have those sorts of challenges. It depends on the decisions you take. You are the captain of your own soul. You take the decision and say this is correct for my soul and the other one is correct for my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, conclude.

MR KATUNTU: About security, we leave that to God. We have to go one day. Hon. Nsubuga went and all of us are going too. Looking after our security should not even be a big problem. We are strong and we shall continue doing what we are doing. 

Madam Speaker, as I resume my seat, I would really recommend that all accountability committees should take this approach of recovering money. You will never recover money from the courts of law because they are full of technicalities; the process takes long. A court process will take five to seven years, for example, and by the time you get a judgement, where is the money? The public will have even lost interest in that case. 

If we have an opportunity and these fellows come when we have evidence - Evidence is very crucial; you must have it. Do not act on emotions. In this particular case, we had already done our job, so when the Chinese came, we had their bank statement and we even knew the interest they had earned. That is why we demanded that they pay back our money including the interest. There is no way they could say the interest was not ours. The only problem we had with one of them was that he had transferred the money to China. If he got 10 per cent, there was no way we could prove it. We just asked for our Shs 4.7 billion.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and request honourable colleagues to adopt our report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the courage and endurance. There has been an attempt to depict Parliament as a non-performing entity that does not care about the public. You have now vindicated our reputation. 

However, I have a problem. If we want to activate this report, we must adopt it but at the same time, there is a very serious demand that the Government comes first to explain how they are going to handle this. I do not know if Government wants to say something. 

2.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and in a special way, its chairperson for the good work. 

I would like to remind Parliament that Government has been on record on the issue of fighting corruption. This has been on top of the agenda. The problem has always been that corruption is amorphous and we all need a concerted effort to fight it. There is no frontline where you can deploy your troops to go and fight it. This report indicates that since the monster has been around, we are starting to identify its foot prints. I will comment on some of the issues that were raised. 

Hon. Mukitale raised a procedural point on what Government is doing in the meantime. Madam Speaker, you recall that the President has commissioned inquiries in many areas including UNRA and the petroleum sector. The President has also written to ministers quoting whistle blowers. Therefore, there is work that has been done and the committee has done a great job in unveiling some of the issues that have been happening.

As the Speaker as said, in order for us as Government to come with a response as soon as possible, I request that we suspend taking a vote on this report. This is because if we do, then we will wait for about six months for Government to come and give a response. This is for the good of all of us because it is going to give me an opportunity to tell my Leader of Government Business to take this report as top priority and prepare a response as quickly as possible for Parliament. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I seek clarification. Earlier on, we had wanted to avoid the exact position that the minister is proposing – having to delay the adoption of the report - but the minister insisted that we move on. We have now reached a critical stage and the Hansard has captured it all. 

The spirit of the House is that we must move and it is in the interest of Government that we move. If this is indeed kisanja hakuna mchezo, why are you then saying at this critical time that we should hold back until the minister has responded and then we see how to proceed in one way or another?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were requests on the Floor that we needed answers to before we adopt the report. That is the dilemma that I have. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, you are very right; we needed answers. However, that should not stop us from moving on; after all, we have a compact report with evidence. The minister can come in with a treasury memorandum in responding to these issues but let Parliament proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Can we then demand that they bring it earlier than the six months? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Government is part of the debate and we are one on this. We have neither responded nor clarified. The committee has proposed measures or recommendations that we would like to look at. This is part of their report but there is another phase of the report yet to come. 

I am only requesting colleagues to allow Cabinet to look at the report and prepare a response before we can finally vote on the report. Perhaps some of the recommendations may be improved if we listened to the response from Government. Maybe we can amend recommendations or even bring more recommendations – (Interjections) - If Members are not comfortable, then I can –

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, before we broke off last week, we had this problem of the Kibuye-Busega loan, which was pending a final decision. There are some recommendations within the committee report. The chairperson of the Committee on National Economy even agrees with these recommendations. Now, if we do not adopt it, what happens to that particular motion?

MR MUSASIZI: I can give information to the House. This is a report generated from the recommendations by the Auditor-General. There is a normal procedure about how these reports are processed through Parliament. The procedure is that reports come here for adoption, after which the Executive prepares a treasury memorandum which then comes back to the House and is sent to the Auditor-General for audit.

If we wait until Government responds and then we adopt the report, we would have missed the principle of processing reports by the Auditor-General. (Applause) This is the point that I would like to emphasise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on this issue raised by the Government Chief Whip. The chairperson in his presentation says this is sort of a summary or abridged version – 

THE SPEAKER: Interim report.

MR BAHATI: Yes, he said it is an interim report. So hon. Katuntu, in your opinion, do you think that it is appropriate that we adopt these recommendations and then we wait for the bigger report, or we can actually wait for the final report and adopt the final report? It is just procedural.

THE SPEAKER: This is a report on selected agencies. There are others that have not been handled and it is therefore not a problem.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Without wasting the time of this august House, we can put a vote on the report and then I can take it upon myself to request the Leader of Government Business to make it a priority for Cabinet to handle it. We can then come back and brief you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The question is that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the Auditor-General’s report for selected entities for the financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time we had received the report from the Committee on National Economy on two loans. One was Uganda/Rwanda: Busega-Mpigi and Kagitumba-Kayonza-Rusamo road project, and the other one was for upgrading Luweero-Butalangu Road.
 
A number of conditions were set, which have been accepted, and we have now adopted them in our resolutions in the report of COSASE. Honourable members, I would like to propose that we also complete that process and take a vote on those loan requests because conditions have been set and they have been accepted. Is that okay, honourable members? 

Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the loan request for 64 million units of account from the African Development Bank and 60 million units of account from the African Development Fund for the road as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER:  I also put the question that this House do approve the request from the Committee of National Economy for Government to borrow US$ 11.5 from the Arab Bank for Economic Development (BADEA) to support the upgrading of the Luweero–Butalangu Road. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, on this business of China, it seems like we are guaranteeing employment in China continuously. Their factories will work and they will have jobs but we are not taking into account our own people – (Interjections) – Yes, that is what we are doing! We are guaranteeing employment in China. Therefore, I think we need to think about this. 

Honourable members, I want to propose that we suspend the House for 45 minutes and then we come back and complete the other items. House suspended to 3.30 p.m. 

(The House was suspended at 2.43 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding _)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE WITHDRAWAL OF USD 33 MILLION FROM THE PETROLEUM FUND TO THE CONSOLIDATED FUND AND PROVIDE A SUPPLEMENTARY OF AN EQUIVALENT AMOUNT TO UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY

3.42
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, in order to raise money to ensure that the first oil comes out in 2020, we have found it absolutely necessary to touch on this Petroleum Fund to raise, this financial year, $33 million. This will be used to commence on the roads going down towards the oil wells so that our objective of having this oil out and flowing by 2020 is achieved. 

All these roads must be in place by 2019. We shall borrow the rest and we have had to suppress certain expenses from the budget. We believe with that package, we should be able to get the oil out of the ground by the target date. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, what I do not know is whether this requires a report from our committee.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we thought that it may not be absolutely necessary to go to a committee because the issue is straightforward. However, subject to the rules of Parliament and subject to whether we are proceeding well, I will need your guidance on this matter. We thought that this was a straightforward matter but as I said, I will go as the rules say. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know there are two issues here; you want to withdraw money from the Petroleum Fund and at the same time you want a supplementary budget of an equivalent amount for UNRA. So, I think that one has to go to our committee and they can examine it and report back.

MR KASAIJA: I concede, Madam Speaker.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: I do not see the Attorney-General that side but I think the Public Finance Management Act talks about the Appropriation Act before you withdraw from that Fund; you cannot do it by a motion. Therefore, I think you will need to address your mind to how you come here to seek that permission. It will not be a casual motion that you bring and we allow you. You just need to address yourself to that, or the Attorney-General should brief you on the provisions of the law.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to remind the Minister of Finance that section 61 of the Public Finance Management Act stipulates thus: “The Minister shall for every financial year, table before Parliament, the semi-annual and annual reports of the Petroleum Fund by 1st April and 31st December…” which you have not been doing.

Madam Speaker, there is a procedure to follow when you want to withdraw funds from the Petroleum Fund. Section 58 of the Public Finance Management Act requires that withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund shall only be made under authority granted by an Appropriation Act and a warrant of the Auditor-General to the Consolidated Fund, to support the annual budget and to the Petroleum Revenue Investment Reserve.

Honourable minister, withdrawals from the Consolidated Fund should only be done to fund the annual budget and not a single sector budget. Section 3 of the Public Finance Management Act defines the budget thus: “the Government plan of revenue and expenditure for a financial year.” A sector budget is not the annual budget.

Madam Speaker, due to inadequate supervision by UNRA and enforcement of social-environmental safeguards, the World Bank withdrew its funding. Therefore, inadequacies cannot translate to be unforeseen. Besides, there is no commitment from Government that the social-environmental inadequacies have been addressed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now jumping ahead; the issues you are – 

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the minister that we cannot continue before this withdrawal is discussed by the committee.

Madam Speaker, given the fact that supplementary estimates have been laid, it is prudent to give the Committee on Budget time to scrutinise it and guide the House on how to proceed. The motion should not be approved because it does not translate into an Appropriation or Supplementary Appropriation Act.

Lastly, honourable minister, finance should lay on the Table an annual report on the Petroleum Fund before 31 December 2016, which you have not done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I can say is that the matter is prematurely before this House. So please go back and file the necessary papers, namely the Appropriation Bill on this issue, before we can proceed.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE CHARTER FOR FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND THE ECONOMIC AND FISCAL UPDATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

5.50
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Charter for Fiscal Responsibility and economic and fiscal update were presented in the House on 17 August 2015 and 14 September 2016 respectively. The Charter for Fiscal Responsibility and economic and fiscal update were referred to our committee for consideration and report back in accordance with section 5(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the committee examined both reports and made some observations and recommendations. We, therefore, wish to report back to the House. 

In the process of the consideration of the two reports, the committee conducted a number of meetings whose minutes I would like to lay on the Table. I would also like to lay on the Table other relevant documentation that was used in the process of considering our report. All the documentation is contained in this file and I beg to lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker.

The Charter for Fiscal Responsibility sets out the Government’s strategic commitment to managing fiscal policy, which is consistent with sustainable fiscal balances over the medium term and maintenance of prudent and sustainable levels of public debt. It is a comprehensive framework under which the Government will prudently govern its public finances.

The objective of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility is to ensure that governments are fiscally responsible, transparent and accountable in making fiscal decisions. It achieves this by requiring governments to be explicit about their fiscal objectives, in line with the principles of responsible fiscal management. It also requires governments to report on a wide range of economic and fiscal information.

Madam Speaker, there are a number of fiscal objectives set out in the charter, which I would like to highlight. The proposed measurable fiscal objectives of the charter were developed to enable Uganda attain the East African Monetary Union Protocol convergence criteria, in Article 6(2), in the year 2021; and at the same time meet our country’s medium term priorities as enshrined in the country’s National Development Plan II.

The proposed measurable fiscal objectives of the charter include the following:

1. Fiscal balance

The Government’s fiscal balance, including grants, is reduced to a deficit of no greater than three per cent of GDP by the financial year 2020/2021.

2. Public Debt

Public debt in net present value terms is maintained below 50 per cent of GDP. There is a table, which Members can refer to on their iPads; it shows the details of the figures under objective No. 2 - public debts.

Madam Speaker, I will not go through the methodology. With your indulgence, I would like to go straight to the committee’s observations and recommendations. The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

a) Consistency with the National Development Plan II

The macroeconomic strategy for the National Development Plan II is underpinned by the objective of maintaining macroeconomic stability and the need to raise resources to address Uganda’s infrastructural deficit. 

The NDP II framework is informed by the following assumptions: The macroeconomic convergence criteria of the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol requires the country to meet specific targets namely, a ceiling on headline inflation of eight per cent; a ceiling on the fiscal deficit, including grants of three per cent of GDP; a ceiling on public debt of 50 per cent of GDP in net present value terms; a reserve cover of 4.5 months of imports; and maintaining core inflation at below five per cent.

The committee observed that the two fiscal objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility namely, that the Government fiscal balance, including grants, is reduced to a deficit of not greater than three per cent of GDP by financial year 2020/2021; and the public debts in net present value terms are maintained below 50 per cent of GDP, affirm that the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility is consistent with the NDP II.

b) Measureable Objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility 

Section 5(1) (a) (i) of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 stipulates that the charter shall provide a statement indicating measurable objectives for fiscal policy for a period not less than three fiscal years, which are consistent with the principles set out in section 4 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended.

The committee observed that the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility is specified for a period of five fiscal years, that is, 2016/17 to 2020/21, which is not less than the three fiscal years as required by the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

The committee also observed that the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility provides the following two measureable fiscal objectives: 
    (i) The Government fiscal balance is reduced to  a deficit of not greater than three per cent of GDP by the end of financial year 2020/21; 
    (ii) The public debt in net present value terms is maintained below 50 per cent of GDP. 

In line with the Public Debt Management Strategy 2016/17 to 2020/21, the committee recommends that the public debt be maintained at a level below 50 per cent of GDP but be disaggregated to ensure that both external and domestic debt levels are maintained at prudent levels to support a strong and sound economy. 

The committee recommends that an amendment to the charter be proposed to read as follows: “The public debt in net present value terms is maintained below 50 per cent of GDP, of which the net present value of external debt is maintained below 30 per cent of GDP and the net present value of domestic debt is maintained below 20 per cent of GDP.”

c) Macroeconomic and Fiscal Projections 

Section 5(1)(a)(iv) of the Public Finance Management Act stipulates thus: “(a) a Charter for Fiscal Responsibility which shall provide – 

(iv) a demonstration of how the fiscal objectives set out under subsection (1)(a)(i) are consistent with principles set out in section 4 using the macroeconomic and fiscal data, assumptions, and projections provided in the economic and fiscal update referred to in subsection (1) (b).”

The committee observed that the economic and fiscal update did not provide for the macroeconomic and fiscal projections for the five-year period of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility when it was submitted to Parliament. The absence of the planned fiscal path towards attainment of the fiscal objectives of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility implies that Parliament could not ascertain the path to attainment of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility objectives.

The committee requested and obtained from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the macroeconomic and fiscal projections (as attached in Annex 1) to demonstrate the fiscal path towards attainment of the fiscal objectives. However, according to the macroeconomic and fiscal projections provided by the Ministry of Finance, the fiscal deficit, including grants, to GDP is converging to 3.4 per cent by financial year 2020/2021, which is above the threshold of three per cent as per the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility target.

In this regard, the committee recommends that Government should constrain its recurrent expenditure over the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility period in order to attain the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility target of a fiscal deficit to GDP of not greater than three per cent by financial 2020/2021. Government should also undertake fiscal adjustment reforms in restraining consumptive expenditure in areas like the expansion of public sector management and ensure efficient utilisation of the available limited resources. 

Given the above, the macro-fiscal projections should be amended to incorporate a medium-term reduction of recurrent expenditure by at least 0.4 per cent of GDP in the medium term, in order to attain the desired fiscal deficit objective of not greater than three per cent by financial year 2020/2021. 

Alternatively, the macro-fiscal projections by the Parliamentary Budget Office that constrain recurrent expenditure over the medium term should be considered (reference is annex 2).

d) Fiscal Risks

The committee observed that the fiscal risks highlighted in the economic and fiscal update are not comprehensive. Fiscal risks like debt refinancing or rollover risks and foreign exchange risks were not considered. In addition, the committee observed that the economic and fiscal update does not provide any mitigation measures for the risks identified.

The committee recommends that the following fiscal risks be incorporated in the economic fiscal update: 
1. 	Debt refinancing or rollover risk: Given the fact that the Government external debt is increasingly being contracted on variable interest rates or non-concessional terms and the low absorption levels of external debt, the risk of rolling over external debt at higher interest rates is pertinent.

2. 	Foreign exchange risks: Given the high share of external debt in the total public debt portfolio, volatility in the exchange rate poses a risk in high debt repayments. 

In addition, the committee recommends that the economic fiscal update report considers incorporating the following mitigation measures:
a)	To mitigate against debt refinancing or rollover risks as a result of challenges in project implementation or absorption of external debt, there is a critical need to reform project management from the point of entry, appraisal to approval and implementation;

b) 	To mitigate against interest rate risks, Government should aim at only contracting external debt on fixed interest terms in the medium term;

c) 	To mitigate against foreign exchange rate risks, Government should control and monitor external debt by ensuring that the proportion of foreign currency debt in total debt does not rise above a maximum of 80 per cent in the medium term; and

d) 	Ambiguity in the interpretation of unanticipated severe economic shock.

Madam Speaker, section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 stipulates thus: “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament, deviate from the objectives in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility where Uganda experiences a natural disaster, an unanticipated severe economic shock, or any other significant unforeseen event that cannot be funded from the Contingency Fund or other funding mechanism provided in this Act or using prudent fiscal policy adjustments.”

The committee observed that whereas it may be obvious to determine a significant natural disaster that has occurred, it is not clear or obvious to determine “severe economic shock”. In this regard, the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility should provide a quantifiable or measurable indicator of what constitutes a severe economic shock.

The committee recommends that the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility be amended to incorporate the following definition of a severe economic shock: “a severe economic shock would constitute a large scale economic downturn, measured by a decline in real GDP growth rates by over 1 per cent for at least two consecutive quarters in a quarter-to-quarter comparison from the preceding period or a rise by over one per cent in international interest rates measured by the London Interbank Offered Rate.”

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the objective of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility is to ensure that Government is fiscally responsible, transparent and accountable in its fiscal decision making. Fiscal responsibility is about ensuring that fiscal decisions are not dominated by present considerations at the expense of future ones. Therefore, I request that the House adopts the recommendations by the committee on this subject matter. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Finance. I think this is our first report under the Public Finance Management Act in this area. Are there any comments, Members?

4.13
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a well-written report. It is one of those reports that have given us a lot of detailed information on two important issues; one of them is the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, to find out where we stand as a country in terms of our debt management. 

As one goes through this report from pages 4 to 6, one of the things that is clear, when the committee talks about the fiscal risk – I think the committee did not go deep because they did not delve much into it - is the question of Government’s commitment to use the loans that they borrow. This is about the performance of our loans portfolio. 

We borrow a lot of money and even today we have borrowed more. However, there are loans that we approved in this House as far back as 2013, for example the loan for the Namalu-Nakapiripirit-Muyembe Road, which was $85 million. There was also the loan for taking electricity to Moroto, which was $182 million. However, there is no project that has started on that road yet we are being made to borrow every day and the loans are becoming skewed. 

We have a problem as a developing country because we are being affected by external factors. The American dollar is strengthening and as most people must have heard, the Federal Reserve Bank has increased interest rates and they are about to increase it another three times next year. What is the Government’s commitment in ensuring that as this Parliament commits itself to borrow, it uses the loans sufficiently? What is happening to the loans that Government borrowed three or four years ago?

Secondly, Government should give us a position on how we stand with the rest of the East African countries. This report is not detailed as far as where other East African countries are in terms of the convergence rates. The discussion available today is that some countries have failed to provide statistics on where they stand in terms of convergence, particularly when we are going to start the East African monetary union very soon. 

What is in the Act? How does Government relate with other countries that probably have no commitment yet we are forced to suppress our expenditure? We need to build more roads and invest more in our infrastructure. How shall we respond to the performance of countries that may not be arriving at the target to which our budget is responding to now? 

Madam Speaker, I find that the issue on the East African Monitory Union Protocol needs detailed discussion by this House. This is because we are putting it in our Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and yet we are not expanding it. However, one of the reasons that we are doing this is that we want to meet the target of the East African Community - at the expense of our own development. These are the issues that the minister probably needs to address in another report to this House.

Madam Speaker, I pray that as we adopt this report, the honourable minister takes these recommendations of the committee very seriously. The question of managing the percentage of foreign debts in our overall debt portfolio is an issue because we do not control the American dollar; we do not print it here. 

Our economy is not growing that fast. So, how are we going to manage this volatility which we do not control but we are just being influenced by external factors? Maybe we should pray that our economy grows faster so that we can be able to attain convergence and those ratios as a result of the growth in our economy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I think it is a good beginning for us on this issue of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility.

Honourable minister of Finance, much as we are obliged to observe the regional targets, for example 50 per cent of GDP for public debt, what harm does it do to this country to observe more prudent and manageable levels of loans? What do we lose if we borrow much more prudently than simply giving the argument that we have not hit the ceiling? Do we have to wait until we are through the roof?

Secondly, there was a proposal to constrain recurrent expenditure in order to meet the fiscal objectives. I think it would be good to hear from the minister on the commitment of Government to reduce public sector expenditure. What can we lay our hands on? What shows that there is commitment?

To the chairperson of the committee, on low absorptions of the loans, I agree with your proposal about reforming project management in its entirety. However, would you consider including loan performance tracking at sector level with consequential penalties? This is important because it does no good for us to see a sector, which cannot absorb its loans, with the same managers in place and then you see more loans.

Finally, to the committee chairperson, your definition of severe economic shock is measured at less than one per cent of GDP in terms of downturn or one per cent above the external interest rate. If we are to apply this definition to Uganda, aren’t we condemning ourselves to a perpetually severe economic shocked country? This is because when you look at our performance and you look at the reality, one per cent appears to be low. Why did you consider this? Is this an international measure? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.20
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to also thank the chairperson and committee members for working tirelessly to see that we have this report. You have done a wonderful job.
 
I personally like that the committee is recommending reforms in project management. However, I wonder whether you may consider requesting the ministry to report to Parliament on the new reforms so that we are informed about what has changed under this recommendation. 

Madam Speaker, we have been informed by this report that our domestic debt is higher than the external debt throughout the three financial years. This country is suffering with high interest rates and one of the major causes of such high rates in this country is domestic borrowing. I wonder whether the committee chairperson may consider a target at that level, so that we can reduce Government borrowing domestically. Otherwise –(Member timed out) 

4.22
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the chairperson of the committee. However, before that, I would like to thank you very much for the report. 

The report is twofold; the first part is about the charter and the second part is about the fiscal updates. However, I am more interested in the fiscal update for the financial year 2016/2017. I would like you to comment on the current glaring inflation rate vis-à-vis the investment portfolio that we have in terms of the foreign exchange outflow in the country. To me, this affects investments, and with a number of foreign investors in the country, we do not know how much the foreign exchange outflow is affecting our country.

I would also like you to comment on the investments in terms of value addition. Has it been able to enhance the current investment status? Has it been able to enhance economic growth? 

Looking at the fact that Uganda is aiming at achieving a middle-income economy by 2020, do you see the current economic trend that we are experiencing delivering us to a middle-income economy by 2020? Your report should have captured that because there should be a trajectory, which will take us from 2016/2017 –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for presenting a good report. Mine is just a clarification. 

The Public Finance Management Act, 2015, section 5 (a) (iii) on the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, says, “a list of the sources of data to be used to report developments against the fiscal objectives required in subsection (1)(a)(i).”

Is the committee satisfied with the sources of data to be used to track the charter sufficiently? That is important because without a clear understanding of the data sources to be used, it will be difficult for Parliament and Government to uniformly track the progress. 

Madam Speaker, it is also important that we have the commitment of the chairperson that while tracking progress, Parliament will not disagree with Government on the sources of data. Thank you. 

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman and committee members for the report presented. I would like to confirm that we will incorporate the recommendations of the committee in the final print of the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. 

I would like to make two comments. The first is on the issue of the debt sustainability of our country. Madam Speaker, the 50 per cent threshold for the region does not meant that we should attain the 50 per cent. We are saying that if one goes to 50 per cent, then they are crossing a red line. 

As we speak, we are now at 34.9 per cent inclusive of the projected standard gauge railway of about Shs 2 billion. We hope that in the next two or three years, we will not reach 40 per cent. Therefore, we are very cautious about it. We hope that the investments and structuring of the financing that we are going to engage in in the next financial year and in the years to come will probably remain in that region until we start getting our oil so that we can reduce on the debt burden.

It is true that the cost of domestic debt is very high. However, beginning with the next financial year, we are going to be reducing on it. It should be noted that sometimes we do not have alternatives because external debt also has its own issues; it is competed for and all that.

The second point is on the public sector expenditure reduction. Madam Speaker, as you will be seeing in the Budget Framework Paper, which we are going to lay on the Table a few minutes from now, we are encouraging massive cuts especially on consumptive items.

Madam Speaker, attaining a middle-income status by 2020 is a huge subject and we have requested before in this House that we be given time so that the Members of Parliament can debate it. We think that we can attain it by 2020 but there are conditions to fulfil in order to achieve that. One of them is that each of us must work hard countrywide, but we shall debate that issue at another time.

On the issue of loan performance, again we agreed that we should be given space in this House to debate how these loans are performing sector by sector. However, moving forward, we also encourage sectoral committees to start doing their work because these loans were acquired for sectors and they are supposed to be implemented by sectors. Sectoral committees should therefore be looking at them. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to lay the Budget Framework Paper on the Table? Thank you, chairman and the committee.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2017/2018 to 2021/2022. 

I am also required, in laying this paper, to lay on the Table the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance and the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, which we have actually debated and agreed upon. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. They are sent to the committee for perusal and report back under the Public Finance Management Act. Can I invite the Minister of Works and Transport, in three minutes, to report on our assignment? 

STATEMENT ON BUS OPERATIONS IN KAMPALA CITY

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government has been faced with challenges of poor management of bus parks in Kampala due to the fact that most of the buses are privately owned. 

The ministry made reforms after a long process of due diligence, consultation and studies stretching over one year with various stakeholders, including bus operators, in its monthly public hearings. These reforms were made in the interest of all stakeholders, including the travelling public whose safety is paramount. 

Madam Speaker, we were asked why the Transport Licensing Board (TLB) makes the decisions and I had included the response in this statement. However, I will lay on the Table the section of the Traffic and Road Safety Act that empowers the TLB to make decisions of this nature.

Madam Speaker, since I was given very little time, let me just get to the rationale of the reforms. The emerging challenges in the public transport sector, particularly those encountered in the bus operations, which included the following – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU:  I would like to thank the minister for acting quickly. However, we are having problems with following him. First of all, he is inaudible and secondly, he has not given us hard copies neither is the soft copy on our iPads. We are, therefore, failing to follow him.

THE SPEAKER: Where are the copies? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I excused myself because my throat was not - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you told us in the morning. 

MR BAGIIRE: I beg that my colleagues really appreciate and understand my predicament.

THE SPEAKER: Did you bring a soft copy for the Clerk?

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, Madam Speaker. I gave it to the Clerk’s office about 30 minutes ago.

THE SPEAKER: Can we listen or you want the copies? The matter is urgent. Let us listen. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that the emerging challenges in the public transport sector, particularly those encountered in the bus operations, include the following:

a) 	Some terminals were no longer complaint to statutory requirements set by the ministry. Such requirements included having proper facilities such as waiting lounges, appropriate washrooms, security, luggage offices and sufficient parking space. Qualicel Bus Terminal, for example, lacked all the aforementioned facilities.

b) 	Some terminals were too congested and as a result, public transport was greatly hindered and passenger safety compromised. 

According to our assessment, Qualicel was the smallest in terms of size - approximately 80 decimals of an acre - compared to Namayiba Bus Terminal and Kisenyi Bus Terminal, which have four and two acres of land respectively. However, out of the 900 buses licensed to operate, over 600 buses were still operating at Qualicel with Kisenyi being second with about 169 buses and 100 buses at Namayiba.

The growth in the number of buses was not followed by the growth and improvement in facilities and space, to the extent that the buses would spill onto the streets, causing congestion in downtown Kampala. 

c) 	The exorbitant charges by some terminals like Qualicel Bus Terminal due to its monopoly were unreasonable. Bus operators reported to have been charged between Shs 5 million to Shs 10 million to be allowed to load passengers from the terminal, and there was an additional charge of Shs 50,000 for every bus that loaded per day. 

Currently, Qualicel still charges a lumpsum of Shs 5 million to Shs 10 million for a loading slot on top of the Shs 50,000 daily for each bus that loads. The other terminals like Kisenyi and Namayiba charge only a total of Shs 53,000 for each bus loading per day and do not charge any other amount of money.

d) 	Qualicel Bus Terminal continuously violated the board’s guidelines and requirements, which among others include allowing only buses with licences to load and transport passengers. On several occasions, the terminal allowed buses such as school buses and coasters, which are not compliant to statutory requirements to operate as public service vehicles, thus endangering the lives of the passengers and the public and causing confusion in the loading of buses.

e) 	The ministry continued to receive complaints regarding the increase in number and influence of brokers at Qualicel who are unruly and indisciplined and who, in exchange for money, were willing to fight for the interests of the operators. In the scuffles, children, for example, would be separated from their mothers and luggage lost as passengers were forced into buses they did not want to board.

f) 	There were also challenges in accessing bus services in Kampala. Buses are scattered all over terminals. As a result, many passengers do not know where to find buses. This is a situation brokers take advantage of to divert passengers from the buses for a fee. This is the reason as to why there is a rise in the number of brokers in these parks. 

g) 	There is also congestion downtown, some of which is due to buses crossing the central business district, having manoeuvred from terminals to their respective highways. This was due to the fact that buses going to different regions could load from any terminal/ungazetted area. Buses are express vehicles that have no business crisscrossing the central business district. 

h) 	Madam Speaker, there were buses loading on the streets at Arua Park as opposed to loading from gazetted places. Some of these buses included Nile Coach, California Bus and some buses going to Juba. As a result, the place became too congested and there was an emerging threat to passengers as a result of hooliganism. 

As such, the board took a decision to redistribute buses as follows:

i. 	Buses headed to the western region like Mbarara, Kabale, Kasese, Fort Portal, Rukungiri, among others, and the mid-western region load from Kisenyi Bus Terminal.

ii. 	Buses headed to the northern region like Gulu, Lira, Arua, Kitgum and Moyo, among others, to load from Namayiba Bus Terminal. 

iii. 	Interstate buses (operating within the region) to Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, South Sudan, DRC and Burundi to load from Namayiba Bus Terminal. 

iv. 	Buses headed to eastern region, to Jinja, Kumi, Mbale and Soroti, among others, are to load from Qualicel Bus Terminal as it improves on the requirements put in place by the Ministry of Works and Transport.

v. 	The ministry allowed buses with private terminals to load from their respective terminals as long as they were cleared by KCCA. 

vi. 	The ministry recommended that KCCA closes bus terminals that were not compliant with statutory requirements, including moving buses loading on the streets like Nile Coach and California to designated terminals. 

This decision was purposed to achieve the following: 1. Ensuring that the buses use as little time as possible to manoeuvre from the terminal to the respective highways. Hence, buses were allocated to terminals that were closest to their respective highways. 

2. 	Eliminating operations of buses in non-gazetted areas such as Arua Park, Dewinton Road, Speke Road and the spill over created by lack of space in Qualicel, which leads to buses operating on streets in downtown Kampala on Allen Road, Namirembe Road and Total Fuel Station opposite Qualicel Bus Terminal.  

3. 	Placing buses from the same region in one area so that the passengers would know where to find their buses and thereby eliminate the chaos caused by brokers as well as improve customer care since the bus company will be marketed by the quality of its services to the public. 

Madam Speaker, Government was sued by the owner of Qualicel, a one Drake Lubega, on grounds that he was losing business. He went on to secure an interim order halting the implementation of these reforms. Government appealed and court ruled in favour of Government on grounds that the decision was made in public interest and the safety of the traveling public. As such, the High Court ruled that the redistribution process proceeds accordingly.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the delay in the implementation was a result of the interim order granted by court and could only be done after 7 December 2016, when court ruled in favour of Government. However, all the other processes had been undertaken; identification and acquisition of parking slots by operators was complete by the end of October 2016. 

As of today, all buses, including Felister owned by my colleague, hon. Felix Okot Ogong, like he said here before, have complied and settled in the various terminals as proposed by the Transport Licensing Board. 

All of them have secured contracts in their designated terminals and Government has already issued licences based on some of the new measures. In fact, the operations manager for Felister Bus, who is also the chairperson of all the northern Uganda bus operators, oversaw the transition of the northern Uganda bus operators to Namayiba Bus Terminal. I am happy to state that they have settled in well.

In fact, the major problem being faced by all bus operators is the high volume of passengers compared to the available services. The ministry is discussing with the police to see how to address this issue without compromising the passengers’ safety; for example, by allowing these buses to do two round trips if it is possible because of the numbers. 

It is important to note that this decision partly affected the operation of buses at Arua Park including buses plying the route to Juba and some to West Nile, specifically Nile Coach and California. Nile Coach and California have a total of 15 buses and ply the West Nile route. These two bus companies have been loading on the streets as opposed to KK Travellers and Gaagaa bus companies, which have their own terminals.

As a compromise position, Madam Speaker, as a result of the complaint that was raised, because Nile Coach and California alongside a few buses plying the Juba route have been historically loading and offloading from Arua Park, I together with my colleagues from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the ministry in charge of KCCA, this morning have agreed to give them a period of three weeks. After this, they will move to the newly designated terminals. It is because of this season.

The rest of the buses in the other terminals will operate in accordance with the new guidelines issued by the Transport Licensing Board. In January 2017, probably towards the end of the month, my ministry will have a further consultative meeting with all stakeholders on improving bus terminal operations in Kampala. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, first for responding very quickly and for giving us the background including the legal issue, but also for finding a solution for the travelling public during this Christmas. Thank you very much. I will allow only one supplementary question from the hon. Bernard Atiku.

4.66
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like thank the minister for this quick response. I do appreciate the content of this report. The conclusion settles my heart in the sense that all stakeholders, including us leaders, are going to be involved in this kind of process. 

When people get beaten up or lose property, they report to us. Therefore, when January comes, endeavour to invite some of us - people like the hon. Okot Ogong, hon. Odur Jonathan and others who are interested stakeholders - to dialogue with you, so that when the decision is made, it is also passed on to the passengers. When they come, they will know where to go or find the buses. 

Otherwise, the report has clearly pointed out that not all buses do not have terminals; there are buses which have established standards and these standards are being followed as prescribed by KCCA.

Moving on, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your guidance on this particular matter. The three weeks are adequate enough to allow people to move during the festive season so that when we embark on this process of transition, we are all on the same page. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me just hear from the two bus owners. (Laughter)

4.47 
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the quick response. However, there is one or two things that I would like to get clarification on. 

First of all, the argument presented by the minister here shows that there was a problem posed by Qualicel to the transport business and they wanted to address that problem. However, what other justification was there to go and push even operators who were in Kisenyi Bus Park, which is licensed and gazetted? What was the justification if the issue was just about Qualicel alone?

Secondly, I would like seek clarification about this grace period. Are you giving the grace period selectively, like when the ministry issued that directive? Are you granting the grace period to all bus companies or you are selecting some few and giving them three weeks? It is important for us to know that. 

If you allow a bus company to operate in the middle of the city where there is business, all the passengers will go there. We will have to ask our people to pay Shs 10,000 per piece of luggage for them to be ferried to Namayiba. If done that way, it will mean you are technically denying other operators a chance to also do business. So, kindly clarify on the grace period, honourable minister. Thank you.

4.49
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for that statement. However, I would like to say that his statement falls short of saying they do not have good planning. 

First of all, in the face of the minister, they sold all the Government terminals. When you go to UTC, where we had about five acres, it was sold to Mukwano. When you come to Baganda Bus Park, it was sold to their own friends. I was a minister then and I raised this issue in Cabinet. I would like to inform you that I raised it in Cabinet so that you get to know. I asked why we were doing that. If we cannot organise our transport system, then which country are we running; that is what I raised.
 
Now, somebody built a big building there with no planning, that is, Qualicel. We went to KCCA for a meeting and I told them that what Qualicel was doing was wrong. However, because they have godfathers, they used to build at night. We got to know that they were linked to very high ranking people who cleared them.

Madam Speaker, we are now again being sent to a private person. What is our security there? Now that we have been sent there, the person is going to determine what we are supposed to pay and even punish the passengers if they do not follow. Honourable minister, our safety and security must be guaranteed. 

Secondly, they are talking about decongesting the city. How can we decongest the city without a clear plan? If I brought somebody from Lira and they were connecting to Mbarara, that person would have to pick a taxi to go to the Mbarara terminal. See the confusion that you are going to create. 

The other day we were showing you what is happening in Rwanda. I am going to post it to your emails. In Rwanda, it is all planned; whether one is going to places like Lira, Iganga and so on, all destinations are in one area, unlike for us where people are going to different areas to board from different stages. This is like practising segregation in our country. Western Uganda passengers go to this and that area, northern Uganda passengers go to this and that area; that level of planning is not good. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the minister that before people go back in three weeks, we must have a meeting to agree on a position. Government must arrange and get us our park. (Applause) We do not want to rely on anybody. We want a bus park for all Ugandans so that when you sit in the park, you know that you are in your country and not on private land.

Minister of Works, we need a bus park owned by Government so that we are free from these charges of Shs 100,000 and Shs 10 million every day, which is all nonsense. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not going to debate this matter. Honourable minister, you have undertaken to have a meeting with the stakeholders. Please report to us after the third meeting. I am sorry, honourable members, but we have other matters to handle.

I have an announcement to make. The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill was sent to the committee today. We are giving the committee time to sit during the recess and the following honourable members are expected to attend: Raphael Magyezi, Alex Onzima, Doreen Amule, Spellanza Baguma, Sam Byibesho, Jovrine Kaliisa, Johnson Muyanja, Sylvia Akello, Noah Mutebi, Alli Ogama, Peter Okot, Betty Nambooze, Ronald Mugume, Flavia Byekwaso, Julie Mukoda and Rehema Watongola. The Members are required to convene on the 28th and 29th of December.

The following ministries are expected to attend: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Electoral Commission. The ministers are required to be there in person. Please, work on our behalf so that we can have these elections. I thank you. 

Let us go to item No. 11 - The passengers will hear about the changes from the radio. Can the works minister announce the changes so that the travellers in this House can know?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Buses that will be heading to the western region and mid-western Uganda will load from the Kisenyi Bus Terminal. Buses headed to the northern region will load –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want you to inform the travelling public in another announcement and not here. However, we want the date of the meeting. Please inform the other people. Thank you. You will discuss those issues in your stakeholders meeting. Honourable members, let us go to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. Hon. Joshua Anywarach, you are not happy; what is it?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I think that from what the minister has presented, the problem of order is becoming an excuse. If you go to South Africa, cities have been decongested by building supermarkets outside the city but here you are only blaming it on transport. I think there is a bigger problem to this. 

There is what we call bus terminals and bus owners. In Uganda, most of the people who own bus terminals are bus owners. Now, what happens if you are supposed to be recommended as a bus owner for another route? Gaagaa, for example, has been struggling to procure a route to Burundi for several years. In such a case, the bus operator is expected to receive a recommendation from a terminal owner. If it is a private property that the operator might be renting, then the owner must recommend them to show that he has or she has accepted. 

The issue here is that bus owners who also have bus terminals use them to control –

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, can you invite all the stakeholders to your meeting, including hon. Anywarach, so that he can explain the issue. All the passengers in this House should attend the meeting called by hon. Bagiire.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 AND DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

4.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Reagan Okumu): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, to present the report on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year 2014/2015 on all districts of Uganda and municipal councils that were audited.

This will be the first report of its kind that your Parliament has successfully responded to for the entire financial year. This was the latest audit report to Parliament and we have adhered to the constitutional guidelines to report to you on all the districts and municipalities in Uganda that were audited.

The Auditor-General audited 22 municipalities and 111 districts. I think some districts came on board later on and they were not covered by this audit report. The next audit report will have 116 districts.

These reports were laid before this Parliament in January 2015. However, it was practically impossible for Parliament to sit at that time. When this committee was established, it took time to settle as it was a new Parliament. However, we have tried our very best to process and present this report within those three months.

I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the report of the committee, which is 338 pages, covering all the districts and municipalities in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations. (Applause)

MR OKUMU: I also would like to lay on the Table two files containing the minutes of all our meetings in these districts and municipalities.

Further, I would like to lay on the Table summary cases handed over by the Parliamentary Committee on Local Government Accounts that were referred to the Criminal Intelligence and Investigative Directorate (CIID) of the police. In most cases, we work with the CIID, but it has been rare that we report about their activities. So we want to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the detailed summary. There are 63 cases that were referred and many more are also being handled. Therefore, let me take this opportunity to lay them on the Table as a record of Parliament because they work with our committee. 

Madam Speaker, this report is a very big volume and I will only handle two things briefly. All districts are included here and all the municipalities that were audited. We divided our report into three. The first part is a brief video clip on what we found in the countryside. The second part is a summary of all the crosscutting issues that affect all the districts in Uganda; that is where I will concentrate. The rest are detailed specific cases in the districts. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to start with the first - just a brief video clip as a curtain raiser. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Please, proceed. 

(A video presentation was made)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, that was the first part of our presentation. All those issues were raised in the Auditor-General’s report of 2013/2014. The situation is actually worse; we could not bring out everything using that video clip because it would take us the whole day. However, next time when Parliament has time, we shall do that. 

In your district, for example, the x-ray machine, which was donated long time ago to Kamuli Hospital, has been lying there idle for years. It has been there with nowhere to use it. It is not being used yet people cannot access its services. These are serious issues, Madam Speaker. We have done our part as Parliament and you have done your part to offer us this leadership.

Let me go to the second part of this report. As I said, I cannot go through the entire report; it is very huge. We started our programme following – I do not want to go into the introduction. The methodology was quite simple. I want to thank my members, first of all, because we were able to form quorum in all those meetings and we were able to divide ourselves into two groups wherever we went. That is why we were successful.

Madam Speaker, we met at regional offices. The Auditor-General has nine audit regions at Mbarara, Fort Portal, Arua, Gulu, Masaka, Kampala, Jinja, Soroti and Mbale. So, we convened all the districts in their audit regions and we met them there.

Madam Speaker, we are very grateful that your office facilitated us with announcements for all these programmes. The public out there were excited. I thank the Government officials - the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), Regional Internal Security Officers (RISOs), District Internal Security Officers (DISOs), Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) and others. They were able to give us a lot of bits of information and tips in all the districts except for Mbarara and Masaka. We shall be raising issues on that as the CIID brought it to our attention.

However, everywhere else throughout the country, the RISOs, GISOs, RDCs, the police chiefs and the Inspector General of Police (IGP) himself supported us. When the IGP learnt that we were moving in terrible situations, he directed the highway patrol to support us throughout the country. He did that for all our tours throughout the country. We thank him for that. (Applause)

When we also appealed to him about the very many cases we were getting, he directed that the special squad from the CIID headquarters, led by Inspector Ocaya, join our parliamentary team to work with us. He assigned six special investigators who completed this work with us. Otherwise, with our parliamentary support alone, it would not have been okay. (Applause)
 
When I was signing a few things in my office, I watched the debate here where there was an argument as to whether adoption of a report should await the Government response. No, the Auditor-General’s report is not responded to by Government that way; it is responded to through a treasury memorandum. We hope that this time, now that we have finished all these districts, Government will respond appropriately. 

However, having assigned a Government department to work with committees in Parliament, I think Government is doing its part. We should only support them and follow up to make sure all these cases are handled properly, as will be stated in our recommendations.

Madam Speaker, our findings, observations and recommendations are as follows: As I said, we divided this report into two; the cross-cutting issues covering all the districts are found between pages 2 and 40 of our report. The specific issues are also divided into two - district local governments and municipal councils. We are also supposed to attach some appendices here, especially the CIID report.

Madam Speaker, among the cross-cutting issues was the issue of physical infrastructure. Throughout the districts, there has been delayed completion of civil works. Everywhere we went, we would find roads that were not completed on time. In some cases, contracts were extended over another financial year but up to now, they have not been completed. This is throughout the country. 

When we asked why this was so, some reported that the contractors had disappeared and were nowhere to be seen. However, we have also tasked the CIID to go to the Registrar of Companies to find out who the directors of those companies are. How can a physical company that is registered just disappear like that? 

We were shocked to find out that in Gulu, the contractor who did not complete the theatre is called Omutala Women Group. We traced their file and we found out that it is based in Pallisa. However, those issues will come later. The works have never been completed. This is the problem throughout the country. I will refer you to the detailed report for all these.

The Road Fund, Madam Speaker, has grossly been abused to the extent that the Ministry of Finance sends money but in some districts there are no road committees functioning. Therefore, the engineers just sit, design work and use it. 

When we asked them about the cost of road works, some of them would say, “it is between Shs 40 million to Shs 50 million per kilometre”- a murram road. However, when we asked the Ministry of Works, they gave us a figure that ranges between Shs 27 million to Shs 32 million per kilometre. In the municipalities, they can actually use some of that money to do some good work. For that, you will find the details on page 4. 

Madam Speaker, we observed that there is a lot of variation in cost for similar works. In Masaka Municipality, for example, the road engineer was able to construct a road of half a kilometre of tarmac at a cost of Shs 202 million; that is 500 metres of what is called low-cost tarmac. However, in Gulu, with the same firm, Shs 723 million was spent on 900 metres of road. So you can see that the variation is really big. 

We praised the engineer in Masaka for having done a good job because they spent Shs 202 million, moreover on a slope, and they were able to construct a tarmac road. However, in Gulu, on flat land, 900 metres cost Shs 723 million. That is the variation in cost.

Our recommendations in this regard are as follows:
(i) 	Any district found not to have functional district road committees should not access the road fund. This is because it will just be abused. 

(ii) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes timely releases of road funds as per the approved budget allocations to all the entities;

(iii) 	Municipalities should prioritise low-cost road sealing under the road fund; and 
(iv) 	The Ministry of Works and Transport should standardize the unit cost of similar roadworks on force account.

Madam Speaker, the pictures that you saw were mostly from on what is called the Uganda Support for Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) project. This is an accountability committee and we would not like to go into detail talking about policies; we just want accountability. Maybe the policy of locating it in the Ministry of Works would be another issue because one would wonder, if something is for the municipal governments, it should be under Ministry of Local Government or Ministry of Works, if it is a matter of roads. However, somehow this project is located in the Ministry of Lands. Anyhow, that was not our issue. 

Our concern was basically the accountability for what they had been given. The World Bank gave $150 million to construct roads in the 14 selected municipalities. It was found in the Ministry of Lands and Housing. This ministry has established what they call a project support team to empower local governments and each local government is given Shs 911 million for capacity building.
 
It was so interesting that the type of capacity building we found included trips for accounting officers - the town clerks - to Dubai and to Dar-es-salaam to benchmark on roadworks. We questioned why they did not send the engineers and physical planners because the different components of these roads require that you should have proper roadworks with greening, environmental and physical planning aspects including drainage works.

The 14 municipalities are at these levels: In Arua, work is “completed” and “commissioned”. However, you saw Idi Amin Road; the drainage is not worked on, the greening is not there and yet monies were sent there. We were even shocked that while in Arua, the minister was commissioning the work. I think that they knew about our visit there and they wanted to commission and say the work had been finished. However, many questions are pending in Arua, though the road was commissioned. The environmental aspect is also not catered for. The drainage system is not covered.
 
As for Fort Portal, Madam Speaker, we just got sad news. It is a big problem because up to date, the only answer which they gave us, and I can state here, is that it has reached a “liquidated damage stage of 100 days”. 

The problem of these USMID roads is that the Ministry of Lands took over the responsibility of procuring contractors. They decided to design a way just to cluster this region; Gulu, Lira and Arua were clustered and given to one Chinese contractor. They have completed the work, the greens can be seen, but the drainage work is still a problem, as you have seen for yourselves. That is what they called, “first phase, batch 1”.
 
Soroti, Mbale, Tororo, Fort Portal and Hoima were all given to one contractor. The idea of giving them to one contractor was proximity, so as to transfer equipment. I do not know what proximity there is between Mt Elgon and Rwenzori so that one can move across the country to work on these roads quickly.

The issue is that all these roads have not been completed. They are time bound and yet they are still in shatters. Soroti is even worse. They changed the designs from the asphalt concrete to mere surface dressing - it is terrible – and yet the amount of money remains the same. Moroto is also bad because they shifted from constructing roads to constructing bus terminals yet the rest were given roads. When you go to Mbale, it is at the worst stage. 

One cannot even describe at what work stage the USMID roads have reached. In Tororo, there is no component of greening and the environment. They were also supposed to put street lighting but there is nothing of that kind. 

The only fair contractor, who tried to do good work, is the contractor who handled roads in Jinja, Entebbe and Masaka. Among these, Masaka emerged the best due to the engineering company. When you go to Masaka USMID roads, you realise they are great. We were impressed because all the lighting, greening and drainage were all worked on; they did a wonderful job – (Interjections) – The details about the Masaka engineer are in this report; just read it. Madam Speaker, Mbarara and Kabale work is not –

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a good engineer. Please mention his or her name for the Hansard to capture. 

MR OKUMU: I think the Member has some constituency interests.

THE SPEAKER: Oh! Okay, continue.

MR OKUMU: Thank you. As I was saying, in Mbarara and Kabale, work is not complete. Delays in procurement have been a big problem. There were delays because the first and second procurements flopped. Kabale wrote a letter to the Ministry of Lands complaining about why they had not given them the freedom to procure the work because they were entitled to do so. Finally, they were granted that permission. Therefore, for Kabale, work is on course because their contract will end and they said the roads will be completed by then. 

However, there are challenges in Mbarara; the drainage aspect, greening and lighting are all still questionable. As the contract stands, it was difficult for the committee to make a judgement because the roads are not yet complete. According to the contract agreement, the roads will be completed in March and Kabale in April. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General has raised a special audit report concerning this matter and tabled it here. 

Concerning this debate, I advise Members to concentrate on the matter of procurement because this has been our biggest challenge and worry. How the officials in the Ministry of Lands - Some of them have ended up with CIID but that is the problem. 

Our recommendations on this are as follows: 

(i) 	In future, the capacity building funds should be left to the municipalities to handle. These capacity building funds of Shs 911 million for each of the municipalities was being centrally controlled by the Project Support Team (PST) at the Ministry of Lands to determine how these monies would be spent but actually, there was no capacity built. 

	We asked them about the second phase - because there will be a second phase of this project beginning in March – and whether the municipalities will now have the capacity to succeed. They said there will be another budget for capacity building for the same municipalities.

(ii) 	We further recommend that the Project Support Team should withdraw from the management of procurement and should not be a permanent team in the ministry. The initial arrangement was that these people would be temporary, to empower the municipalities, and then they would be disbanded. However, now they have become an entity within Ministry of Lands and they are paying themselves highly and managing the funds for infrastructural development in the municipalities. 

(iii) 	The committee further recommends that the PST should be held responsible for the mess in the implementation of the project. They should be further investigated by the relevant organs of Government with a view to prosecuting them.

(iv) 	We recommend that the Auditor-General’s recommendations on the USMID project should be upheld. 

Madam Speaker, while we were moving around, we discovered some issues concerning regional workshops, which are supposed to support local governments in repairing graders. Graders have been given to the districts but they are non-functional. 

The President had goodwill when he met the local government leaders in 2003 and directed the Ministry of Works to open up roads in every district and hand them over to the districts to manage. A budget of Shs 4 billion has been existing in the Ministry of Works and four centres were set up at Luweero, Gulu, Mbale and Mbarara to manage these funds and open up roads. Unfortunately, if you go to the north, not a single road has been opened, completed and handed over to the district from 2013 to date. In Luweero, and a few districts, one or two, they did some work and handed the roads over. Therefore, there is a big question here being asked about what the Shs 4 billion has been doing in the Ministry of Works. 

We thought that this was duplication. Since the ministry has a mechanical workshop, why don’t they support it? After the mechanical workshop has repaired these graders, they should be able to be supportive. 

Our recommendations on that matter are on page 10.  We recommend that the Shs 4 billion released annually to the District Rehabilitation Road Unit (DRRU) should be redirected to the Ministry of Works mechanical workshop with immediate effect, who in turn should take over the responsibility of the DRRU in the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

We also recommend that the mechanical workshop should test the equipment after repair by opening up roads in the districts.

We further recommend that the head of the DRRU in Gulu, together with the former permanent secretary, should be investigated for abuse of public funds, with a view of prosecuting them. This is because they have not handed over even a half a kilometre of road. 

There were issues on education, still on page 10. I implore Members to read that. However, it is important to note that the Ministry of Education and Sports set standards for local governments on the use of funds but they have not followed these standards as required. Therefore, as soon as the Auditor-General goes down there, they query the district. 

We observed that the Ministry of Education and Sports, which set the standards, does not adequately facilitate the schools to meet those standards yet the standards are very high as you can see. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should provide sufficient funds to the district local governments to improve infrastructure and equipment in all Government-aided schools so that they meet the set standards.

During our movement, we also realised that there was abuse of the Universal Primary Education (UPE) funds. This practice is irregular; head teachers have formed associations in the countryside - private associations which are not Government related - to get UPE funds in the name of co-curricular activities. 

We observed as follows:

i) 	That the practice is irregular, as UPE funds are not meant for particular activities within the respective schools;

ii) 	Government funds cannot be diverted to a private account where the Auditor-General has no access. Expenditure of all Government funds must be audited by the Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163 of the Constitution; and

iii) 	The responsibility to support co-curricular activities outside the individual schools lies with the respective districts.

The Committee recommends as follows: 

i) 	The practice must stop immediately; 
ii) 	The districts should budget for co-curricular activities; 
iii) 	The culprits involved in the diverting of UPE funds should be investigated and funds be recovered from them.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of payroll management, I would not like to go into details. There are many issues in local governments regarding payroll management. Our recommendations on that were as follows: 

i) 	Government should desist from introducing new Information Technology (IT) systems without adequately preparing the users; 
ii) 	In the case of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS), the Ministry of Public Service should conduct continuous capacity building for the users; 

iii) 	In instances where the anomaly has been rectified, the query should be dropped; 

iv) 	In instances where the anomaly has not been rectified, the accounting officer must start the rectification process immediately; and in instances where the rectification process is ongoing, it must be done to its conclusion before the end of this financial year, 2016/17.

Madam Speaker, there were issues surrounding salary deductions; I implore Members to read that. On page 14, we give our recommendation on that matter as follows: The Ministry of Public Service must devise a mechanism of having such funds refunded irrespective of the personal loans taken by the individual. 

In most districts, we got issues of overpayment and we wondered why this should happen for over six months; what is the rationale and yet when the accounting officers are tasked to make sure that these funds are refunded, they do not do it?

There were also issues of salary arrears and we have made a recommendation on page 14; Members can read it. There were also issues of staffing levels, which cut across. The districts cannot deliver services when they are halfway staffed. The Ministry of Public Service has been a barrier in this area. 

While we did all this work, we came back and met all the concerned ministries - Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health. They all gave us their different assurances on the concerns of local governments. Members can read all those details in the report. 

Details on the health sector are on page 17. It is also a nightmare. You have seen Kiboga - the area Member of Parliament has just gone out, but the situation in Kiboga is terrible; it is in a bad state. Funds are remitted and one wonders where some of those funds are being used. You really wonder! 

We visited Kiboga, Kawolo and Kitgum hospitals; they are in a very bad state. Throughout your constituencies, this is the situation and yet there are standards set by the Ministry of Health that one must meet. Therefore, there is a dual problem. 

The Ministry of Health does not provide, although when we invited them they assured us in writing, and we put it in our attachments, that within the next two years, there will be no more problems at health centres III and IV because they will meet all the standards. They said that on their part, that is all they can do but they could not make assurances on health centres II. They have got the money and all the other requirements; therefore, normal staffing levels, accommodation, drugs, among others, will be in place and according to the set standards. Therefore, this was a huge pledge.

However, Ministry of Education and Sports failed to give us a timeframe for when they will be able to meet their own standards that they set for schools. I still implore Members to also read that. 

There were also issues on land titles on page 19. This is another nightmare. People are fighting over land; people are grabbing Government land. In Mbale, even the law enforcement officer who was supposed to enforce the law against land grabbing is the one who grabbed land and built a house on it. This is a problem throughout the country. 

We have made a number of recommendations on that matter. Most importantly, we recommend that Government should engage and interest itself in this. This is because we shall have no land and when the need for development arises and what belongs to Government has already been grabbed, there will be a problem.

There were also queries on the lack of information technology services, which we highlight on page 21. This is a cross-cutting issue and Members can read it. There were also issues on irregular tax levies and unspent balances on the same page. We have stated our recommendations there.

Districts have challenges, Madam Speaker, concerning local revenues because councils depend solely on the percentage contribution of local revenue. Masaka District Local Government appealed to us to come to the House at that time and urge the House to hurry with the establishment of Masaka City so that they can merge with the municipality. They said it was unsustainable to maintain Masaka District now because they are only able to collect Shs 150 million in a financial year. How can a council run on that? It is a nightmare.

In some districts, there is a problem, and I would like to urge some of our colleagues here to pay your taxes. Otherwise, in the next financial year, we shall name you as one of those not paying taxes. There are those with ranches; please pay. I was very happy when we met the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) because we had a complaint and we were tipped that he had something. He actually said that he had forgotten that he had an obligation and he asked for the invoice and paid all the arrears. 

I hope my good friend, the hon. Sam Kutesa, will also do the same in Ssembabule – (Interjections) – It is about local revenue or taxes that you are supposed to remit to the district. I am just giving you an example and I too need to be doing the same. All of us should pay these local taxes in order to support the local governments. 

Kiruhura District is the most difficult of all because the accounting officer cannot access some of those ranches. People no longer go to the gazetted cattle markets where assessment can be made; they just buy from the ranch and if you try to find out how many cows have been bought, they beat you up. We, therefore, have a big problem. 

The committee recommends that local governments should be supported to collect local revenue so that they are able to run their district affairs.

Madam Speaker, we gave many recommendations on local revenue. I do not want to go into details. There are recommendations on non-compliance with statutory obligations on page 26 and non-compliance with procurement laws on page 27. This is a deliberate habit in all the municipalities and local governments. There are also recommendations on fixed assets registers.  All these are issues raised by the Auditor-General. 

There were issues on the lack of vehicle movement logbooks. No one could tell which vehicle had gone where or how much fuel it might have used, though they would tell us that so and so went to this and that place.

There were also issues on receivables highlighted on page 30, which are generally a problem, and lack of financial statements in health centres and UPE schools on page 31. This is a big problem and we gave our recommendations.

We also encountered issues on unaccounted for funds. In the two months we moved, we were able to recover funds from some of those advances after we directed them. Before we completed writing this report, we got letters from some of the accounting officers that they had recovered some of the money from those civil servants. The money that has been recovered is Shs 666, 946,574. However, the money that has not been recovered is in billions. 

Some accounting officers promised that they would recover money before the end of the financial year, so we are waiting for their communication. We asked them to communicate to the Auditor-General and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make some of those things easier and acknowledgeable. Otherwise, there are billions of shillings lying there that need to be refunded.

Madam Speaker, we discovered one nasty thing - informal associations of appointed local government officials of the same cadre. Yes, the law allows everybody to join professional associations, but the Public Service Standing Orders do not allow anybody to put themselves in associations to run Government matters. In Uganda today, we have the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) association of Uganda local government, association of procurement officers of local government authorities, association of chief finance officers of local government authorities, etcetera. 

Apart from their intentions, these associations keep them out of the districts all the time. They are paid allowances for attending these association meetings. It has nothing to do with Government but they use Government fuel, vehicles and allowances in that same name. That is a big problem. When we met their bosses, the boss of finance - the PS/ST - described this as an illegality that must stop immediately. The Permanent Secretary of Public Service also said that this was outside the Public Service Standing Orders. 

Therefore, we recommend that these associations be disbanded because of their intentions. Government cannot be informally run. If there are issues dealing with staffing, deal with the Ministry of Public Service; they will handle you. If there are issues of finance, deal with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You cannot go and have parallel associations to run Government. There are detailed issues on that matter in this report.

On page 34, we noted that there is need for a close relationship between the Office of the Auditor-General, the Police (CIID), the Inspectorate of Government, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) and Parliament. We already have the Auditor-General represented in Parliament through a liaison office and the CIID is also represented. However, the DPP is not represented here and yet sometimes there is need for this coordination. 

Parliament does its part but the big question that the population asks us is: what is next? We have done our part, we have exposed and referred, but what is next is now the work of the Executive. As Parliament, we can only follow up by asking questions and asking what happened to cases. However, at the end of the day, we need to collectively work together. Therefore, if we had some of these offices represented here, it would be easier. 

We had some nasty experience in Mbarara and Masaka, which we really regret. It was an isolated issue because all the other Government officials cooperated - from the Inspector General of Police downwards - and we had no problem.

This House should also look at the mandate of the District Public Accounts Committees (DPACs). This has been an issue. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should come out clearly on this. This committee cannot handle the entire mandate given to it. We have 116 districts as we speak, 44 municipalities, 176 town councils, 1086 subcounties and over 1000 Government-aided secondary schools, and also all the tertiary institutions in Uganda. All these are for the Local Government Accounts Committee to handle. We cannot do all that work. There must be separation. 

We can handle districts, municipalities and tertiary institutions and the DPACs - There is need to rectify some laws concerning the DPACs. They are mixed up at the district. They also look at internal and external audits but they are fused up there. Their capacities are limited and they are not facilitated. If you turn against the CAO, he will not facilitate you. Therefore, I think we should streamline their status.

It is good that the Minister of Local Government is here. Parliament should either own them in terms of their roles or not. You can imagine the law requires that they submit their reports to the Minister of Local Government who in turn brings their reports here and when these reports are tabled, then they are referred to our committee. However, since decentralization took off, no report has been tabled in this House. 

Since the Constitution demands that Parliament looks at the reports of the Auditor-General, we have no option but to go out. However, we cannot pretend that we can do all this work; it is impossible. We cannot look at all these accounts. 

There is need for some structural change in our laws, especially the Local Governments (Amendment) Act. We also need to separate roles by giving the local governments what they can swallow and Parliament as well, so that these issues of accountability can be handled.

There are a number of issues raised, district by district; I do not want to go into that. If any Member is interested in any district, they can check. We started with Adjumani, Arua, Koboko - We have all the reports for the audited districts.

Madam Speaker, it is impossible for me to read and respond to all our recommendations. This is a report of about 111 districts and 22 municipalities. It is not just a single report but many reports patched together. There is no way we would finish if we went report by report. 

However, I wish to raise some issues on the recommendations given on this attachment by our CIIDs in doing their work. Maybe that can also help us. In appendix I, which I laid on the Table, they state that a total of 68 cases have been opened for investigations on different officials from Kitgum, Gulu, Apac, Mbale, Mbarara, Kiruhura, Moroto, Bukedea, Nakaseke and Lwengo districts. Some of them are small cases but it is all about abuse of the Public Service Standing Orders. 

In the case of Bukedea, for example, the CAO decided to pay a field officer an out-of-pocket allowance for the first half of the year for 108 days. In the second half of the financial year, he paid this person for 112 days. That is an anomaly. It cannot happen that one person would be earning an out-of-pocket allowance within a financial year for over 200 days; that is not possible. Even if it were you, Madam Speaker, they would query you. They would ask where your office is because you will not be working. So, some of these instances of abuse must stop. 

There are many other case files that have been registered but they are yet to retrieve serious information. The number is going to rise from 63. Their challenge is the inadequate time to concentrate on inquiries of the cases referred to them; otherwise, by now there would be some cases in court. 

In Mbarara we were frustrated because when the CIID officers found all the evidence, they wanted to go and process it and they worked with the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) of Mbarara, but the District Police Commander (DPC) interfered. The DPC went to the police station in the night and removed the suspects. He took them away and brought them back in the morning. When the CIID officers discovered this, they raised a complaint saying that it was a parliamentary issue. 

I raised it with the police commandant here; I asked him, “When your officers go out, to whom do they report to?” I told him, “They report to you because you are the boss and this is parliamentary work.” The DPC stupidly signed for their release from the police cell at night and when he brought them back. After we left, he transferred the officer in charge of CID; he is no longer in Mbarara. The DPP representative there just switched off his phone. Our CIID officers wanted to move on with the taxi park issue but they were frustrated. 
	
In Masaka, the DPC just chased away the CIID officers and did not allow them to register cases until the Regional Police Commander (RPC) intervened and told him, “This is police; it is not your personal home”. 

These are some of the challenges that our CIID officers meet when they go to the field. I have tried to settle that with the police commandant here and I think he is streamlining it. 

Inadequate equipment and funds in carrying out investigations: Some of them are attached here but some of these issues are between Parliament and their headquarters and they find a lot of challenges in doing due diligence. 

Delays in pursuing case files by the prosecutors: The prosecutors take a long time. Sometimes people blame the CIID officers saying they have been handed many cases but there are no results and yet some of these results may be in place. 

They also raised issues to do with delays caused by handwriting experts and interference by corrupt people through their corrupt networks. They gave an example of the Mbarara taxi park tender, where the DPC removed the suspects from custody and took them in his vehicle from the station and later on brought them back and kept them in his office in the morning. 

They also gave another example from Mbarara – this place seems to be in total confusion - where the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) got involved. They decided to coordinate against some positive things for the CID. I also gave you the example of Masaka.

Their recommendations were:

i) 	That time be allocated to the investigators to concentrate on the cases mentioned here; 
ii) 	The team be supported with funds to do their work; 
iii) 	The investigating team be accommodated in a secure office for safety of the case files;
iv) 	The DPP needs to be consulted for purposes of attaching one prosecutor to the investigating team; 
v) 	The committee needs to interest itself in the challenges of interference, where some investigators and responsible police officers who work with the committee face intimidation and other indirect administrative mistreatment. Some of the police officers we work with face intimidation from some individuals and they are appealing for support. 

Madam Speaker, this is a voluminous report; I cannot go on reading district by district because it will take us the whole day. However, the whole matter revolves around issues of procurement, contracts that never get completed, salary overpayment, private associations used to run Government entities. 

Madam Speaker, I know Members may not be satisfied because they have not been able to get the detailed report. However, it was very difficult to also have a summary of this report and present it to Parliament. Even signing every page has not been possible, but we have signed in between the end of pages. We signed and confirmed that this page ends here and on the next page we also signed that the page starts, and all members’ signatures are attached. I beg to move that this report be adopted. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the Committee on Local Government Accounts and your committee members for fulfilling your constitutional obligation of examining all the districts and municipalities. 

The issue of how far the committee of this House should go into these accounts has been on since the Ninth Parliament. I hope that during your reporting, you can give us a solution because clearly, over 1,000 local governments I think is too much for a committee to fulfil in the required time. Therefore, hon. Obote and your committee, I hope that you will address this.

5.57
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, section 88 of the Local Governments Act, subsection (8), says, “The local government public accounts committee shall submit its report to the council and to the minister responsible for local governments who shall lay the report before Parliament.”

From my understanding of this, it seems that we should ensure that the local government public accounts committees are able to do their work and report to the minister and then the minister can submit a consolidated report. However, for that to happen, I think there is one or two things we need to do. 

When you look at the facilitation to the local government public accounts committees, they are supposed to get their salaries and allowances from the council as part of the local revenue. The chairperson has already articulated the problem of local revenue collection. During the amendment of the Act in 2001, when we found that there was a problem, the salaries and allowances of the district service commissions were transferred to the Consolidated Fund. 

For me this is where we could tighten a bit, so that we strengthen accountability at local government level rather than bringing it to Parliament. Let us change the law so that these public accounts committees at the local government level are paid from the Consolidated Fund. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the arrears on the payroll, I am a bit surprised. I wish the Minister of Public Service was here because we asked about the arrears for salaries and pensions and the minister assured us that because of the decentralised payroll and pension management system, today there are no more arrears. Now, when a report comes like this, Government Chief Whip, I think it is something that the Minister of Public Service should take up. Is there a situation of arrears of salaries and pensions in the local governments? Can it be handled? How much are the arrears so that they are captured in the next budget? 

Finally, I would like to thank the chairperson of PAC for raising issues on procurement, management of projects, capacity building and what they call project support teams in the ministries. The problem is not just in lands. This particular USMID project is under lands because it comes from the urban development docket, which is under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development headquarters. Maybe this is a structural issue, which the Prime Minister should take up. Should the minister in charge of urban development be under lands or should that be under the Ministry of Local Government? I think it was a good question.

The more fundamental issue, however, is: If we agreed to decentralise, honourable ministers, why are you keeping the resources for procurement, project management and capacity building in your ministries? We have gone around in some of these districts and people tell us these things. For some of these projects like USMID, which are controlled centrally, the local governments tend to keep off. This is because they do not know how you contracted the contractor, they cannot tell the terms under which you are paying the fellow and they are not in charge of certifying the works. I would like to get clarification - (Member timed out.)

6.10
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for work well done.

Madam Speaker, I have one problem and that is the conflict in ministries over projects. I have been part of local governments. Even when we were receiving the road equipment, there was a conflict. We did not know whether the equipment would be given to us by the Ministry of Works and Transport or Ministry of Local Government. We were at Namamve but our minister was not even aware about what was taking place. The same still applies and we have new road equipment soon coming. They should solve these conflicts since they are all Government entities.

Madam Speaker, the problem the chairperson and members of the committee found in local governments was brought about by the ministries. Too much money was left for local governments - Shs 911 million - for capacity building. What do you expect the accounting officer to do other than organise trips to Europe, Dubai so that the money can be spent?   

Madam Speaker, when you look at procurement, there is a lot of bureaucracy in the procurement procurements in the local governments. Sometimes they keep money because the protocols or procedures are hard for local governments. Let the Ministry of Local Government play a part. 

One time we came to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in 2013 and 2014. The Minister of State for Defence now, hon. Adolf Mwesige, was the Minister for Local Government then. We demanded that municipal engineers, district engineers and chief finance officers be subjected to transfers. It was supposed to be the role of the ministry to move that amendment to the Act. However, up to today, we are still complaining of shoddy work. What do they expect from someone who is perennially in a local government for 28 years and yet we are only changing the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and the town clerks? 

Madam Speaker, billions of funds are being wasted in local governments because of shoddy work. When I was still the president of mayors, I went to Mbale and I advised them just like the committee has done. However, it is only going to stop here. They have come up with good recommendations like the Ninth Parliament did but nothing has taken place. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, when you talk of the Auditor-General’s reports, it is not clear - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us get his local governments experience.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: When you get the Auditor-General’s reports, they only stop at the executive level; they are not taken to councils to be discussed. The Executive are always in connivance with either the town clerks or the CAOs; how do you expect these reports to yield good results to support fair service delivery in this country? I thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for having covered all our areas. You are aware that we all come from these local governments and many times we take blame for failures down there. Even when they convene meetings, you are never invited or they invite you at the last minute. Some districts even lack roads committees, for instance Sembabule, and the minister is here.

Madam Speaker, I listened in when the chairperson said they have touched each and every local government. However, the report is not yet uploaded. As we debate, we do not have the concrete areas from our respective districts – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Has it been uploaded? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: In any case, it would be good that Members carefully read about the districts where they come from. When the chairperson then invites us to come up with concrete recommendations, we shall be in a better position to contribute meaningfully to this very critical and important report.

Madam Speaker, this issue is critical and it concerns all of us. There is no way you can run as a successful Member of Parliament without having your base catered for. Therefore, with your permission, Madam Speaker, if it is possible I request that we are given time to go through this so that once Members rise, they rise on their respective districts. In that way, we shall give justice to this very important and critical report.

THE SPEAKER: You want hon. Nankabirwa to go and read the Kiboga issue, hon. Ariko to read the Soroti Municipality issue and come back with energy and also be able to monitor from the other side, and I should look at the Kamuli report entirely? Is it okay, Members, for you to go and internalise it?

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, as I said, we should also comply with constitutional obligations. The committee tried its level best. The next Auditor-General’s report should be coming on 31 December and according to our Constitution, we should do the due diligence within six months. If we postpone the debate on this one, it will be done next year and we will have outlived the constitutional expectations. 

Time has been of essence. The committee spent time – (Interjection) - You cannot say, “Why didn’t you bring it early?”  Honourable members, when did you come to Parliament and when did the committee settle? You should actually thank us for a job well done because these Members were sleeping in buses. We would arrive and meet 10 districts and people got tired. We did this because we wanted to meet the constitutional deadlines.

Madam Speaker, as we shared with you, we thought that as we go for Christmas and wait for the next Auditor-General’s report, we should not be left hanging with this report and then Parliament is blamed for not doing its work, the way the media people say.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you have fulfilled your part; you have reported before the constitutional deadline. I think you have done your part.

MR OKUMU: The constitutional requirement is that Parliament should debate and pass this within six months. That is what it is.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned that the honourable member would like us to discuss the report immediately yet this report was sent just today and it is 360 pages. I think we should not debate because we have to debate. We debate on what we understand. I would suggest that we get time to read the report before we debate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, will the First Sitting of the Third Meeting of Parliament be too far, around mid-January? Would that be too far?

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with that. However, we would have gone against the constitutional requirement because these reports were laid here in January last year and Parliament has tried its best. 

This new committee tried to complete its assignment within the period required and that is why we endeavoured to visit all the districts and municipalities and wait for the next audit report. The next audit report is supposed to come out on the 31st of December of the next financial year.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, when he guided on the constitutional limit within which we are supposed to respond and pronounce ourselves on the report, he has swayed my thinking. Nonetheless, this Parliament can have a special sitting on one day for local governments so that we dissect the local governments. 

We appropriate the money from here but local governments take advantage of us. Madam Speaker, appoint a special day and we wash ourselves clean and see how to move forward in this country. (Applause)

MR HERBERT ARIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for the additional information. The issue of a special sitting is a welcome idea. However, this morning, this House received, considered and passed the COSASE report. It was equally a big volume. 

Like some colleagues have been trying to be attentive to follow issues and had actually risen up to debate this motion, I want to be persuaded that the rest of the Members can find time to look into the issues so that we consider the report and pass it. Madam Speaker, my view is that some of the Members are ready to start on the debate today. That is my view.

6.13
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with hon. Ssekikubo that we need a dedicated session, probably a day, to consider and discuss the issues that relate to local governments. It is a big area and there is quite a lot more that could have been uncovered, but probably it was not within the mandate of the accountability committee because their focus may be mainly on policy issues. 

However, even if we are going to have a dedicated day to discuss this, that should not preclude or stop any immediate contribution now. This could add to the session that would be dedicated for that discussion. 

Looking at what was contributed, I have some issues to raise. From the report that was tabled this morning by COSASE and what we have now, corruption is the main theme and that is very problematic; it is a menace to this country. Yesterday, I did not have the opportunity to mention it, but one of the issues that my good friend, Matia Nsubuga, was working on was a national dialogue where we can have leaders of this country meet together and learn from leaders of other countries that have been able to fight corruption, and then we set up an agenda for action on how we can overcome corruption.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank COSASE for their report. One thing, which actually disturbs me, is that for every stone you turn, there are worms. Sometimes we have made mistakes to think that it is only in Government, but here we are talking about local governments. 

There are problems with the way the local governments are being supervised. These institutions get money on a quarterly basis and the money is given based on the implementation of other releases; it is baffling. Why is the supervision going wrong? These are things we should start reflecting on. Thank you.

MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very detailed report. 

Madam Speaker, I think each one of us knows that the committee presented this report but we received the information just two hours ago. I must inform the committee that local government touches each one of us here. It matters very much. Therefore, it is not a matter of just telling us that since the report of the other committee was passed, this one must be passed too.  

I support hon. Ssekikubo’s suggestion that we get a special day and get the details - the messes in the local governments. We cannot be here and just play with the local governments.

Madam Speaker, I request that the report be discussed next time after we have internalised the paper very well. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the area we need to address are the recommendations because the committee has done the work on our behalf to establish the facts.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We would like to thank the chairperson for the elaborate presentation. 

As Members have just said, he is also aware that he only presented a summary of the report. He has not gone into details because it was bulky. We would like to internalise it and see what the details and the issues are. What are the CAOs doing? What are the procurement officers doing? What is it that the engineers are doing? What are the committees on the road doing? We would like to know the magnitude of the matter and appreciate it, Madam Speaker. In addition to the recommendations they have made, some of us also have issues that we would like to add so that Government may take them up. 

He has already presented the report within the stipulated dates, it is now up to us as Parliament to discuss it and dispose of it. I beg the chairperson to give us time so that we can go and read the report and then come and discuss it, so that we do not have a narrow debate. It should be a detailed debate that will help the local governments. We should not be lamenting but helping the local governments to progress. 

You heard of some municipalities wanting to merge with districts because they are not generating local revenue. What is happening? In some of these districts, we know why the local governments are not generating revenue. Some people are printing their own receipts vis-à-vis the one of the municipalities and the districts. We have to handle such things. They have not discovered many of the details. Thank you.

6.20
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One thing we must know is that COSASE’s report was presented in the morning and it was a detailed presentation and not just a summary like this one. With the Committee on Local Government Accounts, we have 111 districts and 22 municipalities and we are all interested in contributing to the debate.  Since it is already past six o’clock and we cannot sit here up to 10.00p.m. - I even heard that today is the last day of our sittings - let us have a special day to debate this report properly, when we are not exhausted. Right now, the energy is gone. 

It is important that we all contribute to this debate. Each one of us may want to speak not only on the recommendations that are here but also on other issues that affect us at the district level because they are not different.

6.21
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no doubt that this report is comprehensive as it covers all districts, it cost a lot of time and it is well presented. 

As a new Minister for Local Government, I would like to take advantage of this report, read and internalise it. In a month’s time, we will all be able to come here and have a clear and comprehensive debate, which will help some of us to reform in the ministry if it is necessary.

Madam Speaker, what hon. Ssekikubo asked for is what I am also asking for. Give us one month and we should be ready to debate this report. I thank you. 

6.23
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kuteesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you probably know, I rarely agree with hon. Ssekikubo – (Laughter) - and that is because most of the times he is wrong. However, this time, he is right. (Laughter)

The enormity of the problem presented is clear. When the chairman was reading his report, he said that there were certain things that he could not go into because they were too detailed. The report touches on education, health, roads and other infrastructure. While he suggested that we should have some people prosecuted, he is also suggesting that there should be some structural policy changes. I think this needs deeper analysis.

I agree with the chairperson about not breaking the law and that is why I think hon. Ssekikubo is right. Let us find a day before the end of the year so that we keep within the law but at the same time give deeper consideration to this issue. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee has fulfilled its obligations by reporting within the constitutional deadline. This is a very comprehensive report and we need to get well grounded. I will, therefore, defer the debate and I will appoint a date so that we can have only the issues of local governments discussed as we debate the report. 

I request Members to go and read the entire report and not only the parts to do with their districts, so that we can have a proper foundation for the new minister and the local governments. The matter is deferred.    

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your ruling that we go home and read the report. However, I would like to note that we cannot access information on our iPads once we are out of the precincts of Parliament. Can that be improved so that we can be ready to read these reports? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Clerk please address that? Thank you, hon. Okumu and your team.

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I know why hon. Ssekikubo raised this matter. In the Seventh Parliament, there was a suggestion that the reports that had been overtaken by time should be disposed of like that. The then Attorney-General brought an opinion to the House. If hon. Sam Kuteesa was attending Parliament, he would remember.(Laughter). 

The opinion clearly stated that there is no Auditor-General’s report that we should “sweep under the carpet”. We must bring them to the Floor and we either debate or adopt them as the Auditor-General has presented them. If we can make recommendations on the Floor, then well and good but the report must be adopted by Parliament.

Madam Speaker, when I heard my elder brother suggesting that we could come here before the end of the year, I got worried that he did not remember that there is already an opinion in respect to the Auditor-General’s reports. The Member, a senior lawyer, never objected that time but he is objecting now. This is why I have been saying that hon. Ssekikubo is always right and hon. Kuteesa is always wrong. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just a final comment. The reason as to why I am so happy that we have agreed is because we have over 100 accounts. I would propose to colleagues that each one of us should go and look at our district reports so that when we are going to debate, it should be regional. The Members from Kisoro, for example, could debate their own issues because in Kisoro, they may not be stealing from the road fund but stealing from the education fund and in Arua, they may be stealing drugs. It is important that all of us go and read the report because –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we have already made a ruling to go and read the report and come back. The matter is deferred. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016”

6.29
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: If you could please use only five minutes. 

MS MUTONYI: Before I go through the motion, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the same motion and a memorandum thereon.

This motion is seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2016” moved under Article 94, (4) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda allows Parliament to introduce a Bill or motion that does not impose or alter taxation other than by reduction or causing the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda enjoins a Member of Parliament to move a Private Members Bill; 

COGNISANT of the fact that the local government system of Uganda established under Article 176 of the 1995 Constitution is based on democratically elected councils on the basis of universal adult suffrage and no candidate shall be nominated for an office of a local council unless he or she ordinarily resides in the area and is of age…” – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper, item No.3 says, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2016”. Now, my good sister, Rose Mutonyi, is raising under item No.12 and she wants to seek leave to also bring the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2016. The procedural issue I am raising is: has she studied what the minister has brought to know that it does not-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is why you should have allowed her to move her motion. What she is doing is different; it is not the minister’s issue. Please, listen.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. In any case, what the minister brought here was regarding elections of LCI. This is a different issue.

“…NOTING THAT Article 179 of the Constitution of Uganda stipulates that the measure for the creation or alteration of the boundaries of an administrative unit shall be the need to bring services closer to the people, taking into account the means of communication, geographical features and density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people;

RECALLING THAT Parliament in 2015 carved out in accordance with the Constitution, new electoral areas out of some of the existing administrative electoral areas, but deferred their commencement date;

CONCERNED THAT chairpersons and councillors of original local governments are subjected to fresh elections under section 181 of the Local Governments Act in cases where they were representing an electoral area within a newly created local government;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT this provision of fresh elections has caused chaos in local governments and also imposes an extra charge on the Consolidated Fund when unnecessary elections are held in the same electorate;

AWARE THAT the term of office for interim councils under section 186 of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, is only six months, which has created vacancies where elections are not held within the stipulated time and therefore the need to allow them operate until elections are held;

COGNISANT THAT there is need for an amendment of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, for provisions that (a) a chairperson should have an option of representing a newly elected local government within his or her area of residence; (b) Councillors of the original local government representing areas in the newly elected local government should continue representing their areas in the newly created local government without being subjected to an election;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled ‘The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill 2016’, a draft of which is hereto attached, and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Justify.

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I am requesting to be granted leave to bring an amendment Bill because of the creation of new districts in Uganda. Manafwa has been divided into two and there is a new district called Namisindwa, which has already started generating problems. 

The chairman of the original district is now wondering what he can do. He is uncomfortable in the original district because people say that they requested for a new district so why should he stay in the original one. However, he fears that if he goes to the new district where he resides, he is going to be subjected to another election yet he has just gone through an election this year like most of us. I am sure if anyone of us went back for fresh elections now, we would not be sure of a win even though we have spent a very short time here –(Interjections)- They did not steal votes.

Madam Speaker, it is even worse for the councillors who are representing the subcounties in the newly created districts. When they go back, they will be subjected to a new election. I do not know why there was an oversight on this issue because when a new unit is created, Members of Parliament are allowed to select or choose whether to go to the new one or to remain in the old one without being subjected to an election. However, it is not the same for the local councils.

The chairperson in the original district or the LC III should be given options to remain in the old district or to leave. They are not given that option to move to the new district or new administrative unit even if they reside in it. Nothing is mentioned about their movement. Therefore, these chairpersons are rendered helpless unless they choose to remain. If they go to the new unit, they will be subjected to an election. If they remain in the original unit, they will not be comfortable and the people will not be comfortable either. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is the reason why I am seeking leave to go and draft a Bill so that we can cause an amendment to the Act so that if the chairman chooses to remain in the old district, he can remain there and if he chooses to go to the new district, he should not be subjected to a fresh election. Likewise, the councillors representing the subcounties in the new districts should not be subjected to fresh elections. That is what my Bill will be about.

I have done this because I tried to seek help from the Ministry of Local Government but I was not assisted. Therefore, I was forced to move this motion to seek leave to bring the Bill because it affects my district greatly.  Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she is asking to be given an opportunity to bring a Bill so that we can debate it from a point of information and rectify a possible anomaly. That is what she wants. Do we object? Can we hear from hon. Atiku?

6.41
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second this motion. I know that this is being done in good faith, to help this country have a smooth transition. 

We are all aware that in the Ninth Parliament, we did pass a motion for the creation of new districts, with some coming into being in the coming financial year and others in the next financial year. Therefore, it is important that we cure any lacuna that exists in the transition process. 

Madam Speaker, just as the mover of the motion said, we have seen many situations where new districts have been created and the chairpersons are faced with a situation of either moving to the new district or remaining in the original district. You know, if one has projected his or her political career, switching left or right or being blocked from where you could move to a new district where you could continue with your political career is being hampered by the law. Therefore, I think it is important that we support the honourable colleague in this regard.

Madam Speaker, when a district is divided, some of the subcounty councillors are cut off and many times they are given a period of six months to operate as an interim local government. When the interim local government period expires, they are all subjected to fresh elections. Now, this also creates a problem because the Electoral Commission has to plan for more finances to carry out elections and yet these are elected people who could be given the mandate to continue, unless there are new electoral positions brought about by the creation of the new district.

Therefore, this amendment would benefit the office bearers and also the Government. The Government would save the money that it would have spent on repeating elections, which have already been conducted. I would, therefore, like to implore honourable colleagues to allow us work on this Private Members’ Bill so that we can cure this lacuna and hence help our colleagues in the lower local government and also the Government in terms of saving. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the Member is asking for is to be given an opportunity to come here with a Bill so that we can debate it in detail and see whether we agree. I put the question that leave be granted – Does the minister have an objection? 

6.44
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member did say here that she was not assisted by the Ministry of Local Government when she went there. I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that she did not contact me on this matter. I would have been of great assistance and maybe we would have discussed this matter in detail and we would have brought it together with other amendments, which I am going to bring to this House.

However, what I want to say is that I do not intend to stand in her way, although the Manafwa case is purely isolated; it is alone. This has not been the case in Kibale District, for example. The chairman of Kibale actually remained in Kibale District where he does not reside and he did not go to Kagadi District where he comes from. There are other districts but all I am saying is that this is a new case, purely isolated. I hope that given time, it will find its ground.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is information from Kyankwanzi.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I wish to give you is that Manafwa is not an isolated case because we have the same situation in Kyankwanzi. New subcounties were created and they took effect in July this year. In one of the subcounties, the chairperson who had just been sworn-in in May is ordinarily a resident of the newly created sub-county. 

This is just like the issue in Manafwa. The chairman had just been sworn-in two months before and he was ordinarily resident and registered by the Electoral Commission in the newly created subcounty. However, they are telling him that according to the law, he belongs to the electoral area where he was elected from. He says it is not true because he is ordinarily resident and a voter in the newly created subcounty.

I think that is the issue that hon. Mutonyi is trying to bring forward. Actually, it is not only those ones; even the councillors representing interest groups like the youth, persons with disabilities, the elderly could have been elected to represent entire subcounties.

My colleague mentioned town councils but I have not mentioned town councils because I am aware about the law concerning town councils. Once you are a new town council, the interim chairperson is the district chairperson; the LC V is the interim chairperson –(Interjection)- Yes, the executive takes over the town council. So the town councils are catered for and are not at the same scale; the problem is the subcounties and the districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that issues of representation are public rights; let us allow her to bring her Bill and we debate it in its entirety.

MR BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I referred to Manafwa District as an isolated case. I was not talking about subcounties and town councils et cetera. I said that I did not intend to stand in her way but it is a new case and it needed a study. Thank you.

6.49
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only stand up when there is something I must say. Otherwise, I have been sitting since morning without interrupting you. (Laughter)

I have been following the presentation by hon. Mutonyi but I did not understand it. We now have over 112 districts in the country and constitutionally, those districts have been passed by this House through the Ministry of Local Government. No district has ever been brought here for approval through a Private Member’s Bill; they are created through the Ministry of Local Government. She cannot create a district by herself; it must come to the House. 

I am not against this motion, but I think that it should come through the right channels. The honourable member should go and discuss with the Ministry of Local Government the problem she has faced. If the Ministry of Local Government can handle over 160 administrative units, why not this one?

Madam Speaker, I beg that this motion be deferred to allow the honourable member go back to the Ministry of Local Government and discuss this matter with them and we shall come back to discuss this later.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would not want to be seen fighting with the honourable minister, but the minister himself is not sincere. Last week, this issue came up and when they saw it on the Order Paper, he came and we discussed it with him in the lobby. He even called his Personal Assistant (PA) to find out if I had ever been to his office and discussed that issue with his personal assistant for an hour. 

I asked him to call his PA to confirm that I was in his office early November. He indeed called his PA and I overheard him quarrelling with him that he had never informed him that I had been to his office.

Secondly, I even met - (Interjection) 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From what we have heard on the Floor of the House, discussions have gone on between the minister and the honourable member. The Leader of Government Business has also given further guidance and opinion on this. Whereas it is the right of Members of Parliament to seek leave to introduce a motion, it should not be a matter of course; it must be justifiable and well grounded. 

There is an opportunity for the minister to introduce comprehensive amendments, as he has stated on the Floor. Therefore, I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. Let the honourable member continue with the discussions that she had begun with the Ministry of Local Government so that the minister in charge of the docket introduces comprehensive amendments not those that are isolated for Soroti, Kumi and the like. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is unfortunate that certain events have occurred on this Floor. I was not happy that a Member of Parliament is asked to deal with a personal assistant of a Minister on any issue. However, I think that we should allow the Member to get leave and when she comes back, we can defeat the proposal because we will have it debated with pros and cons. Leave granted.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and thank you, honourable members, for what you have done.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) 78.5 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO $110 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA REPRODUCTIVE MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

6.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and members. I would like to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow SDR 78.5 million, which is equivalent to $110 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank to support the Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project.

Madam Speaker and members, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow the amount, which I have already referred to, from the IDA to support the reproductive maternal and child health services improvement project in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 16 November 2016 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration. The committee scrutinized the request and now begs to report. 

However, before I continue to report, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the signed report, minutes, the minister’s brief on the proposal, project appraisal document, loan approval guidelines, loan agreement, resettlement action plan, a letter of compliance with the National Development Plan, valuation and survey report and a letter from the Country Director of the World Bank confirming that this loan is not affected by the suspension of loans by the World Bank. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, before I continue, I would like to allay the fears of colleagues with regard to slow absorption of loans. We took time as a committee to scrutinize the cause of this slow absorption and we have accordingly come up with guidelines, which we think will help to cure some of the causes of the slow absorption. 

I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the guidelines containing some of the cures to the slow absorption of loans, like the lack of counterpart funding. We now require Government to come up with a letter of commitment and ring-fence money in the budget to ensure that there are funds for projects which require counterpart funding. This has been the main problem that results into slow absorption.

The other problem has been lack of readiness by Government to absorb the money when we approve it. We have also come up with strict guidelines to ensure that Government is ready to utilise the money when we approve it. Madam Speaker, I wish to lay these guidelines on the Table. (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, the chairperson has stated that the committee has come up with strong guidelines on how to resolve the issues of low absorption. I am wondering about this because these guidelines have been developed by the committee. I would think that the right way would be to have those guidelines brought to the Floor of Parliament to be adopted so that they become parliamentary guidelines, which we can now follow to ensure that Government follows them.  I would like to get your take on that. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you leave her to finish presenting the report and then we shall discuss how to implement it.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I will now go to paragraph 2 of the report, which is the methodology. We held meetings with the ministries and those that we cross-examined included the following:
i) 	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
ii) 	Ministry of Health
iii) 	National Planning Authority. 

We also referred to a number of documents

Madam Speaker, Uganda is one of the countries with the highest burden of HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis globally. Other key conditions contributing to its burden of disease are lower respiratory infections, meningitis, peri/neonatal complications and diarrhoea -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, Members can read that by themselves; you go to your findings, observations and recommendations.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to go to paragraph 4, which shows the alignment of the project to the country strategy.  It is well aligned to the country’s strategy, as indicated in paragraph No.4. In paragraph No.5, the project objective is clearly spelt out. The project is going to improve utilisation of essential health services, with a focus on reproductive, maternal, new-born, child and adolescent health services in target districts; and also scale up birth and death registration services.

The project components are given in table No.1, under paragraph No. 5.1. Paragraph No.6 gives the project cost and financing arrangement. This project is going to cost a total of US$ 140 million out of which, IDA credit will be US$ 110 million and US$ 30 million will come by way of a grant from the Global Financing Facility (GFF) Trust Fund. 

The Loan Terms and Conditions

It is a concessional loan with a maturity period of 38 years and a grace period of six years. The service charge is 0.75 per cent and commitment charge is 0.5 per cent. 

The loan conditions are given in paragraph 6.2 and the implementation arrangement in paragraph No.7. The main implementing agency is going to be the Ministry of Health, and at the district level the District Health Officer (DHO) is going to oversee the implementation of the project activities.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee was concerned about the ministry’s ability to absorb the money borrowed. The Ministry of Health, since it is providing vital services, should improve and expedite absorption of loans in order to save lives of Ugandans who would be beneficiaries from these loans. This refers to the loans which were contracted earlier.

Furthermore, the committee observed the deplorable state of health centres and hospitals. Buildings are in a dilapidated state and there is inadequacy of beds, leading to the sharing beds by patients especially in children’s wards. When you go to health centres and some hospitals, it is common to find children suffering from different diseases sharing beds. 

Government should consider rapid renovation, expansion or construction of health facilities in order to cope with the fast growing population since medical treatment is not a luxury of the lucky few.

The committee noted the intermittent shortage of drugs in health facilities. You must have heard the National Drugs Authority recently say that anti-malarial drugs and other drugs had run out. Government should come up with a plan which will ensure that there is a steady flow of drugs to Government health facilities, through proper budgeting and management of drugs, as a cure to intermittent shortage of drugs. 

The committee noted with concern the lack of Government plans to manufacture drugs locally and even to support herbal medicine development through research.

Government should put in effort in manufacturing drugs locally and protecting local manufacturers besides banning importation of drugs that are locally manufactured. In addition, Government should put in deliberate effort in growing of medicinal crops. Since they are income generating, they should be among the enterprises covered by Operation Wealth Creation. They would serve two purposes.  

The committee further noted that most hospitals and health centres are understaffed and even the few staff who should be there are busy making ends meet elsewhere. Government should also address the causes of the high attrition rate of medical workers such as lack of staff accommodation and payment of a living wage. 

The committee further observed that there is a component for training health workers in the loan request yet there are many trained medical personnel with no jobs and there is a high attrition rate of those who are trained. To benefit from Government sponsored training for medical workers, Government should consider bonding trained staff for a period of time in order to benefit from the training.

The committee noted that there is lack of accommodation for health workers, especially for those in remote hard-to-reach, hard-to-work and hard-to-stay areas. As a matter of urgency, Government should consider provision of accommodation to health workers in remote hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay and hard-to-work areas.

The committee further noted that there is lack of equipment in new hospitals like Kawempe and Kiruddu and the newly renovated regional referral hospitals. Ministry of Health should come up with a comprehensive plan for the operationalisation of the new health facilities at Kawempe and Kiruddu referral hospitals, and re-entry of Mulago super Referral Hospital and the newly renovated regional hospitals.

Government, under the policy of providing health centres III to all subcounties, should ensure equity and speedy rollover of these facilities to all subcounties in the country. The committee noted that there are quite a number of subcounties without health centres III. Now that they are doing away with health centres II as a new policy, they should endeavour to have health centres III in all the subcounties.  

The committee further noted the lack of ambulances in health facilities especially in hard-to-reach areas. To save lives of Ugandans especially in hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay and hard-to-work areas like Bududa, Government should provide ambulances to all health centres III and health centres IV. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee has noted Government’s continued commitment to improving the situation of mothers and children.  Sustained financing to the health sector, maternal and child health in particular, is still required. This is to enable the country meet the aspirations of Vision 2040 and the Social Development Goals.  

Government has developed the Reproductive, Maternal, New-born, Child and Adolescent Health Sharpened Plan. This project will focus on the priorities highlighted. The implementation of this project for which this financing is sought will reduce child and maternal mortality, save healthcare costs related to child and maternal morbidity and improve child survival.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the request by Government to borrow SDR 78.5 million, equivalent to $110 million, from the International Development Association for financing Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project be approved. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. You have the necessary signatures; you can comment, Members.

7.12
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County Nebbi): Madam Speaker, initially, I was so puzzled when I heard the word “loan”. I imagined a woman being pregnant and then going and borrowing even maternity wear. I thought this was a serious issue.

However, from the way the Member has presented it, I would think the facts speak for themselves. In law, we say res ipsa loquitur. Therefore, if I am allowed, I would like to move that the question be put and we pass this loan request without debate so that we save time and the loan is approved, if I may be seconded. Thank you.

7.13
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleague, hon. Anywarach, I was personally opposed to this kind of borrowing considering the amount of loans that this country has got. I was imagining that by the time I become President, I will only be paying off loans because of the many years we are committing this country to and the level of indebtedness.

However, I think the cause for this loan is good. The only challenge is that I would like to know the specifics because we are going to approve this but it is blank borrowing. How many health centres, for instance, are you going to renovate and equip - (Interjection) - Is it at the back? Okay, thank you. I rest my case.

7.14
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing this very important loan request. We have been borrowing for so many things but this is the first time we are borrowing for a reasonable and noble cause - maternal and new-born health.

We are all aware that we lose about 16 mothers per day in Uganda during delivery. We need this money very urgently to prevent children from getting diseases such as malaria, diarrhoea and so forth. Regarding delivery, mothers are dying because we do not have enough midwives. This money will help in increasing staff, most of whom will be midwives.

On the issue of transport, many mothers die on their way to deliver. Some are carried on boda bodas and some deliver at the roadside. We, therefore, need these ambulances at subcounty level and they must be fuelled because if you give an empty one, then it will not help the mothers.

Therefore, we do not want to stress ourselves. All of you have wives, daughters and aunties so this issue is very important; please support it. We do not have to waste a lot of time. Thank you very much.

7.15
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this motion. However, the chairperson of the committee mentioned that they have developed guidelines and agreed with Government that for every loan that comes through their committee, they provide a clear indication in writing that they have counterpart funding. 

I do not know whether hon. Syda Bbumba asked the same ministry why they are not implementing the other loans. Have they provided for the several loans before they bring other loans like the one we handled in the morning and this one? Have they provided for counterpart funding for the loans that we approved in the Eighth and the Ninth parliaments?  

That is the reason they are giving us, that they do not have counterpart funding for the loans. Now that they are asking for new loans, why don’t they first clear the backlog of counterpart funding for these other loans before they bring us loan requests every other week?  

We want to know all this; otherwise, those guidelines may just be there so that we quickly approve this one, which we have no problem doing because this is a very important one. It is the first time we are borrowing money for this sector, particularly for maternal health. However, have you discussed with them those guidelines and have they provided for that counterpart funding? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the chairperson was presenting one of her loan requests, these conditions were stated as having been agreed upon. 

Honourable members, do we really have to spend a lot of time on this matter? This is the first time in the history of this Parliament that we are borrowing money for a social service. We have been borrowing for roads, power but this is for our children. Honourable members, the question is that this House do approve this loan request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification on where the $5 million for registration of births and deaths will be placed. We know we have already revamped Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) to take care of this. Will URSB take the $5 million set aside to cater for births and deaths registration services? Where will this money be placed? We have already provided for it elsewhere in this very Parliament. Will it be under the Ministry of Health or will it be sent directly to where it belongs? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, we have passed this but please clarify because we need to know where the money is going.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, this money is going to support the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) but there will be a steering committee comprised of NIRA, Ministry of Health and other service providers.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to be comforted that No.36 is actually Gomba and not Gombe because Gombe is not a district.

THE SPEAKER: Gombe Hospital - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have no objections to borrowing money for anything but before we borrow, we must make sure we have analysed everything. 

I stood up on the issue of capacity building. If it is about delivering children, nurses are already being trained; are you sending money to the nursing schools?

Madam Speaker, loans are very important to us. However, it will be dangerous for us, Members of Parliament, to commit Ugandans - they are going to pay back this money tomorrow - when we are tired and some of us are even thinking of the soup outside. 

Madam Speaker, we have passed this loan request but we need to analyse the next one. Currently, interest payments as a Government expenditure are third after education. We must analyse why we should pay more interest. What is happening? Why do we continue to borrow without the capacity to absorb the loans?

This is the former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who used to negotiate loans and she is now making recommendations. I would like to request that we end here so that we go and do other things and come and discuss loan requests when we are fresh. I beg you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: This is the first time we are building capacity in the health sector. I have been hearing it only in the roads sector. 

7.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Madam Speaker and colleagues, thank you very much. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to guarantee the loan request of US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank, and US$ 16 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) to support Uganda Development Bank (UDB) -(Interruption)- This is a guarantee.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to guarantee a borrowing by Uganda Development Bank Limited of US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank, and from BADEA US$ 10 million and a long-term private loan from BADEA of US$6 million for on-lending to the private sector in Uganda – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been following the proceedings of this House and I am wondering where we are now. Are we still considering the other loan request or is this another loan request that she is presenting, because we had not resolved the other one? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I amended the Order Paper to allow these two reports to be presented. The one on maternal health is done and the second one is this one on UDB. However, the decision is yours to make; listen and decide. 

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker-

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Have we passed the other one? I thought we would -

THE SPEAKER:  Yes.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 5 December 2016. It was accordingly referred to our committee in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure.

The methodology is given under paragraph No. 2 and the background is also clearly spelt out in paragraph No. 3. I will go to paragraph No. 4. The loan is aligned to the country’s strategy - Vision 2040 and NDP II. The project objective is given under paragraph No. 5.

Madam Speaker, the bank is still undercapitalised and this limits its ability to carry out its core business of providing affordable short, medium and long term loans to the private sector. The share capital structure is given under table No.1. The authorised share capital is Shs 500 billion; registered share capital is Shs 100 billion; and out of this only Shs 83 billion is paid up share capital. Therefore, for UDB to have adequate resources for its business, the Government has got to continue capitalising the bank using resources from various sources. 

Madam Speaker, the project description and components are given under paragraph No. 5.1. The loan amounts from the different sources and the different components are spelt out clearly under table No. 2.

The loan terms and conditions are given under paragraph No. 6.1. There are three loans here from two sources. There is one from the Islamic Development Bank of US$ 10 million. It is a line of credit to UDB with a loan period of eight years and a grace period of two years. The one from BADEA, under a private term finance window, is US$ 6 million with a repayment period of 10 years and a grace period of two years. Lastly, the BADEA trade finance - this is for working capital – is US$ 10 million with a one year renewable repayment period.

Madam Speaker, the loan conditions are clearly spelt out under paragraph No. 6.2 and the facility arrangements under paragraph No. 6.3. The loan terms and conditions are clearly spelt out. Unlike the other loans we have been taking, this is a guarantee. We know that a guarantee is some kind of liability to Government but it is not direct. It is UDB borrowing but because it is 100 per cent owned by Government, it has to be guaranteed. 

As you know, UDB is the only local, long-term lending arm of Government. The other one, which is the East African Development Bank, is regional and is not accessible to many of our people. Realising that the commercial banks are charging killer interest rates to many of our private sector people, and this is one of the reasons why many of our private enterprises are limping, this facility will provide loans on friendly terms. 

Observations

Madam Speaker, under paragraph No. 7 the committee made the following observations: 

1. 	The major source of capital for UDB’s financial operations is Government through budgetary provisions. The budget provisions over the years have been too small for UDB to make substantial loan extensions to its clients. 

2. 	Restructuring of UDBL resulted in a reduction of its debt portfolio and it is on an upward recovery trend an shows signs of sustainability especially if interventions can be made through further capitalisation. It is improving but what is crippling it is lack of money to lend out. 

3. 	Uganda Development Bank Limited provides friendly terms to its customers and is involved in laying strategies for improving the performance of business entities that have accessed their funds. They provide remedial management 

4. 	The committee observed that in the past, what derailed UDB’s portfolio was political interference. 

5. 	The committee noted that loans are dollar dominated, which causes a big foreign exchange risk because of the mismatch between currency of subsidiary loans and currency of payments of lines of credit. 

6. 	The committee observed that Government is continuously borrowing or guaranteeing loans in foreign currency without increasing exports to repay those obligations.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that Government should further capitalise Uganda Development Bank to meet the bigger need for development financing in the country especially towards agricultural production, agro-processing, tourism and other export oriented projects. This is as a way of enhancing dollar inflows in the country and creating employment especially in agriculture where we have a comparative advantage. 

Considering that UDBL is the only Government long-term lending arm, Government should speed up its capitalisation so that it can attract more money from lending agencies in order to fill the vacuum for long-term foreign currency dominated loans. In addition to this funding, Government should source for money to finance UDBL from different sources for onward lending.

We further recommend that Government should speed up the process of setting up agricultural insurance as a way of making agriculture attractive to lenders since agriculture is our core economic activity. Uganda Development Bank Limited, as one of the financing institutions participating in the agricultural credit facility, should be encouraged to play a more active role in the utilisation of that facility. 

In order to avoid UDBL from being denominated by a few informed people, the public should be informed of funding opportunities in the bank. Uganda Development Bank Limited should avoid a repeat of what happened in the 1980s by desisting from lending politically backed loans.

To hedge against foreign exchange risk, Government should ensure that this money is given out in Uganda shillings for viable enterprises and indigenous companies which have got the capacity to create employment and add value to our local raw materials. Dollar denominated loans should be extended to only those projects which have got capacity to earn foreign exchange. 

In addition to funding small and medium enterprises, the committee recommends that UDBL be supported with the appropriate funds to enable it extend loans to long-term projects that require substantial investments.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to guarantee lines of credit of US $10 million from the Islamic Development Bank and US$ 16 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa to Uganda Development Bank be approved subject to the above recommendations. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, the signed report, the minutes, minister’s brief, project appraisal documents, loan approval guidelines, loan agreement, resettlement action plan and compliance with the National Development Plan are contained in this this file, which I wish to lay on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. As you may recall, in the Ninth Parliament we agreed to recapitalise the Uganda Development Bank to support the economy. Since this is part of the process, they want to borrow money but they need our guarantee to be able to get active in the market. 

7.33
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, chairperson, for the presentation. You talked of capitalising UDB for development financing, agro processing and tourism. However, you are talking about US$ 26 million and you make the entire Parliament sit to celebrate the capitalisation of the development arm of Government with only US$ 26 million! Is this the best that we could get?  

Madam Speaker, more should be added to the bank. Let us be fair. If we are talking about development and you want Uganda Development Bank to be the engine, how can the entire Tenth Parliament be made to sit to pass US$ 26 million for this; it is an insult. The reason I am saying this is because we observed in our audit report that only about three companies would take all this money. In fact, I remember we had a problem with funding Kakira. It is because you are involving agro processing. One sugarcane company is going to take all this money and it will not even be enough.

Secondly, you cannot say you are going to use UDBL to enhance agro processing and agricultural development in the country. How many branches does UDBL have and how well are they distributed in the country? It is only here in Kampala. How about those districts across the country? 

I think we need to define the role of UDBL and say that it is only to finance foreign exchange earning businesses. For us to say that it is going to be involved in tourism, agro processing and reaching out to the common man is not true because our farmers down in the villages will not have the capacity to attract and get loans from UDBL.

Madam Speaker, I remember in our recommendations, we asked for fair distribution of this money because only about three companies drained the entire UDBL loan portfolio. So, we need to be told what will happen. I am sure there are people who are ready to receive this US$ 26 million; they are prepared. What we are doing now is a ritual so that money can be taken. They must be waiting for this money we are passing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What do you propose?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I propose that we should restructure UDBL if we want to recapitalise it. Let us not hoodwink Ugandans; you cannot talk of US$ 26 million and say we are recapitalising Uganda Development Bank. It is a hoax –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH:  Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. To recapitalise Crane Bank, which is very distressed, Government gave Shs 200 billion. That was to help it come out of economic shock. However, to resuscitate a whole economy – because UDBL is resuscitating the microeconomic sector - we are only talking of US $26 million. If you multiply this by 3500, you get about Shs 75 billion, not even Shs 100 billion. It is not realistic. I think something is hidden behind this lending. For that reason, therefore, I think they should go back and rethink.

Madam Speaker, we need to recapitalise and retool holistically so that we are convinced. Otherwise, this is not convincing. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. You gave an example of the sugar factories. I have just been discussing with hon. Olanya Gilbert and he said in Amuru District, the factory under construction has stalled and needs about US$ 100 million for it to get completed and start production, but here we are talking about US$ 26 million. We are wasting time under the pretext of passing a loan request to recapitalise UDBL. We are not serious; we are only joking. 

The ministry should return this and bring a loan which is more than US$ 500 million if we are serious. These are industries that are going to improve on our economy not these factories that repatriate resources. We need to capitalise UDBL so that they can be able to give money to the local industries in order to improve the economy of this country.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo and honourable colleagues. I would like to appreciate the fact that we all want to see UDBL capitalised and capitalised fully. However, the challenge that we have now –(Interjections)- That is the reason we are going into this. 

The challenge we have now is that the capital base of UDBL is Shs 85 billion and the source of this funding –(Interjections)- Yes, they fund according to the capital base that you have. The bigger your capital, the bigger the loan you can access – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to raise a point of order. 

Recently, we capitalised Crane Bank, which is a privately owned bank, at Shs 200 billion. Bank of Uganda was impaired when it came here and we gave it Shs 1.1 trillion. Uganda Development Bank Limited is going to promote growth, and I am sure hon. Kyambadde would be happy about that. If we can give a private bank Shs 200 billion, how serious are we if we give only Shs 85 billion to our own?

Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to capitalise a private bank with Shs 200 billion and our own bank with only US$ 26 million?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if it is true that this US$ 26 million is going to serve only three actors in this economy, then why would we borrow for one person or entity?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the committee can confirm because they interacted with UDB. It is not true that the $26 million is going to capitalise only three entities; there are quite a number of enterprises which have applied for small amounts like $1 million, $3 million or $5 million. They have applied to access this money and the chairperson saw the list. However, there are also other sources- (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I follow events in this country, especially when it comes to the economy’s development and growth. When you were putting up a very powerful hotel to improve the economy in Kamuli, you requested Uganda Development Bank to aid you with some funds, which you would pay back, but they told you there was no money.

The question of the average demand for development money is easily determinable. First of all, one factory alone requires Shs 100 million in Amuru as my brother said; you are then talking about the agriculture and tourism sector, to mention but a few. Now, the minister is here saying that this amount is adequate for the multi-sectoral overview that we have.

Is the minister, therefore, in order to keep on misleading this House deliberately and insulting the economy for the sake of borrowing? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is your plan to capitalise that bank? That is what we would like to know. If you are going to borrow this little money and then wait for three years and borrow $15 million-

MR BAHATI: Honourable colleagues, our plan is as follows: Today we are guaranteeing Shs 76 billion; next financial year, as you will see in the budget, we are capitalizing with –(Interjections)- Before the end of this year from Government of Uganda, we are putting in an extra Shs 25 billion and Shs 50 billion next financial year. We hope in three years, we shall have capitalised Uganda Development Bank- (Interjections)– Can I first answer your question? 

THE SPEAKER: Allow him answer the question.

MR BAHATI: Whatever route you take, this bank needs to be capitalised and it can be capitalised by putting in money. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am saying we are guaranteeing Shs 75 billion today, which is through this loan. Before the end of this financial year, we are putting in Shs 25 billion and next financial year, we are putting in Shs 50 billion. We hope in three years, we shall have capitalised it by Shs 300 billion. That is the plan we have.

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. I tend to agree with my friends that UDB needs more money, but I also have fears. There are lots of audit queries alluded to collusion in UDB between borrowers and bank people. They originate from projects that are supposed to be financed. Fraud and mismanagement have been alluded to in that bank. I do not know how much the proponents of this loan would assure us about those things not reoccurring in future before we approve this loan request.

Secondly, the minister signalled that there are going to be budget cuts but now he is saying they are going to provide more funding for UDB. This is contradictory. I want him to be clear that the budget cuts are not going to affect UDB so that it is on record. Thank you.

7.40
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all love to have a very wonderful development bank as a country. However, we also know that this bank has been embroiled in a lot of scandals in the last few years.

Madam Speaker, in 2014, if we recall, there were warrants of arrest issued for the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of this very bank and those matters have never been resolved. There are issues with the IGG and the Anti-corruption Court. There are real issues of management of that bank. Getting money and putting it in this very bank in its current state is the worst mistake we can make right now. We would like a wonderful bank and I am very keen- (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Karuhanga to suggest that UDB now is under poor management when we have one of the best ladies in this country qualified to run a bank, and she is seated over there. She has never been involved in any scandal and she is the new manager of the bank. Is he in order to mislead this House that the bank does not have good management when we actually have?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if the person you are referring to is not the one sitting here, then you need to withdraw.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, it was on 10 February 2014 when a warrant of arrest was issued by the Anti-corruption Court to the CEO of UDB. If you would like me to name the person, I can also do it. The warrant was issued against Patricia Ojangole. I am informed about these matters because I have been the chairman of the Anti-corruption Forum in this Parliament. I have been very interested in following them very closely.

Madam Speaker – [Mr Oguzu rose]

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to conclude, please.

MR OGUZU: The Auditor-General’s report of 2012 observed that about 25 per cent of UDB’s loans are non-performing. Can the proponents really assure us that there are no non-performing loans in UDB that we can rely on the management? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, it is not that we would like to frustrate this loan, - probably it would enhance our economy in some way - but we would like to use this opportunity to still push and insist, as Parliament, that UDB is restructured so that we can have a functional bank. This bank can, indeed, play a very critical role in our economy. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

7.50
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate we did not know much about UDB. However, as we approve loans which we are asking the Government to guarantee, we would also like Government to act on the parties that are operating UDB.

Madam Speaker, if you read the newspapers, you will realise that banks are collapsing. People who acquire loans from the banks deposit their collateral but they never pay simply because the banks are charging them too highly. We wanted UDB to be given a lot of money so that it can support our economy but bringing in US$ 26 million may not help us.

THE SPEAKER: So should we leave them to collapse? They are the ones who are borrowing and all they are asking from us is a guarantee.

MR LUBOGO: I would like to give information to hon. Joy Ongom on the lending rates. Uganda Development Bank is supposed to be giving out development loans. However, the interest rate at which they give the money is between 16 per cent and 20 per cent. If you are borrowing in US dollars, then they lend to you at about 12 per cent. You can now really imagine whether this is a development loan or it is just like any other commercial loan.

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much, honourable. We remember when many of these companies were indebted; there were almost 100 companies that wanted the Government to bail them out. How would this US$ 26 million help? I do not think it would.

I would also like the ministry to assess UDB. There is a claim that UDB loans money to its staff and not to companies. Can you please check that out?

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Ongom still coming back?

MR MUGOYA: She gave way to me for information. She has not finished.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, quick information.

MR MUGOYA: I am a student of the law of banking and practice in Uganda and the whole world. I would like to inform this august House that when we are analysing issues to do with the banking sector, it is not as simple as we are looking at it today. There are several issues that we must unearth. 

Within one minute, allow me, Madam Speaker, to summarise for you the key and critical factors that have affected and caused a spate of bank failures in Uganda. The first is the issue of insider lending. (Applause). The second is misappropriation of depositors’ money and creation of new entities where that money goes. Thirdly, there is Government influence in the banking sector, where we have Government officers who fully participate as conduits for misappropriation of depositors resources.

When are looking at the issue of Uganda Development Bank and other commercial banks, it is not as plain as we are looking at it. I actually expected to see in this report details of how they have addressed the issue of bank failures in this country. The report is conspicuously silent about that issue.

In my view, I would request this august House to reject the proposal and we revisit the issue at hand.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are mixing commercial and development banking; there are no deposits in UDB.

7.55
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, when loans are brought before us, I think the minister should listen to us. If we have some information that we need, for example the Speaker asked a very pertinent question to do with the plan, it would be good for the committee to go back and receive the information that the minister has, so that the House can be satisfied. He could give us information on the strategic plan on how they are moving forward with UDB.

Honourable members are not just generally suspicious for nothing. It is a good thing that I was the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy when hon. Bahati was a member of the committee in the Eighth Parliament. Pressure was applied on us both to guarantee Phenix Logistics. The company was highly geared; they had other problems. We were forced to give money to this company. The Vice-President even called us in the night saying that we have to give this money urgently as it is important for the country. The Prime Minister also came in later. 

Madam Speaker, you do remember, after we gave that money, where is Phenix Logistics now? I would like to know from the minister to what extent that money has been recovered from Phenix Logistics, because what I hear is that the very day that the money landed onto the account, the owners of the company withdrew all of it, divided it and closed the company. There were guarantees in the documents that were brought before the committee. Therefore, we are not just suspicious for nothing. Give us the information.

THE SPEAKER: What do you propose?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: My proposal is that unlike the reports of the Auditor-General that are time bound, we are going for Christmas and UDB is not going to lend money overnight here or on Christmas Day; let us wait for January and we get this information and then we decide (Applause).

7.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My understanding of UDB is that this is a development bank, an arm of Government that as a farmer I have been waiting for.

I would like a loan but I cannot access and manage the commercial loans at 25 per cent. Igara Tea Factory would like to establish a new line in Kakombe but we require US$ 7 million. We are not able to go for the commercial loans because this will “kill” us. 

My understanding is that the chairperson of the committee is talking about a guarantee by Government to the bank so that they can access a facility for their recapitalisation. However, this is Parliament and I would beg that we take a decision that is going to help the country. If we sit here and support UDB piecemeal – 

I was reading what UDB expects of Government; you too can google it. The chair of the bank, Dr Samuel Sejjaaka, points out that Government has made its promise in the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech to fully recapitalise this bank so that it propels the development of the country. The expectation is Shs 500 billion – (Interjection)- 

Dr Sejjaaka’s complaint, if I can read it, says, “Government is paying lip service to the bank. Government has really been ambivalent in terms of refinancing the bank. We have a very distrustful relationship because Government said they would give us Shs 500 billion but we now hear of Shs 5 billon only.” 

If I am going home to my village, I would like to tell the people that we sat in Parliament and received a comprehensive programme on how the bank is going to be restructured, how its systems are going to be improved, its connection with the farmers and how the local people and business enterprises are going to be improved. I would like to tell them that, rather than simply giving them money now just because they need it. 

Even if it takes two weeks or a month, the minister can give us the guarantee and we shall give this guarantee, but can we get a programme, a strategic plan, to make sure that this bank gets on its feet and does what it is supposed to do for Uganda. Thank you.

8.01
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman representative Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what I had wanted to submit has been said by a colleague. 

According to the debate here in the House, it seems Members suggest that Uganda Development Bank should be reorganised and restructured and they should stop behaving like the other commercial banks so that we can take loans from this bank in a massive way, and this will increase their capital base and help the development of the country. Members’ arguments here are not intended to frustrate the borrowing process but to make sure that this capital -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it seems the message from this House is that we need a functional development bank - well organised and capitalised - so that it can drive the economy. That is the feeling that the Members have.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, Government wants to give them a guarantee so that they borrow. When you borrow money, on your balance sheet it is not capital; it is a loan to you and therefore a liability. I want us to understand that the guarantee you are talking about is not capitalising the bank; you are borrowing money and increasing the debt of the bank. That is number one.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you recall that when we were here, Ministry of Finance, Finance, Planning and Economic Development used say, “send Shs 10 billion to UDB” and behind it they would attach the names of the beneficiaries - Kashwada, Lira Spinning Mills, Nandala-Mafabi, Oboth Oboth and so forth. The money would leave Parliament and we would think it is going to capitalise those entities yet it was just going to a selected few.

The procedural issue I am raising is: if we want to capitalise a bank which is our own bank, do we need to borrow or we need to appropriate money in the budget to capitalise the bank?

8.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the concerns of the colleagues. We share the same concerns that UDB is undercapitalised and in our recommendations we made it clear that Government should capitalise UDB to make it attractive to the lenders.

Right now, as we speak, that is how much we can borrow against the paid up capital. When you are borrowing, they look at the gearing ratio, the debt/equity ratio and they match what you have put in up to a certain level. If you have put in only Shs 83 billion, they cannot give you so much. However, I think this is the beginning. We made a recommendation – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Before becoming the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, the Member was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. She used to go to World Bank to get money. World Bank does not borrow; governments bring in money and they lend this money at no interest to the developing countries.

Uganda Development Bank is supposed to develop the people of Uganda. It is not UDB to borrow. If we want to borrow money for UDB, it should be Government to borrow and pay interest, but UDB should get interest-free money.

The point I am raising is that this is a former minister of finance and a former employee of UDB and he knows this –(Interjections)- Sorry, she knows this. You know, these days a chairman can be “he” or “she”. You know, Cecilia Ogwal was chairman of UDB and she insisted that she be called the chairman.

Madam Speaker, she knows the issues of UDB very well, first as an employee and then as a minister of finance and as a person who has been to World Bank. How can she, in her normal senses, come and say that UDB borrows instead of recommending to us that you people of Uganda should appropriate money for UDB.

8.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been given an opportunity- 

THE SPEAKER: Take these points of clarification and then answer.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in the Budget Speech of the year 2013/2014, the  Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that Uganda Development Bank has developed a medium-term recapitalisation plan 2013-2017 that will increase the shareholders equity from the current Shs 100 billion to Shs 500 billion. This was in your budget speech regarding UDB. 

With this piecemeal arrangement of yours, 2017 is just a few days from today, shall we be able to achieve what you promised, that you will be able to recapitalise to that tune of Shs 500 billion?

MR ANYWARACH: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) just concluded the Policy Support Instrument (PSI) review. Their recommendation on Uganda was good. Therefore, in line with what hon. Nandala was raising, if you have a review report of IMF on PSI, what stops you from going to World Bank and borrowing the money interest free because it is coming to Uganda Development Bank –(Interjections)- They are not paying attention; they are talking to each other.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those are the clarifications.

MR BAHATI: You saw me shaking my head here because there is no loan that we have got from World Bank interest free. There is no free money from the World Bank and I think every Member should know this. That is why when hon. Anywarach raised this, I said no.

Madam Speaker, it is true that in that speech we said that our plan is to capitalise UDB by Shs 500 billion. If we had the money in Government of Uganda budget, which we appropriate here, we would have done that. However, we are saying we are starting with the US$ 26 million now – (Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: At that time you said that you are going to get money from the Kuwait fund, African Export-Import Bank, BADEA and Islamic Development Bank. Those are the sources you gave us.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the sources we are talking about in that speech are the same sources we are bringing to the House. We are getting money from BADEA and we are going to other funders to give us money to capitalise. How shall we do this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are saying that you are on course but you are doing it piecemeal. 

MR BAHATI: Yes, we are on course. We cannot have all these lenders give us money in one month or one year; we keep looking for it - (Interjection)- There is a process, hon. Okupa. 

Madam Speaker, we are on course; we shall capitalise UDB and the best way is to start this way. 

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It really grieves my spirit because, let us face it, honourable members have deployed all of their intellectual capabilities in trying to make a valid justification for deferring the loan request.

Honourable minister, you should be aware that this is basic economics - borrow my neighbour policy. This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; it is not a clearing house. You cannot use borrowed funds to capitalise a bank, more so a national bank. Colleagues have already guided wisely that we have the capability; this is within our means to appropriate – (Interjection) – I am coming to that. 

Secondly, the fate of the Shs 200 million for the Crane Bank bailout - if you want to go outside the appropriation – is there. Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to continue diminishing Members’ contributions? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a problem; the Vice-President is in the tent and we are still here-(Interjection)- You are also hungry? Let us have hon. Oboth first.

8.13
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chair and the Members who have contributed, more so the Member from Budadiri, who was raising the point of whether we can borrow to capitalise a bank. 

The challenge is not that we should not approve the loan; it is that UDB has not been visible. They have been operating but no one is aware of the services they offer. Even if we are aware of them, the services have been far away from the people who represent the population. Madam Speaker, that is the challenge. 

How do we overcome that challenge? Denying them the funds is denying them the opportunity to be relevant. I would take it in good faith that all that was raised here would form a very strong basis for recommendation that should be taken seriously. We cannot do without Uganda Development Bank but the bank has not showed its relevance. (Interjection) May I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please.

MR OBOTH: The question is obvious; we are talking about the cost – the interest rate being higher. Now we know why they are borrowing - to lend out. It cannot be less. I wish Government would take it up, that we provide for funding appropriation from the budget.  

Now that we are in this situation, Madam Speaker, permit me to wonder aloud: How do we reconcile the need to let them move – I am aware of an incident where a local investor was frustrated by Uganda Development Bank. Their application was either looked at or ignored. So, this thing of feeding a cow whose milk is being taken by somebody else - that is why you see the pulling of ropes.

If it was relevant to this country and Members of Parliament knew about it, we would be the ones championing the cause for more funds. The President made a statement and we all clapped during the budget reading. Actually, I went to the CEO, Madam Ojangole, and I told her, “You are now going to get money; please make it available for people to develop.”

My humble appeal is that, let us try to reconcile the differences so that we move forward in approving this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, suppose we require the Government to give us a concrete plan and a timeframe on how they propose and intend to capitalise this bank? This is because we are not sure; after this it may take another three years before we get Shs 10 million.

8.17
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As one of the new Members of the Tenth Parliament, I do respect our senior Members who have experience. We have heard a number of submissions concerning UDB and I have a suggestion to make. Following the way Members have submitted their concerns, I request the Minister of Finance to take back the document and prepare it again so that he can bring it back when it is well organised. I beg to move.

8.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the spirit of the debate is positive, that we should fully capitalise the bank. I do not think anybody would object to that. However, I think we need to address the reality. 

Yesterday, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries convened a meeting of people from tea-growing areas and one of the issues we discussed was the need to establish tea factories where tea-growing has been promoted. These are some of the factories lined up to benefit from the immediate capital to UDB. Therefore, we need to weigh the implications. 

If you say that the Minister of Finance should go to the World Bank to negotiate a new loan and so forth, how long will it take to have that loan approved? Therefore, my view is that all of us appreciate the point being made that we must mobilise money to fully capitalise the bank, but in the meantime we also need to support the bank so that the projects that are lined up should not stall. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the honourable minister and the House that what you are asking for – their plan for capitalising UDB - is what they gave us. They gave us a three-year plan, 2013-2017 and that is what I read here. They said they are going to mobilise money from the banks which I stated here - BADEA, Islamic Development Bank, African Export-Import Bank and the Kuwait Fund. 

It is now in the last year of the plan that they are coming up. This is the plan they had given us but they failed to fulfil it. Now they have realised that the three years are coming to an end and that is why they are bringing this request. Unless they give us a plan for 2017 to 2021 -

MR BAHATI: As I said, hon. Okupa, we are moving in that direction because we received $10.4 million from the Kuwait Fund; we have also received $4.5 million from BADEA; and we have another Shs 16 billion. That is what we are doing. It is too little but you must begin from somewhere.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the information. The point being made is that the share capital of UDB is small and it is difficult to attract even bigger loans. Therefore, are we saying that we freeze any support to UDB as of now until –(Interjection) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, he knows he is a friendly force, but he constrained me to resort to some other way. We are talking of Shs 500 billion capitalization and the minister is coming up at the tail end with $26 million. I have been listening but the minister has not told this House whether and where they got the Shs 200 billion that they put in the crumbling Crane Bank. You have not explained to us. It took you just one minute to wire Shs 200 billion and now for the Uganda Development Bank, we are on our knees informing you that we are ready, bring the plan and we recapitalise our bank but you are not budging.

Is it in order for the minister to insist that because of our little capital, they are going for $26 million and yet they are not telling us how they got the Shs 200 billion to put in a private bank?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t we come to an agreement that you present a concrete plan of how you will capitalise this bank, we adopt it and look for the money because –

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for the support you have given the banks so far in this debate. Madam Speaker, we can work on that and very fast so that we can approve this loan in January because it has a deadline. Therefore, I would like to appreciate and this is the spirit; I hope this spirit can apply even when we are appropriating the budget.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is deferred to the Third Meeting of the First Session of Parliament. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, I informed you earlier that the Vice-President is waiting for us outside in the tent and we cannot continue leaving him alone. I would like to adjourn the House and you will be called on notice. Thank you. Let us go and dance and have a merry Christmas. 

(The House rose at 8.24 p.m. and adjourned sine die..) 

