PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 22 DECEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6697Thursday, 22 December 2022people of Teso, and for the country at large, when we woke up to the sudden news of the passing on of Hon. Okabe, who was a Member of Parliament of Serere County. He was also a bishop. He passed on in a fatal accident, with his wife Christine Okabe, in Budaka, early morning that day. Today, we are gathered in this House, in a special sitting, with grief and sorrow to send off a distinguished colleague. I can assure you, the new Members of Parliament, that you may not have known Hon. Okabe because he was a quiet, peaceful person. He was not cantankerous like some people can mean to be. (Laughter)The Hon. Okabe that we are talking about and who is going to lie in front of you, was a bishop and a God-fearing legislator. In most cases, we do not get so many legislators who are God fearing. Now we had somebody who was a bishop. Instead, we get people who knock heads in these kinds of places. The person we are talking about was God-fearing. He had so many churches; he was a very peaceful legislator who never wanted conflicts. That is the Patrick Okabe that we have lost. Patrick Okabe is leaving a legacy. He has so many churches in Soroti, Busole, Mbale, Pallisa, even in Kampala here. That is the peacemaker that we are talking about; a voice of reason and a remarkable leader that we have lost. In just two weeks, we have had two bodies in this House. I think we need to pray to God that IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 16TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 11.59 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this special sitting. I sincerely welcome you, with a deep heart, to this sitting, pursuant to section 6(h) of the Administration of Parliament Act. The sitting is for us to pay tribute to one of us who was in the last sitting, seated where you were. Just put yourself in that position, as presiding officers. It is not an easy thing to chair a House where you are paying tribute to your own person, who has been with you in the same House, who you have joked with in the same House. I want to recognise the arrival of the Vice President, thank you for joining us. I also want to recognise the presence of my deputy. Thank you for coming to pay tribute to our own. We are a small family, as Members of Parliament; we are only 556. We need to be there for each other and I am very happy with the turn up that is in the House today. Thank you so much. (Applause)On Monday, 19 December 2022, this country woke up to very sad news. It was a very dark Monday for the Parliament of Uganda, for the PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6698TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [The Speaker]this House is not a House for bodies; this House is for us to make decisions for this country. We ask God, if there is anything in this House that we have erred upon, we ask for forgiveness. We will not continue with this premature death of having bodies in this House throughout. God should forgive us and have this House make decisions for the people of Uganda and for us to be able to do our work, and not coming for special sessions. It is not an easy thing. Of course, death is inevitable and we have to get along with it. Hon. Okabe was in the 10th Parliament with most of us. When he was in the 10th Parliament, people saw what he could do. Even the Bible says, “By their deeds you will know them”. One can know what Hon. Okabe did when he was in the 10th and 11th Parliaments. We feel for the people of Serere because they have really lost a leader. We continue praying for the people of Serere, the family and this nation. On that note, therefore, as Parliament of Uganda, we want to commiserate with the people of Serere, the Teso Parliamentary Group and the people of Teso, the nation at large and the children of the late Hon. Okabe Patrick; a God-fearing man, a man of reason, a respectful man, a man of values, a man who has brought change, especially with the women of Serere. May his soul rest in eternal peace. We have also lost Hon. Okabe’s wife, Christine Okabe, in the same fatal accident. Our Government Chief Whip has also lost his brother, Jasper Okello. Hon. Herbert Ariko of Soroti East also lost a mother, who will be buried tomorrow. The Government Chief Whip’s brother is to be buried tomorrow as well. We, in Bukedea, also lost an LC V chairperson, Hon. Alemkan Moses. May we rise to observe a moment of silence in their honour.(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the death of Hon. Okabe and his wife is as a result of a fatal accident. This brings all of us to take responsibility for what is happening. I am happy that the Minister of Works and Transport is here. We have sung the issue of accidents in Uganda, but nothing has happened. Most of these accidents are created due to negligence. Accidents live with us. They leave us with injuries, causing mortality and trauma that we go through. Imagine the trauma this Parliament is going through is caused by an accident yet we always discuss issues of accidents in this House.Therefore, as we bid farewell to our colleague, Hon. Okabe, we must think of a solution, as legislators, on what to do next about these accidents. It is not only Hon. Okabe; it is happening all over. Very many people have died. You have only heard about Hon. Okabe because he is a legislator and we are paying tribute to him in this House. Honourable members, on a daily basis, we lose over 10 people. We must see what to do especially during this festive season. We need to give stringent regulations to all road users.Once again, I would like to sincerely thank Members. On behalf of the leadership of the Parliament of Uganda, we called you on short notice and we are happy you are all here; you have been able to come and pay tribute to our late brother. We are brothers and sisters; so, we feel for each other. May the good Lord bless all of you.It is very heart-breaking, but we cannot do much. We have to live with it and let us be each other’s keeper. As we go out for a break, take care of yourselves. Be mindful of accidents. Thank you.(Entrance of the late Hon. Patrick Okabe.)The National AnthemThe East African Community AnthemLaying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we lay the wreaths, on the technical 6699THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022bench this afternoon, we have the immediate family of our fallen colleague. They are:1. Rev. Abilet Mislam - father to the late. Thank you for coming.2. Mrs Lucy Abilet - mother to the late.3. Mr Omoding Emmanuel – son to the late. He is the first born.4. Mr Okabe Samuel – son to the late.5. Ms Apiny Margaret – sister to the late.In the public gallery this afternoon, we also have a delegation from the Iteso Cultural Union representing His Highness the Emorimor, Papa Iteso. They are:1. Papa Davidson Elyau 2. Papa Francis Ekwaro 3. Papa Stephen Ejoku 4. Papa David Emodu.Join me in welcoming them. They have come to witness the proceedings (Applause)We also have the family, friends and well-wishers of the late Bishop Okabe; kindly stand up and wave. You are welcome. This is your Parliament. Welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you for coming. (Applause) Laying of wreathsTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for laying your wreaths and for the solidarity. In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Hon. Michael Werikhe  and Hon. Lyandra Komakech.  They have come to witness the today’s proceedings, as we pay tribute to our beloved brother. We also have Bishop Simon Peter Emiau, the Bishop of Pentecostal Assemblies of God (PAG). You are most welcome. Further, in the VIP gallery, we have Hon. Capt. John Emily Otekat, Hon. Judith Mariam Amoit, a CEC member, Hon. Lydia Wanyoto, Hon. Dr Francis Epetait. You are all most welcome. Thank you for joining us. Honourable members, we also have condolence messages that have come in. We may not be able to read them, but we have a condolence message from the Vice-President of Uganda, H.E, Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, the Member of Parliament for Katakwi. Thank you for the message. Enclosed in her message is Shs 5 million. Thank you very much, Your Excellency, the Vice President. We also have a condolence message from the National Resistance Secretariat, signed by Hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende. Thank you so much for the message. We have other messages from: the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria, signed by Hon. Milton Muwuma; the Uganda Parliamentary Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Limited (SACCO), and enclosed is Shs 1 million and signed by Hon. Ndugwa Migadde, the Chairperson. We have a message from the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, of Shs 10 million. (Applause) There are also other messages from: the Teso Parliamentary Group of Shs 37 million, the Buganda Parliamentary Group of Shs 1 million, and a message from the Woman Member of Parliament, Bukedea, the Rt Hon. Anita Among, of Shs 20 million. (Applause) Thank you very much for all your contributions and may the good Lord reward you abundantly.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR SERERE COUNTY , SERERE DISTRICTTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the Administration of Parliament Act provides for paying tribute and supporting the families of the sitting Members of Parliament. Hon. Okabe has been a sitting Member of Parliament. The issue of the welfare of a sitting Member of Parliament is covered under the Administration of Parliament Act. When a sitting Member of Parliament passes, Parliament takes charge 6700TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [The Speaker]and control of everything in terms of all the burial expenses. It is provided for in whichever budget that you approve. However, we have a scenario where we have two bodies lying here; we have the Member of Parliament together with his beloved wife. I want this House to allow, that we, as Parliament of Uganda, take charge of the wife’s burial as well. (Applause) I put the question.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: We will bury the two bodies together, as Parliament of Uganda. The wife is equally our wife. We are going to get a motion from the Prime Minister.12.49THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Bishop Patrick Okabe for his dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda.“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow, the sad news of the death of Hon. Bishop Patrick Okabe, Member of Parliament for Serere County, who died together with his dear wife, Mrs Christine Okabe, in a motor accident along Mbale-Tirinyi road on Monday, 19 December, this year; AWARE that Hon. Patrick Okabe has had a distinguished career serving in various capacities, both spiritual and political, in Uganda, including as Member of Parliament for Serere County in the 10th and 11th Parliaments where he served as a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) in the 11th Parliament, a member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in the 11th Parliament, Chairperson, Teso Parliamentary Group in the 10th Parliament, a bishop at Impact Ministries in Mbale City and the proprietor of Rhema High School in Soroti and a Christian based radio station in Mbale city; APPRECIATING that Hon. Bishop Patrick Okabe was a diligent leader who served his country with devotion and integrity and strongly advocated for women economic empowerment, human rights and the fight against malaria in Uganda; FURTHER APPRECIATING that as a devoted Christian faithful, Hon. Bishop Okabe greatly contributed to the promotion and observance of Christian values of love, peace, faithfulness, ethics, integrity, generosity, hope and respect, as a means of transforming the lives of Ugandans;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:1. Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen in this country. 2. Parliament takes cognisance of the immense contribution that Hon. Bishop Okabe has rendered to Parliament and the people of Uganda.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by the Member for Ibanda, Hon. Kakembo, Hon. Kaberuka, the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Sseggona, Hon. Elijah, Hon. Opolot, Hon. Edakasi - the whole House, including the Vice President of Uganda and the Attorney-General. Prime Minister, would you love to justify your motion?MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Okabe Patrick, Member of Parliament for Serere County. On Monday, 19 December 2022, the country woke up to the sad news of the passing of Hon. Okabe Patrick, a Member of Parliament for Serere County, which occurred at 5.00 a.m. in a motor accident at Naboa along Tirinyi Road in Budaka District.6701THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022Madam Speaker, we mourn and celebrate the life of a distinguished God fearing man of God and a Ugandan politician. He is remembered for leading a crusade to foster unity and harmony amongst Teso Members of Parliament. At the time when he was elected leader of the Teso Parliamentary Group, his patience and cooperation with members of Teso Parliamentary Group began to yield gains when he initiated a welfare fund for his colleagues to support each other in situations like this.The good representation to his people got him re-elected to represent the people of Serere County in the 11th Parliament, a term he has passed on while serving. During his second term in Parliament, he has been serving on the Committee of Public Accounts (Central Government) as well as the Appointments Committee.Madam Speaker, Hon. Okabe was born on 28 November 1958 to retired Rev. Mesulam Abilet and Lucy Naire. Hon. Okabe went to Atira Primary School and completed primary in 1972. Thereafter, he was admitted to Ayal College for ordinary level, and sat for the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education in 1976. He joined the Bible Training Centre and graduated with an Advanced Diploma in Bible Theology from the Pentecostal Training Centre. In 1990, he took a Bachelor’s degree in theology from the Pan African Christian College. He holds a Master’s degree in Divinity from Nairobi Evangelical Graduate School of Theology. In 2018, he was awarded a PhD in Leadership from the University of America. He worked closely with the Emorimor, the Itesot Cultural leader, Bishop Onkile of the Anglican Church, the late Paul Etyang, Hon. Frederick Angura and other Tororo leaders; His Excellency the President of Uganda, and several Cabinet ministers to bring unity, harmony and development in Teso region. He commanded respect among his fellow pastors that he led as the bishop, and worked with Bishop Edweu, Bishop Eitu and other prominent pastors in Teso Region to strengthen unity, harmony and development in the subregion and Uganda at large. Hon. Okabe has been developmental. He served as the Managing Director of Serere Farmers Support Centre from the year 2018-2021. He was also a devout Christian and served as the Managing Director of V oice of Serere FM and Faith Radio in 2006-2021, and the Director of Impact Schools Limited from 2002 to 2021; and Director of Rhema High School from  2007 to 2017. He was also the Director/overseer Impact Ministries Uganda from 1991 to 2021. His love for serving God was untiring. Being a son to a retired reverend helped him to get closer to understand the virtues of religion and how several issues would be resolved through unity and harmony, which he exhibited throughout his life. He was married to Christine Okabe with whom they have two children. We wish to extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to the bereaved family, friends, Teso region and the people of Uganda. May the Almighty God grant his soul eternal peace. I beg to justify.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister for that message. I would like to correct the record that the late Hon. Okabe had five children. Two are here so far, and the others are on the way coming. In our Teso culture, you do not count children. (Laughter)1.01THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is with utmost humility that I rise to second the motion moved by my honourable sister, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in support of the resolution to pay tribute to our fallen comrade, Hon. Bishop Okabe Patrick, that we sadly lost in an accident together with his dear wife, Christine, on the morning of 19 December 2022. I extend my commiserations to the family, friends, the people of Serere 6702TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [Mr Mpuuga]County, the Itesot community generally and the entire country. I got to know the late in the 10th Parliament as ably described by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a very amenable character, very unassuming, but present in all forms. I vividly recollect that he and other colleagues founded the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria and he was the treasurer of the forum. Unfortunately or fortunately, he is the only member who survived from the 10th Parliament to the 11th Parliament from the forum leaders. The rest were eaten by political malaria. They never transited to the 11th Parliament. I am not discouraging the current members of the forum. You can survive like him. It is very sad to lose anyone. As Parliament, a colleague of his poise is very sad a moment to lose. I also recollect that his former party machinery rigged him out of the primaries, but he was able to uphold the power of the people of Serere –(Applause)– he is a living testimony of the power of the people, as opposed to the power of the gun and the culture of impunity. I rise here to pay tribute to a man who believed in the politics of sanity and one who was a deep peacemaker in his life. His impeccable character as a man of God will live to inspire those who knew him and followed him as a peacemaker, theologian, moralist and leader.Madam Speaker, I recollect vividly his very firm commitment to health. In one of our deliberations on the budget, we had a standoff on the health budget in the 10th Parliament. We even deferred the passing of the national budget until we had an increment on the health budget. He was one of the most vocal speakers that day.As part of keeping his memory in our midst - it is good we are in the budget process. We need to look at what it means to live up to the Abuja 2001 Declaration of at least 15 per cent of the national budget put on health, as part of serving his memory as a man who dared when many feared to speak about the impossibilities. I would like to extend my sympathies to the family, but I thank God that the children at least, like we have observed, are adults and well-schooled. They live to be challenged to live in the footsteps of their father. It is very sad that we even lost the mother. The challenge is even bigger, but I want to comfort you and the people of Teso that it is not insurmountable for you to rise and even be better than him. You live in times where you can look up to him. If he struggled, you are not struggling. If he figured out impossibilities, you live with possibilities around you. I would like to, once again, applaud and thank him posthumously for being the man he was and still is in our midst. Lastly, he died in an accident and so, this is a moment for us to reflect.  We do not have, in our possession, details of the nature of the accident, but again, the narrowness of our roads remains an eyesore. I hope when the House resumes, after recess, the Prime Minister and her team, will have the courtesy of reporting on the action taken on our resolution on the Uganda Road Fund – a matter which they would rather not report about – but our roads are a death-trap; they are extremely narrow. There is no doubt the volume of traffic on our roads continues to grow while the roads continue to decay. I, again, thank the Prime Minister for the motion. The House gathering to pay tribute to our own is a huge loss. It must humble all of us, servants of the people, to serve above partisanship and beyond the issues that divide us, as individuals, and serve the country. We thank you, Bishop, for your service to the country. We thank you for your humility and your ability to reach out to all of us regardless of creed, political persuasion and age. May you rest in eternity. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. The late was an Independent Member of Parliament, but aligned to the NRM. (Applause)6703THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 20221.09MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Patrick Okabe, former Member of Parliament for Serere County, Serere District. This sitting today is not what any of us would have expected – that our colleague, an amiable man, would now be lying before us. Death is wasteful. Bishop Okabe has been a very resourceful citizen of our country, but it is the harsh reality of life. The life of mortals is like grass. They flourish like a flower of the field. The wind blows over it and it is gone; its place remembers it no more. Here we are now saying “he was”. There is never a time in life that we are ready when death strikes. It is always painful. Life is short, and we depart. The Psalmist could not have put it any better. “Teach us to number our days, that we may gain a heart of wisdom.” Madam Speaker, Hon. Okabe knew this and he harnessed the wisdom of God. He lived by the conviction that longevity of life is not in the number of days lived, but in the quality of life in the days lived. Hon. Okabe did not count days. He made the days count. He did not live for himself alone, but for many, especially the orphaned, the vulnerable and deprived of our society. This can be witnessed by his foundation, which has reached out to many orphans and vulnerable children of our country. As such, he has left a better country than he inherited. He has lived a life of impact and stood for and by his convictions, especially the right appropriation of Government resources for the benefit of the taxpayer. If you go through the Hansard and read and study his submissions, his heart beat for a Government that cares for the taxpayer and the right appropriation of resources. As the Independents of this House, we are proud of our colleague, Hon. Bishop Dr Patrick Okabe. We have no doubt that his soul even now rests in eternal peace. Madam Speaker, with your wise guidance – I am not sure if it would not be proper that you invoke Rule 61 of our Rules of Procedure – as I seek an amendment to the prayers of the motion moved to include “the prevalence of Government to reinstate the enforcement of speed governors in this country.” This is not to insinuate that the Bishop was in any way speeding. Just last week, we lost 84 citizens of this country. I may not know the statistics of how many of those were as a result of speeding. Therefore, if it pleases you, Madam Speaker, the motion should be amended to include in the prayers: “Prevalence of Government to reinstate the enforcement of speed governors.” May the honourable colleague – now departed – rest in eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Dean of the Independents. He has brought an amendment to the motion. Is that amendment seconded? Honourable members, the enforcement of speed governors is just one of the regulations that is in the law. What we just need to do is enforce the laws that we have. Minister of Works and Transport, you need to enforce the laws. Honourable members, a secondment has been done. Can I hear from the chairman of PAC, where the late was a member?1.15MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. Colleagues, I rise to support the motion put forward by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of this country and to thank her, as well as the seconder. Again, we stand here in the presence of God to celebrate another life. I have consistently said that when people die and they are not men 6704TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [Mr Sseggona]of straw – as we call them in law – we do not mourn them; we celebrate them. Hon. Okabe is one of those that we must celebrate. Why? It is because he was gifted and he knew how to use his talent, as given to him by God. Of course, the double tragedy of losing a father and a mother in an accident cannot be over explained. He would perfectly understand. As said by the Leader of the Opposition, we worked tirelessly with the late Hon. Okabe in the 10th Parliament, when we were pushing for the rejection of the budget, especially on matters of health. Due to his sober voice, he said, “No, let us not use the word ‘reject’ the budget.” He said, “The budget is our own. We can make amendments and modifications here and there.” Some of us wanted to push forcefully and he said, “No, let us not use force; let us negotiate.” I asked him, “Negotiate until when?” and he said, “Until we get there.” I will live to remember those words with fondness because when we negotiated and negotiated, we got there.As colleagues appreciate, Hon. Okabe was posted to the Public Accounts Committee - Central Government. I had not seen him for long, so I had to look for him. I called him and said, “Please come, why are you not attending meetings, is it because you do not like me”? He said, “Chairman, before I answer, can we pray?” He said, “I know you to be a Christian, why do you want to go straight into the conversation without praying”? And we prayed.He led the prayer, of course, being a pastor, and I am a lay Christian. One of the things he said in the prayer, I remember, is that God gives us the wisdom to walk out of that meeting united. Of course, we were not disunited in any way.So, after the prayer, I asked him what the problem was and he told me so many things. Above all, he said, I want to apologise to you that I have not been able to attend meetings, because of those things; and I noticed the humility in the man because, I think he was everything better than me. He was experienced in many things.I want to say we will miss him; but we believe that he is living in faith because he accepted Christ as a personal saviour – (Applause) I know physically, he is gone from us and we have all reasons to mourn. However, we believe truly, that he lives and that one day, we will meet him at a dinner in the presence of our redeemer. May his soul rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sseggona. The death of Hon. Okabe reminds us about our own legacies. What will you be remembered for? Will you be missed like Okabe, if you went tomorrow? Our deeds speak more than anything. 2 Corinthians 9:9 says, “They share freely and give generously to the poor.” That is what Hon. Okabe was known for. He had an orphanage school, home and all that. As legislators, I implore you to have a heart that gives; there is more blessing in giving than in receiving.Chairperson, I am coming back to the Minister. I wanted to hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights; the two committees where Hon. Okabe was a Member, then I will come to the Minister of Teso Affairs. Sorry, can we first hear from the Vice President?1.21THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion, moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Robinah Nabbanja, to pay glowing tribute to our departed brother, Hon. Patrick Okabe, the former Member of Parliament for Serere County.Madam Speaker, let me, on behalf of His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, and Mama Janet Kataha Museveni, the First Lady, and on my behalf, express our sincere condolences to the family of the late Hon. Patrick Okabe and the people of Serere County, all colleagues here present and also those who may be watching us, and the entire people of Uganda.Madam Speaker, I stand here to say kind words about a brother who I know loved Teso and the 6705THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022culture of Teso; he loved his party, the NRM; he loved his God vehemently, and he loved this country. (Applause)Hon. Patrick Okabe was a very distinguished leader who served without discrimination. He served the children, the widows, the elderly, women and men in all their colours, regardless of their party affiliation or creed.In the fraternity of religious leaders, he will be dearly missed because he was a religious leader who easily worked with anybody. His mission of evangelisation was spread and intended to benefit everybody, regardless of their denomination.Madam Speaker, Hon. Okabe, as you may also know, was a key pillar in the NRM party in terms of mobilisation, but also in offering leadership at all levels to guide the people. He was a national leader and a nationalist, a clear demonstration that we shall miss him in this House and all the people of Uganda will miss him.I would like to implore colleagues here, that in order to carry his legacy forward, we should borrow a leaf from those very good practices which he used to extend to the people, so that we can keep his name amongst us and carry forward his duties.I would like to appeal to the family to get comfort in the Lord. And I will particularly leave you with a verse in the Bible, which is in the book of Romans 8:37-39. In summary, it says that nothing can separate us from the love of God.As we mourn our departed colleague, I would like the family to note that nothing can separate them from the love of God and nothing can separate all of us who are grieving today, from the love of God. I leave you all with that verse from the Bible. Madam Speaker, may the soul of the departed brother, Hon. Patrick Okabe, rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Vice President, for those kind words. While we are here in this House, what have you learned from all that has been said or what is being said about Patrick Okabe? Honourable members, try to be brief; everybody wants to speak. 1.27MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like Hon. Sseggona who had the privilege of being the chairperson to Hon. Bishop Okabe, let me begin by confirming that Hon. Okabe was a much better citizen than all of us in this House.Madam Speaker, the word decency can be attributed to the person of the late Hon. Okabe. Not many politicians are decent human beings, but I can confirm that Hon. Okabe was a decent human being. (Applause)I had the privilege of being his chairperson, but he had the obligation of being my permanent teacher and I learnt many things from him. You know, I am not particularly a very moral person, but the late Hon. Okabe’s foundation in morality was a permanent compass to look up to.Madam Speaker, in Africa, when a person passes, we have a tradition of saying good things about them. But I will confirm that every good thing said about Hon. Okabe today, was deserved and he earned it. We are not only praising him because it is a matter of culture, we are only stating facts. In September this year, Madam Speaker, you may remember, you sent the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to Teso Subregion. We had the privilege of having lunch at a facility owned by the late Hon. Okabe. We were all challenged by the developments he had put up in his constituency. The people of Serere fondly referred to him as the “Lion of Serere”. Madam Speaker, there lies the “Lion of Serere”. We shall dearly miss him. We shall miss his modesty and decency. May the Almighty Lord grant him eternal peace. (Applause)6706TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABETHE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As he said, he may be better than most of us; not all of us, but most of us. The decency aspect is really very crucial. As leaders, we need to be decent both inside and out. That is why I keep admiring my young brother, Hon. Kiryowa Kiwanuka; I love your decency. (Laughter) Let us hear from the Minister of State for Teso Affairs.1.30THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Mr Kenneth Ongalo-Obote): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity to pay tribute to a great man, a great friend and a leader who truly loves these people. On Monday, the 19th of December, we all woke up to the tragic news of the demise of Hon. Okabe, in a road accident. All of us were paralysed. We took very long to decide on the cause of action to take. And this is why even though this is a motion to pay tribute to our late colleague, it is also a testimony to your generosity, to your big heart, and to the fact that you really love people. (Applause) By the time we woke up from our slumber and decided to take action, the Speaker had already taken possession, not only of the body of our colleague, but had also made a decision that his wife, Christine, must be treated with the same dignity. (Applause) I want to thank you because at that point, everybody was talking about Hon. Okabe and we seemed not to realise that there was also his wife lying next to him. Honourable colleagues, I want you to appreciate the difficulty that the Speaker faced that day, of having to make decisions without the ability to consult anybody. Normally, one would consult the spouse of the deceased, but in this case, every time we needed to consult, we realised that the spouse was also dead and none of the children was in the country, yet decisions had to be made.And this is why I want to send this message to those who are listening out there, that we took decisions in the best interest of everybody; the family, and in consideration of Parliament and the rules that govern it. I want that to be very clearly known. Madam Speaker, Bishop Okabe was my very personal friend, in part because we shared a lot in common; we were all children of reverends. We grew up in the church; we were third borns in our families, all our families were very large and the two of us also happen to be the ones who had somehow, for whatever reasons, risen above the rest. And so, we had that burden of carrying the rest of the families on our shoulders. Bishop Okabe was born in a family of 16 children. None of them were twins; they are 16. The mother and the father are all here. The late worked so hard to ensure that whatever came his way, was always felt by his family. (Applause) His father and his mother will tell you that because of Bishop Okabe, I usually laugh at Reverend - you probably don’t know it, but I know you as “Mr Thanksgiving” from the time when you attacked the Bishop that he did not give you thanksgiving. However, Hon. Okabe made sure that every day of his father’s life was thanksgiving. I want to appreciate him for that. He loved to give and nothing pleased Hon. Okabe than to see the pleasure in your face when you appreciated what he had done. That is why his ministry was about giving. He was not interested in fundraising for building churches. He was interested in fundraising, so as to facilitate saving groups. He had village savings groups. When he fundraised a few weeks ago, his money went to village saving groups. By the time he died, all the villages in his constituency had benefited with Shs 1 million from him. That is the kind of person he was. (Applause)6707THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022He had expanded this, even to the Iteso Cultural Union. He had wanted to begin a saving for every clan, with the idea in mind, which I am sure you will all appreciate that it is embarrassing for a client to even fail to bury their dead. Every time someone dies, they inform the MP. So, he wanted these clans to be empowered so that they could go back to the time when clans had dignity in times of tragedy, rather than exposing their weaknesses by borrowing and/or begging. Therefore, he was really a great man. He cared about the welfare of others. I felt so bad for him in the last term when he helped us Members of Teso Parliamentary Group to save a lot of money, which money enabled some of us to win primaries, although he lost; I felt so bad. The good thing is that he was not robbed. I would like to tell you that I spoke to Bishop Okabe and this speaks to you – THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you speak to the motion? Whether he was robbed or not, he was in Parliament. He wasn’t robbed; he preferred to be an Independent.MR ONGALO-OBOTE:  He was an Independent Member of Parliament, who believed that service to his people did not depend on which side of the House he sat.As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I ate a lot of meals with Bishop Okabe and he said a prayer before every meal. He would always say, “Let us pray” and it was a very short prayer. It went like this, “Bless this food for our use and make us ever mindful of the needs of other people.” Always, the needs of other people was central in his mind. He was a great man and I believe, as we are told in Romans 14:7-9, we do not live by ourselves, we do not die to ourselves. We live in the Lord and we die in the Lord. Just as the Lord died and rose that he might be both the Lord of the dead and of the living, Bishop Okabe and his wife Christine, live with the Lord now.I was saddened, but also, oddly, it looked so correct. When we went to city mortuary to identify the bodies and Bishop Okabe was rolled out and shortly after that, the wife was also rolled out, they lay there, side by side. Both of them died in a very horrible accident, but God spared their faces. They had clean faces and they looked so peaceful. I must say, oddly, that they actually looked beautiful. It is a very sad thing to say, but that is what I saw. May they rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ongalo. 1.40THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the House to support the motion and convey condolences to the family, to the people of Teso, including the Members of Parliament, the Teso Parliamentary Group and the wise people of eastern Uganda because the Bible says the wise men came from the east; the writers of the Bible were not very gender sensitive.Of course we remind ourselves that the wise men and women came from the east to see a great man in the west - (Laughter) - because they were going to see Jesus and the description of east means they were going to the west.On behalf of the people of Kinkizi and Kanungu and on behalf of the NRM party, we convey our deep condolences. It is not very easy to go through a situation where you lose your father and mother at the same time. So, we feel for the children. We know what you are going through and we pray that the good Lord gives you strength and comforts you so that you are able to go through these difficult times. In the Ninth Parliament, I served as a Parliamentary Commissioner together with Hon. Okupa and others. One of the most painful times we used to go through was during the budgeting process when we had to handle an item of how many Members of Parliament we needed to budget for in case of death during our term of service.It was a subject that none of us was comfortable handling. We would put four to five because we had to budget, but you cannot know who 6708TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABEexactly will consume that budget. I pray to the good Lord that Hon. Okabe becomes the last person we come here to pay tribute to in the 11th Parliament. Those are our wishes, the rest we leave to God.At 64 years, Hon. Patrick was still young by all standards because even the holy book says, our span is 70 years or 80 years for those who are strong. He has died at a young age. Like one colleague said, the English say, what matters is not the number of years in your life, but the life in your years. At 64 years, Hon. Okabe has done his work on this earth and has been successful. We could give tribute until the cows come home because we have been with him in this House, we know how he behaved; a very humble servant of God, a person who touched everybody, very down-to-earth, loving and lovable. We will greatly miss him, but those are God’s plans. We pray that the Lord receives him and gives him a comfortable seat in heaven and intercedes for us because that is where we shall all end up.The bishop died in a road traffic accident. When I watched some of the pictures, it is as if a speeding truck invaded his vehicle and hit it. When I was in medical practice, around these days of Christmas, we would receive very many victims of road accidents and gender-based violence in hospitals because people celebrate, over drink and fight and so forth. Notably, there are many accidents. We would like to appeal to all Ugandans following this discussion, that we are entering into the Christmas season, which will usher us into a new year. Let us drive responsibly on our roads, let us celebrate responsibility so that all of us can be able to enter into the New Year alive.Finally, I also wish to dedicate a Bible verse to the members of the family; Proverbs 3:5-6 which says, “Put all your trust in God and do not lean on your own understanding. In all your ways acknowledge Him and He shall be able to protect your path.” This has happened, it is very tragic, sad and difficult to accommodate in your lives, but put all your trust in God and He will give you all the comfort. May the soul of our brother, Bishop Hon. Patrick, rest in eternal peace and may the good Lord continue to comfort members of the family. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Chris. I would like to re-echo what the Minister of Teso said on the decision that was taken in the absence of the family. When you enter politics, you become a Member of Parliament and you become a property of the Government of Uganda. The Government will always make decisions for and on behalf of your families. We are sorry for not directly involving the family members; they were out of the country, but the decision was taken in good faith. We want to give a decent send off to our colleague, friend and brother. Members, we will take two minutes so that everybody speaks. 1.46THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to register my condolences, the condolences of the people of Kibuku and Bunyoro -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before you go, I want to let you know that there is a sitting tomorrow. We are going to receive the Budget Framework Paper. MS NAMUYANGU: Condolences to the family, the people of Serere, Teso and Uganda at large. Hon. Okabe was a statesman, a man who towed the line supporting the vulnerable - the people who needed help. I had an opportunity, last term, to go to Serere at the invitation of Hon. Adoa, to celebrate Women’s Day. We went by chopper, but found Hon. Okabe had organised the women, offered transport to them and even provided gifts and [Dr Baryomunsi]6709THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022some support to them. I looked at him as a God sent leader. Sometimes when we organise celebrations for women, it is left to the women.Also, he put up development - radio stations. He could have used them to campaign, but he used them to educate and sensitise people. He would have limited the development to his own constituency, but he went beyond that –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Condolence message from team 317; the historicals.  4.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late Hon. Patrick Okabe and his dear wife. We are paying tribute to a very sophisticated grassroots mobiliser, unifier, spiritual leader, legislator and above all, a parent.Let me say something about the sophisticated mobilisation. A few weeks ago, Madam Speaker, you were kind enough to assign me to go and represent you at the function of this man now lying here. He was giving money to the rural poor for SACCOs that have been described very ably by the Minister of Teso Affairs. I can confess here that the level of organisation of some of the SACCO groups beat those we have organised as a Government –(Applause)– either through Emyooga. I did not know the doctor very well until 2016 when he came to the 10th Parliament. We went to Kyankwanzi - where we always go as Members of Parliament to reorganise ourselves and see what to do here. While there, we decided as the Teso group to caucus a bit and see who could lead the organisation. We sat, Hon. Okabe was new, but in him, in the little time we interacted, we saw a man who would unify the Teso Parliamentary Caucus. We elected him in Kyankwanzi and when we came back here, we confirmed him. I can testify to this distinguished audience that Hon. Okabe brought unity to the Teso Parliamentary Caucus and trust among the members. (Applause)Madam Speaker, we have missed - He was not outspoken, as you correctly observed in the House here. Leader of the Opposition, you may not have even noticed Hon. Okabe was in the House, but he was present in Teso and Serere. I really want to say it is sad he has died in a road accident. Many colleagues have talked about road accidents and what we intend to do. I do not think it is enough for me to say here what we intend to do. A few days ago, my senior colleague, Gen. Katumba Wamala, read to the country a few guidelines that we want people to follow as we now go into the festive season. We are going to come back to this House and inform Members of a number of interventions we are proposing, including touching on the legislation, again, to reinforce what we want to do so we can make our roads safer. May the souls of these distinguished leaders - Hon. Okabe and his dear wife - rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of Works and Transport, reading the guidelines alone may not be enough. You need to do continuous awareness on the guidelines that are passed. The problem we have in this country is that we pass laws and they are not popularised. We need to popularise these laws - the regulations and guidelines - so that people get to know. 1.53THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the colleagues here to pay tribute to our colleague, a brother and nephew. He used to call me “Ija” meaning “Aunt.” The people of Karamoja happen to be aunties and uncles to the people of Teso. I have known Hon. Okabe for the last seven years. To be honest, he was a very humble person. He was a man of dignity and integrity. 6710TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABEHe would not fight for space like some of us used to; he would leave you to pass and then come after. What beats my understanding is that he was a peculiar leader who could balance the church, politics and family. Where do we find those kinds of people? Hon. Okabe had God-given qualities. He was able to lead all the churches. He has a church in my constituency and he has been coming there annually to pray with the people, at some functions. Honourable members, given our responsibility, balancing all those institutions is very difficult. Sometimes you give up at some point, but he did not. It is said in the Bible that, that is where we are all going. It will be said here or back at home. There will be kind words, sincere and true, but it cannot take away the emptiness Hon. Okabe has caused in his church, house and family. Even the people he has been serving in Serere and those who knew him, the emptiness will never be filled. Nobody can fill that. I cannot stop crying. How can someone die just like that? The wife dies at the same time, then you expect people to reconcile this in the shortest time. It is very painful. Hon. Okabe should not have died just like that. I liked him as a person. Just imagine how many people are crying for him. My people in Nakapiripirit, where he has been praying, are really crying. Imagine if those people are crying for him, what about the Christians in Serere and Mbale? May his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. We will always respect the late Patrick Okabe for keeping in his lane. Do not forget that you can only occupy a space that you can occupy. Do not get space for more than one person because you may not be able to swallow it. Move within your lane. 1.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pay my condolences to the family. Madam Speaker, you are aware that I come from Serere. I would like to, first of all, thank you for taking responsibility to ensure that our brother was brought to the mortuary. I also thank the honourable members of Parliament; we thought that it was going to be an empty House, but I thank you for coming to pay tribute to this big man. In the 10th Parliament, I was the chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and I worked with Hon. Okabe for five years. This man lying here was a unifier; he was not a man of intrigue. As politicians, we have intrigue, but Hon. Okabe never had it. Never! (Applause) Whenever there was a problem concerning him, he would come and say, “My sister, what is the problem?” He wanted it sorted out. He was an administrator. On the 17th of December, I think we were almost all in Serere. I was with Hon. Okupa in his constituency. Hon. Opolot was in Pingire and Hon. Okabe was in Serere. He told the people not to eat the money he had given them for saving, during Christmas. He urged them to keep it for the future. He had promised to go back to his constituency to do what the President talks about: income in the family and production.He had promised to take back cassava cuttings. He had promised to take women pigs because that project started in the last Parliament. He had promised some piglets to every family. This was a man who thought of everybody else. If you had a problem, Hon. Okabe would come to you. I remember when the Rt Hon. Speaker here was contesting for the speakership, he mobilised us, as the Iteso. He said, “Hon. Asamo, Aibo ijai ijo?” In Ateso, it means, “Where are you?” [Ms Anyakun]6711THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022He asked me if I was steady like a soldier, to which I told him I was. He said, “Thank you very much” in Ateso. This was a man who would talk about –(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Switch on your microphone. MS ASAMO: Thank you. I just want to say that he loved his clan. He loved Iteso and he loved everybody. I remember when Hon. Galiwango had problems, Hon. Okabe told me, “that is my daughter.” I wondered what kind of man he was. We went home in Tororo and he sat in my sitting room and said, “My daughter, next time, bring Members to Serere because I want to host you.” Every time we were in Serere, he wanted to host Members of Parliament. He made sure to use his money without pain. The man would contribute to every function that happened in a place. If you approached him, you would find the man there. No wonder, people have come to pay tribute. Madam Speaker, may God bless you. You have taken responsibility where there was nobody. When I saw the wife dead and Hon. Okabe on one side, I said, “Who do we ask for clothes and every other thing?” The family that was coming from Serere also got into an accident in Kumi. We asked ourselves what was happening; what kisirani is this? When we heard that the mother had collapsed, I said, “I think things are getting hard.” We stood with Hon. Obote and the team from the Teso Parliamentary Group and with your guidance, Madam Speaker, we have moved. I thank you that we now see the light on the road. At the end of the day, the people in Serere are waiting and they are mourning; the gap will not be filled. Rest well, my brother; till we meet again. Eyalama!2.01MR FRED OPOLOT (NRM, Pingire County, Serere): May I, first of all, thank you, Madam Speaker, for your effective response right from when the news broke of the demise of our friend, Hon. Okabe and his wife. The people of Pingire are in mourning; the people of Serere are in mourning and the people of Mbale are in mourning. Indeed, the whole country is mourning this illustrious son of Uganda who approached life - as we all know and has already been said - with humility. Hon. Okabe’s approach to politics was one of transforming the ordinary person. As indeed already said, he supported multitudes of SACCOs in Serere County, and to be specific, he supported 160 SACCOs, of which, he launched 85 of them. In the coming year, 2023, he was actually planning to complete launching the rest with Shs 1,000,000 to each SACCO with a savings box. He also supported the girls’ brigade in his constituency with –(Member timed out.) 2.03MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I am sorry that I am a bit emotional because Hon. Okabe has been my spiritual father and one of my mentors. Madam Speaker, Papa lying there is a great loss to the people of Mbale City because most of his projects were in Mbale City. His wife was also staying in Mbale City.At this moment in time, it may even be difficult to describe the person lying before us. He was such a humble man that whenever he would find me, even in Parliament here, he would say, “Yes, daughter. How are you now?” He is one of the people that prayed for me before I came to Parliament. Indeed, he had never disowned me up to date, when he passed on. He has been a man of development, given the fact that he has a ministry called “Impact Ministries”. There is an orphanage in Mbale City where he collected all the disadvantaged children to see that they get good education. In that church, he has many people that he has taken care of. Indeed, from – (Member timed out.) 6712TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE2.06THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Ms Agnes Nandutu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of the colleagues in paying tribute to Hon. Okabe. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for taking the decision that you took to have the dear wife of Hon. Okabe buried in the same honour as our honourable member. I thank you for that. (Applause) When Hon. Okabe came to Parliament, I had been expelled from this place, and therefore, I did not have a lot of time to interact with him. However, when I joined the 11th Parliament, I found this man so friendly. One time, I had lunch with him somewhere with some Members of Parliament when he was organising his fundraising function, and he briefed me on how he worked in his constituency. He said that he had worked so hard and could not believe that people could let him down during the primaries. When he lost, he told me, he picked the courage to go to the people and mobilised and indeed, people realised what this man had done for them; they could not let him down, so, they voted him as an independent Member of Parliament. (Applause) Many have talked about him as a servant of God. He used all his abilities to serve God, through his communication and ministry. As a politician and preacher, he preached to many souls. And indeed, he fulfilled the word of God in the Bible, that faith without action is nothing - he did act, and serve the people. As I wind up, this man lying before us here has died in Christ, and we believe he is going to live with Christ. I want to implore all of you, that as we pay tribute to our honourable member, may you take this opportunity and reflect and also receive Jesus Christ as your personal saviour. (Applause) I thank you. May his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give all of you a minute each. 2.08MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues, firstly, in supporting the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family. On behalf of the people of Entebbe and the Teso community in Entebbe, accept our heartfelt condolences to the family, colleagues and to you, Madam Speaker, Papa Emorimor and the entire Teso community on the loss of this great man. I am one of the freshers in Parliament, so, I did not know much about him. However, I have appreciated all the comments, the good words and the good deeds that have been said about this great man of God. Indeed, we are celebrating his life. We want to thank God for the gift of Patrick Okabe to this nation. We want to thank God as we glorify Him for all the good things Okabe has done in this country, not only for the people of Serere and the Teso community, but also for Uganda, because indeed, the memory is big. May all the memories comfort us in the strange moment as we pray for his soul to rest in peace. We thank God and we shall always remember Patrick. Rest in peace. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Pamela, then Bugiri Woman MP.2.10MS PAMELA NASIYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is with a heavy heart that I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, the late Hon. Patrick Okabe, who perished in a fatal accident in my district, just three kilometres away from my home. Madam Speaker, I have fond memories of my brother, a fatherly figure in him, and a true servant of God. Among the many things that I 6713THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022learnt about the late was that he cherished the institution of family. He spoke passionately about his dear wife, who is also deceased now, and his children. Madam Speaker, the late Patrick Okabe was a hardworking person. I want to say without fear or favour, that he made significant contributions towards the people of Serere; I witnessed it. He invited me to a fundraising and many people have spoken about it. He has made a great contribution to the people of Serere through the different livelihood projects that have changed the people. Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Budaka, on behalf of the 317 family, and on my own behalf, my thoughts and sincere condolences go to the people of Uganda, Teso Subregion and the people of Serere District. May the souls of Hon. Okabe Patrick and his dear wife, rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Pamela. Bugiri, Edakasi. 2.13MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and condolences to you and all Ugandans. Madam Speaker, I served with Hon. Okabe on the Committee on Human Rights, where I was his chairperson. Hon. Okabe was a selfless man. He had a very busy schedule, being a bishop, a family man, a manager and a Member of Parliament. However, despite that busy schedule, he would make time to come and attend to fieldwork. We had a very hectic time, immediately after the elections. However, he would fuel his own car to run and come and meet us wherever we were, just to serve this country. It is a pity that Hon. Okabe perished in an accident like that with his dear wife. I would like to request that we move, as Parliament, in the next phase of roads that we shall construct in this country - we could resolve that for every new road - because, apparently, the roads that we have are not divided. Let us divide the roads with metals or something that they always use to separate them, such that the person who on the other side cannot cross over this way, even if they have a problem. Secondly, Madam Speaker, the country has progressed, despite our challenges; we have so many cars. However, we continue to plan and construct narrow roads equivalent to those that were constructed in the colonial times. I would like to request that going forward, for all the roads that we construct, the least number of lanes should be four. However, we can even do better than that. Hon. Okabe and your dear wife, I believe that you are with the Lord because you served Him and his people. May your souls rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for Bugiri District. Honourable minister, what the Member of Parliament is saying is that let us move away from single-carriage roads to dual ones in order to avoid the aspect of collision. And if you heard what the honourable minister said before, you notice that this accident occurred as a result of a collision. The driver of the other car just went to the side where Hon. Okabe was driving. If we have a dual carriage road, we could be able to avoid collisions of that kind. So, think about it as you come up with the next designs for roads.2.17MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I start by thanking you - I represent the Teso Parliamentary Group, as the secretary. When we heard of the loss of our Papa, you just came in handy. And I really would like to thank you for the leadership that you give this Parliament. I also add my voice to the voices of the rest of us who said, “Thank you” to this House and to 6714TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [Mr Edakasi]your leadership, for considering the burial of our Mama. We were overwhelmed and did not know what to do, but we thank you very much. I knew Hon. Okabe for a very short time, but the people in my constituency always referred me to Patrick. We have people who keep crossing Lake Kyoga from Kaberamaido to Serere and back. The women in my constituency asked me to learn from what my senior here was doing. And I am overly indebted to him. I wish I had more time with him. Anyhow, I am glad that there are some things that I have learned and I will implement them for the women in Kaberamaido District. I also bring to this House condolences from members of the Pentecostal Assemblies of God in my constituency, where I have several pastors for whom the Bishop was a leader. Even right here represented is the National Overseer of the Assemblies of God –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Edakasi. Honourable members, let us try to use very short time so that the rest can also speak. We will close this debate at 3.00 p.m. sharp because the body has to go to the east. 2.19MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also join colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen comrade, Hon. Okabe. I travelled from Ntoroko, an area that recently had ADF incursions from DRC Congo, and I want to thank you, personally. You took the time to call me and sympathised with the people of Ntoroko. In addition, I want to thank our people and the Government of Uganda, through the UPDF, for what it is doing though the situation is not yet stable. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Ntoroko, I extend my sincere condolences to you, the Deputy Speaker, the family, the Parliament of Uganda, the Teso region and Uganda at large for this great loss. I knew the late in the 10th Parliament and what I really realised about him is that he was a God-fearing person; he did not forget his God. When some people get into other jobs, they forget what they had been doing before. Because of our schedules as Members of Parliament, sometimes, we forget what we have been doing. Hon. Okabe, as a person, was still preaching and doing the work of God, which is not easy for some of us. Secondly, as Members of Parliament – to be an Independent – I am an Independent Member of Parliament and so, people say that we are orphans in this Parliament, but the fact is that we are not. We have you as our parent, but the fact that –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Sorry, you have been cut short. The one thing I can assure you of is that you are not orphans. You have a Dean of Independents who is a Speaker of Parliament. Actually, as presiding officers, we are more at a loss because the late represented Independents on the Committee on Appointments, which I co-chair with my deputy. So, we have lost. And one thing we must tell you is that we are very proud of all of you. (Applause) I did not even imagine getting 20 Members in this House. However, when I got the House full, I was humbled. (Applause) We will, forever, as presiding officers, be indebted to you. And whenever it comes to anything concerning our Members of Parliament, we will do whatever it takes to protect and preserve our Members. (Applause)2.23MR MOHAMMED KATO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I am a Muslim, but about a month ago, I met the late in the lift. He started preaching to me and offered to visit me in my constituency. He was a generous man. May God rest him in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.6715THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Amen! I wish everybody would be brief like Hon. Kato. 2.23MS JACINTA ATUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapelebyong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kapelebyong and on my own behalf, I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Serere, Teso region, this august House and the entire country at large on this loss. Papa Bishop was a mentor to some of us who are first-timers in this House. For sure, he was a humble and dedicated servant of God, who served his people diligently. He was a peacemaker wherever he stepped. He was not like some of us here who want to cause commotion wherever we go; that was not Hon. – (Interjection)  THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atuto, first finish your statement. (Laughter) Let us hear from Hon. Atuto. MS ATUTO: I am not going to mention names here, but there are Members who love seeing trouble wherever they step. That was not the case with the late Papa Okabe. He was a cheerful giver who always wished to impact the lives of everyone, irrespective of their background. For sure Papa, we shall forever miss you and your wife. May your soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. When we were starting TPG in the 10th Parliament, we inherited a TPG, which was always fighting. And the only person who would bring peace and harmony to TPG was Bishop Okabe. Bishop Okabe would never want to see anybody unhappy. He would always call you, “My daughter, what is the problem?” And he would advise you. No fights with Hon. Okabe. There was always peace of mind with Hon. Okabe. “Live a free life and move within your lane,” that is one thing I learnt from Hon. Okabe. 2.26MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey heartfelt condolences from the people Buhweju.I have come to realise that during times like these, reality sets in. Even those who have a sense of entitlement realise that we are all perishable. You hear people speak and realise that yes, death brings us closer to the truth that we do not know who the next candidate will be. I do not know why we are always very proud; we speak like we are on top of mountains, we speak like we are in charge of all situations yet it does not take even a second to leave - (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for those who are proud, God said, forgive them for they do not know what they are doing. Indeed, as Parliament, we have forgiven them.2.28MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I know people will call me Nnaba, but I am also Ssaba. Madam Speaker, my condolences to the family and to you. I know you are going through a lot; this is a very difficult time for you because there has been a lot of confusion. I pray that God keeps you strong and takes you through this process.I served with Bishop Okabe in the 10th Parliament on the Human Rights Committee. When I introduced myself as a wife in Teso, he really guided me and we would always pray together.Finally, Madam Speaker, if Hon. Okabe was here and it was somebody else, I would imagine – Madam Speaker, this is just a scripture that I want to share. I would imagine the scripture that he would give us would be in Luke 23:28 that says, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not 6716TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE [Ms Akello]weep for me, but weep for yourselves and your children.” Let us weep for ourselves, he has done his part. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Lucy.2.29MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand for the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria (UPFM) where the late was the founder. We appreciate him for the mentorship that he gave to the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria and we pray that his mentorship will make the forum stand.Madam Speaker, thank you for being there -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members , some order.MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Thank you for being there for all of us. Madam Speaker, we are happy about how you treat us and help us sort out our problems in this Parliament. (Applause) May the good Lord continue giving you that heart. Because of time, I want to give information to this House that recently, the late Hon. Patrick Okabe was elected by global parliamentarians to head the Fossil Fuel Free Future and he was supposed to continue as – (Member timed out.) Allow me just a second - the focal point person for East and South Africa. We are aware that fossil fuels are the leading cause of climate change crisis globally. His role was going to be to network with global leaders and discuss a possible shift from fossil fuels to renewable energy.Before he implements what he was supposed to do as a key coordinator of eastern and southern Africa, he has gone. May his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Bumali, talk before you go out.2.31MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are referring to Hon. Okabe as a former Member of Parliament, but he did not lose an election and court has not nullified his election. However, he is a former Member of Parliament. This is something for us to learn.Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament, including ministers, change their style of walking because they are Members of Parliament or because they are ministers. They act as if they eat on the same plate with God, but the time is going to come when all of us will go back to the Almighty. We must reflect and act in a godly way because that is going to help us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.2.32MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kigulu South where our brother had established a church in Nakalama subcounty under Impact Ministries, we convey our condolences. My people are mourning and as we talk, they are already in Mbale waiting for the remains. Madam Speaker, the simplicity of the late Hon. Okabe was manifested when we were paying tribute and later burying the late Papa Emorimor in Serere. I saw a campaign poster for the late reading, “servant leader” on a number of buildings. When we went for the burial, this man left seats for Members of Parliament who had gone to bury. He kept carrying chairs to ensure that Members are – (Member timed out.)Madam Speaker, I want to thank God for the gift of life that he gave to him and for the wonderful service he extended to this country. We will miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.6717THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 20222.34MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me, on behalf of the people of Buliisa and Bunyoro subregion and on my own behalf, to convey condolences to you, Madam Speaker, to the President of this country, the Parliament of Uganda, Papa Emorimor, the people of Teso subregion, to the family, to all of us, colleagues and above all, to the Christians worldwide.Our colleague and friend, Hon. Okabe, with whom we were in the 10th Parliament on the Committee for Gender, Labour and Social Development was such a great person and full of passion. Together with his wife, they invited us to their home, as a committee, and we dined with them. We saw the love that was between the two of them and a love for humanity. Allow me say this, Madam Speaker. In his own words, this year in October, the bishop said, “We may not, even in our own time, see the Mbale we want to see, but our children and grandchildren will see it and live in this place.” That was the prophecy that the bishop made. May you leave in peace and may you be able to receive the crown from the Almighty God.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.2.35MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, my colleagues and the family of my controller - I used to call him the presiding Bishop Okabe.Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the way you handled the process until when my mentor is lying here. My words are few. Rev. Okabe has been my political mentor and controller because sometimes I run fast and we have been discussing -THE SPEAKER: Actually because of mental health, he moves faster than anybody else - (Laughter). Hon. Okabe has been the controller. MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, since I was born at the border, sometimes we run fast and he has been my controller. My presiding bishop and honourable member has been a mentor and we discussed political issues. The last political issue we discussed was about how President Yoweri Museveni gave a very good submission in the US-African Summit while the Opposition leader of NUP went for photo shows in the US. We also discussed an issue on how in the future, the National Resistance Movement can give the Independents priority. There should be free and clear elections in our party. My bishop, rest in peace. I know you are at the right hand of the Father. Tell him we are in Uganda, but the economic situation is not okay; so that things can be good in Uganda. Thank you. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the controller is gone, so we should be able to control ourselves. Leader of Government Business, there is an issue he is raising about Independents. They have approached my office on the need for an amendment of the Administration of Parliament Act. They also need to be included. They are proposing that one parliamentary commissioner should come from the Independents, and that they should be allowed to chair committees; so, please, take it up. Independents are like any other person. (Applause) You have been helping to give, but not their right. There is a right that, “This is our committee,” just like the Opposition have. Being the dean, I will always advocate for that.2.38MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH  (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for advocating for the Independents. I am one of them. I bring condolences from the people of Aruu County about the demise of a Member of your House. We condole with the people of Serere County. As a growing legislator, the late always taught us one of the pivotal issues: to speak with conduct and decorum. We have been faced with other legislators who come and mentor us into utmost aggressive legislation, but the late, who is lying in front 6718TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABEof us, has shown that one can speak with discipline and decorum and still serve in this genuine and able Parliament. The wife should not have passed on; so, I want to send a plea to the Ministry of Health. Why can’t we have paramedics in the ambulances that transport casualties from points of accidents to hospitals? These are Class A ambulances. In fact, as they transport our patients, they actually aid our casualties to die along the way. Other than the driver cruising at a terrible speed, the patient has no one attending to him or her. Thank you. May the late rest in eternal peace.  2.40MR MARTIN OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. It is indeed a devastating moment for this Parliament. I join the rest of my colleagues in condoling with the family, the people of Teso and Uganda.On 11 August, I received a message from someone whose contact I did not know before. That was the time I was planning to have a thanksgiving event in Gulu. When the message came, I read and it said, “My brother, I am not able to join you. I would love to be with you and speak to you.” He sent a contribution of Shs 1,000,000. I picked interest and called back because I wondered who sent that message. Later on, he introduced himself as Hon. Patrick Okabe. That, to me, was very touching because I had never interacted with him. I did not know him much. Later on he said, “My brother, I have been following you and when you return to Kampala, I will have further discussions with you. There are things we need to talk about”. When I returned, I met him. I saw a gentleman, a father and leader. Leadership is not about the positions we carry, the pomp or how powerful we can be. It is about responsibility. That is exactly what I saw in the Hon. Patrick Okabe. It is unfortunate that today he is lying before us. May the good Lord receive him and give him life in eternity. Thank you. 2.42MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen Member of Parliament. No words can express the grievances we feel towards the loss of our honourable member, but I know it is God who gives and takes. We cannot question Him. Hon. Patrick Okabe will always be remembered for the great contributions he has made towards development and the wisdom he has instilled in us, the young people. In the West Nile region, one time, he attended a meeting and encouraged us to always use the regional caucuses for national unity – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Patrick Okabe was about unity. 2.44MR NATHAN BYANYIMA  (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join others to condole with everybody here. I can tell you some of us are old men, but he was a real Muteso. When I was born, Teso was a different region. I think, let us emulate him. Teso was a region for bright people. All permanent secretaries in this country came from Teso, but of late, I am worried. (Laughter)Members, I want to appeal to you - I had never met this gentleman here. I met him when I had gone to bury the Emorimor. I think I was the only Munyankore there. He welcomed and thanked me for a simple thing: he said, “In Parliament, you told people to treat other people the way you want to be treated.” That was the gentleman.I would like to say that our Christmas is no more. It is spoiled. There is nothing we can do, but to pray for him and his family. Let us go and bury him. That is what I plead for. (Applause)[Mr Komakech]6719THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022I condole with you, Madam Speaker, for what you have done for us. Be there for us and we shall always pray for you. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is a very humble request to the Members. Let us go and send off our colleague. That is the only love we can show to the family and to the Parliament of Uganda. Teso will always remain Teso; the wise come from there. (Applause)2.46MR SIMON PETER OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The book of Matthew 25:31, talks of when the Lord Himself comes and gathers all nations together. He divides some to the left and some to the right. For those to his right, he says, “Welcome to the kingdom of your father that has been set for you from time immemorial. When I was hungry, you gave me food; when I was sick, you visited me; when I was naked, you gave me clothes.” I have seen this in the work of the late Hon. Patrick Okabe; he did exactly that. No wonder the day before he died, some two gentlemen came to me; they were both security guards. One was praising him and the other said that he has not done much, but I said that according to the praise of one of the gentlemen, then Hon. Patrick Okabe has done a great job. Little did I know that in less than 12 hours later, he would pass on. The gentleman had given me a number to give to him so that he would call him. Unfortunately, the Lord has taken him –(Member timed out.)2.47MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bunya County South in Mayuge District, and on behalf of the Busoga Parliamentary Caucus, I bring condolences to the family. A lot has been said concerning our honourable colleague lying before us here. His generosity cannot be overemphasised. I remember one time, when we went to support Hon. Moses Magogo in his constituency, we had organised this as the Busoga Parliamentary Caucus, but shortly, I saw him arrive and he gave us a lot of money to support our colleague in his constituency. May he rest in peace.2.49MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on behalf of the people of Kashari North and on behalf of the Ankole Parliamentary Group, which I chair, to pay tribute to you, Madam Speaker, and the Teso Parliamentary Group and to the family of the late Patrick Okabe and his dear wife – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chemutai, you are going to speak for Sebei. MR BARARINGAYA: A lot has been said about the late Patrick Okabe and I cannot add anything. May his soul and the soul of his dear wife rest in eternal peace. 2.49MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues, on behalf of the people of Bukwo District and Sebei Subregion and on my own behalf, to condole with the family on the loss of a great servant of God. Hon. Okabe, like everyone has said, was a peaceful man. Every time he met me, he would ask me, “Are you standing in the gap?” He had always told me that together with him, we would pray for Parliament and this country. In 2018, I had a function in my constituency and he decided to bring me the entire public address system because it was a church function. He told me that was his contribution. Every other time, he encouraged all of us to keep praying for our families, for our nation and our Parliament. That is the man lying there before us. I stand to pray for the family and the children. May his soul, together with that of his wife, rest in peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.6720TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE[The Deputy Speaker]2.51MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ora County, the people of West Nile and the West Nile Parliamentary Caucus, which I chair, I want to confirm that it is true that we have lost a friendly man; an easy and very simple man despite all the advantages he had over others. We pray that God comforts the family. On behalf of the Parliamentarians for a Fossil Fuel Free Future - when he was elected in Egypt, he informed me immediately and said that we had to meet. We discussed and promised to meet again in January, but it is now not possible. On behalf of that group, I would like to pass our sincere condolences to the family and the people of Uganda; that we have lost a great man, but very simple, very approachable, and also easy to work with. May your soul and that of your wife rest in eternal peace.2.52MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Karamoja and the Ik people, I send my condolences. Matthew 24:36 says, “However, no one knows the day or the hour these things will happen, not even the angels in heaven or the Son himself, except the father.” Therefore, we should be prepared all the time. Romans 8:31-39 says that indeed, nothing in all creation will ever be able to separate us from the love of God. That is Hon. Patrick with his wife. Hon. Patrick Okabe put a smile on our faces while he was with us. He was very interactive and gave hope to extremely vulnerable persons. Madam Speaker, one time, I went to Garden City and got a seven-year-old child who was very sick. I asked Hon. Patrick Okabe to help me raise some money for this child, to which he accepted. We generated a list and did it for a sick young child. We will live to remember him and we shall miss him dearly. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 2.53MS JOAN ACOM (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the record, I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group. A lot has been said about our dear Papa. To me and to the rest of the members here, I believe Hon. Okabe was a mentor. The first person who called me after I won the elections was Hon. Okabe. He said, “Now that you are a Member of Parliament and you are a new person, this is what I want you to do...” Every quarter, the gentleman lying before us, had been tracking me on whether I am following what we had agreed upon. This leaves us with pain. You have gone when we needed you the most. We love you, but God loved you more. This leaves me with a prayer. Looking at the way our brother and his wife have been victims of a road accident, and the many buses that have been involved in road accidents, killing people, could we come up with a plan that many of these big trucks and buses have a limited time to move on the road? Many other countries have prohibited big trucks and big buses from moving beyond 9.00 p.m. and they have a starting time in the morning. This will help us limit some of the sleepy drivers who lose their way. We shall also remember him for his humility; a father who loved each and every one. About two weeks ago, I asked him how I could catch the eye of the Speaker, whenever I am in the House. I am glad today, I have caught the eye of the Speaker with his advice, as a father. Thank you. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.56MS STELLA APOLOT (FDC, Woman Representative Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okabe was a Bishop and I benefited from his pastoral services. He 6721THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022was development oriented. I went to Serere to benchmark, because we have the same programmes in Ngora. Lastly, Madam Speaker, the road carnage in this country is devastating families and communities just because of the bad narrow roads, which the LOP has alluded to. I think our role and purpose, as a Parliament, is to direct law. Can we put some attention to the Ministry of Works so that our roads can be safe for us? I beg to submit.2.57MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join all the previous speakers and the Prime Minister to support the motion, as we pay tribute to the late Hon. Okabe. The community of Serere based in Kapelebyong, who are really a big number, are joining us in mourning and they will be joining us in Serere. I wish to thank Hon. Okabe - who has left us - for setting an amazing legacy of being a politician, accomplished religious leader - a Bishop at that - and a founder of a ministry, an academician at the level of a PhD, social entrepreneur - a number of institutions are running, a man of the people and loved by his people. I am challenged to follow him. I pray that God rests his soul in peace. Thank you.2.58MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the sake of the people in the gallery who may not know me, I am Mugole Stephen, Member of Parliament Kabweri, in Bugwere, where the late’s life rested. This is a revelation. In 2012, two bishops got a revelation, one of them was Bishop Okabe, and the other was the late Bishop Chrisestome Weyabire , the first cultural leader of Bugwere. These two Bishops were all based in Mbale. They got the revelation that one was to cause cultural sanity and the other, political sanity. They had many issues with their wives because their wives refused whoever wanted to go; but they were determined. Bishop Okabe chose to go into politics, not as a politician, but to cause sanity in the political arena. Just like the late Weyabire - I am surprised that all of them have gone so soon. The late Weyabire went during the COVID-19 pandemic and under an unprecedented way. I would like to conclude –(Member timed out.) MR MUGOLE: Let me conclude with this one, it is very important. The prayers that Bishop Okabe made are part of why one of the leaders who is also anointed, was appointed to the third most important position in this country – they also come from Teso. So, we hail Bishop Okabe and we thank him for the legacy that he has left.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ocan, then Yusuf. 3.00MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Madam Speaker and the bereaved family, Parliament is in tears - we are really in tears because most of the time, we are on the road. We mourn our fallen colleague. Honourable members, it is hard. However, my prayer is to have discipline on the roads. Madam Speaker, it would help if enforcement officers did community policing. I am very sure that the person who knocked our colleague with his dear wife, was sleeping. Therefore, even if his driver was disciplined, he could not escape –(Member timed out.)   3.01MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the people of Butaleja, we shall miss and remember Bishop Okabe, for having established Impact Ministries in my constituency of Bunyole East, in Bugadunya Village. What is very interesting is that he kept on preaching that we should never be religious 6722TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABEbigots or zealots. He established a church where there was also a mosque; so, there was some bit of conflict . I reported to him what was happening.  He told me to wait and that he was going to do something to settle that matter. One Sunday, he came to the church carrying 20 bags of cement. The Christians thought he had brought it to them, but after the prayers, he called the Sheikh and gave him the 20 bags of cement. That was the end of the conflict because the Christians did not complain. Up to now, there is co-existence. If there is any issue in Impact Ministries, the Muslims will be there, if there is any issue in the mosque, the Christians will be there. Therefore, he brought peace in our area and we thank him for that. He even employed most of our children on Impact – (Member timed out.) 3.03MR HANNINGTON WAKAYIMA (NUP, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send my sincere condolences to you, the family, and all the Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about the Bishop, but my focus is on the nature of our roads. When you move on our roads, you notice that all road signage have disappeared. All rail guards that were put in the black spots have been knocked down, and UNRA has not replaced them; that is also a problem. Many other stuff on the roads have not been catered for by UNRA. At this particular time, we need to think of what we can do to see that we improve on road safety, as we say farewell to Bishop Patrick. Thank you.3.05MR KARIM MASABA (Independent, Industrial Division Mbale City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bugisu, I want to send my condolences to the family, to you, Madam Speaker, and to the entire country. Madam Speaker, as the people of Bugisu, we are at a great loss. We have been partly or partially the biggest beneficiaries of Bishop Okabe’s life through his ministry, foundation, and he has done a lot for the people of Bugisu. It is a sad day for us as the Bagisu. I believe I was one of the first people to arrive at the scene when I got the call because the bishop was my neighbour; our homes are about 400 metres apart. So, I was one of the first people to arrive at the scene, and I then followed up to the mortuary. Then the wife also passed on while we were still at the mortuary and so, her body was also brought. I would like, in a special way, to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for what you did because while I was at the mortuary and did not know what was to happen next, I saw some gentlemen from A-Plus Funeral Services coming. They were rushing saying, “The Speaker has been calling us.” (Applause) They said: “The Rt Hon. Speaker has called us and she wants us to get done with the preparation and transfer the body to the City Mortuary in [Kampala].” So, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause) The number of people that turned up in those two hours was amazing. I could not believe that hundreds of people could gather within such a short time. Very many people turned up and this showed the love that the people of Bugisu, together with the people of Uganda, had for the late Bishop Okabe. I left Mbale today morning at six o’clock and we actually have two vigils. One at his home in half London and another at his church. So, there are two places where people are converging, but the number of people that is coming is very huge and all this signifies the love these people had for Bishop Okabe. I know that there is really nothing much I can do, but as a believer, all I can do is to pray for the bishop. I pray that the good Lord blesses the works of the bishop and gives him the best out of it, and for Mama’ s soul to be forgiven. May their souls rest in eternal peace. (Applause)[Mr Mutembuli]6723THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 3.08MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I want to join the rest in condoling with the late Hon. Okabe’s family. On Friday, the late and I happened to visit the same nerve doctor in Ntinda - Dr Namara. I met Hon. Okabe at about 2 o’clock. He had a problem with his nerves.Hon. Okabe told me: “Solomon, when I felt this pain, I thought that I had a heart problem. I didn’t know that it was actually a muscle. Solomon, I really fear to die. I had to run and admit myself at the International Hospital Kampala.”They had to do an ECG for the heart to check if his heart had anything and he told me that they found his heart is very – THE SPEAKER: It is called ECG.MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are very knowledgeable in law and even in medicine. He told me this: “My heart is okay. Solomon, I am not going to die. Let these people treat me and I will be okay.”When we were leaving, Hon. Okabe told me, “I am happy, I am not going to die.” And this reminds me of the gospel according to John 11 when Jesus saw Lazarus and the mourners around the home of Lazarus, and Jesus wept.The late Hon. Okabe was afraid to die, but death from another angle that he did not expect – the issue of the heart was okay. The issue of the muscles was sorted by the doctor, but we didn’t know that death was coming from another direction. I pray and I know we all pray that the soul of Hon. Okabe and that of his departed wife rest in eternal peace. For God and My Country.3.10MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of my colleagues to condole with the family. Meanwhile I also want to make some small corrections. Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido District not Kalaki. THE SPEAKER: I am sorry, Hon. Jane Awich.MS AWICH: I want to join the rest of my colleagues to condole with the late’s family. To me, the late was like a father, brother and a colleague. I am a first-timer in Parliament. So, I always take a lot of my time to consult with the people who have been here longer. I keep asking, “How have you managed?” Because some people have been here for four terms, one wonders how they have been managing. This is so because politics has a lot of pressure that comes with it. But the late – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Give Hon. Awich one minute.MS AWICH: Thank you. The late would always counsel me. He kept telling me, “Do this and that.” I also want to thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker - actually, I saw the news about the late’s death at around midday because I took long to check my phone. However, I felt we were safe because I know you, Madam Speaker; you do not take such things for granted. Thank you for giving us comfort, for always standing in for us and for loving us, as Members of Parliament. I pray that God rests his soul in peace.3.12MS FLORA NATUMANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kikuube): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. It is so unfortunate that we have lost such a man at this time. Many times people think that politics is a dirty game, but he was one of the people who was changing people’s mind-sets by telling them or letting them know that politics is not a bad game. It is only made dirty by poor players. It is very unfortunate that we have lost you. Rest in peace, my brother.6724TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE3.13MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was with Hon. Okabe in my second term of Parliament. It is so sad that he has gone at such a time. However, knowing that he has been a man of God and was caught up by chariots just like Elijah did, is comforting. Hon. Okabe has been a peacemaker. As Parliament, we are really crying. He was that person who would come in whenever we went bullying each other by sending those ‘friendly fires’. He would come in like a father and ceases the fires. We are going to miss you, honourable, and the people of Sironko that you employed at Impact Ministries in Mbale are mourning your departure. May God receive you as he received Elijah. Rest in peace! Thank you, Madam Speaker. 3.14MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Butaleja and on my own behalf, I wish to convey condolences to the family of our fallen colleague, Hon. Patrick Okabe.I had the opportunity to work with him in the Public Accounts Committee (Central) and he was a man of his word and this was manifested through his actions. We are going to miss him greatly because his success was attributed to development. He was the face behind Faith FM in Mbale and he happened to employ some people from Butaleja. He worked a great deal in the community by providing community services to farmers. One time he offered a tractor to a farmer’s group in my constituency.Madam Speaker, the spot at which he died is the very spot where my coordinator also lost his life this year. He was on a boda boda and a truck rammed into him. I support the contribution by my colleagues here that the Ministry of Works and Transport should take interest in that road. The design was not properly done and it is a bit slippery. Hon. Patrick and his dear wife will be greatly missed. May the Lord continue to comfort the family and may your souls rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MR SAM OTUKOL (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Pallisa County and Pallisa District, I send my condolences to the family of the late Hon. Okabe. For the little time I knew Bishop Okabe, he was a great mobiliser. He mobilised for you and he mobilised for us regarding the unity of Teso and we got united. I now want to request honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament, to live with our people in a simple way. When we become Members of Parliament, we are still the same people created by God. Know your bosses, know that this is the Speaker and I am a minister or a Member of Parliament, and we shall move in peace. Lighting fires on TVs and being seen is not very important. Let us live with humility. May his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.3.19MR PATRICK AEKU (NRM, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I will admire the late Bishop for one thing; how he managed to balance politics and religion. He was a revolutionary in the church and a revolutionary politically. For me, that was the one thing I loved about him. For all the good things he did, today is a sad moment and we will miss him so much. We will keep his memory and his legacy and ensure that we always remember Bishop for all the good things he has done for Teso. Madam Speaker, as TPG and as Teso, we have lost somebody who is almost irreplaceable by the fact - ( Member timed out.)3.17MR DERRICK ORONE (NRM, Gogonyo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was one of the people who received the 6725THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022information and I called you and you acted immediately. I even had to post in the groups yet the first person who got the information was afraid to post.One thing I want to thank Papa Bishop for is, when I went for a by-election, he was one of the people who sent me Shs 5 million. I want to thank him for the good heart. Papa also inspired me to join politics as well as to open a radio station in Pallisa. Papa, rest in peace. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.3.19MR RICHARD OSEKU ORIEBO (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences to you and colleagues, but most especially to the family who have lost their dear Papa. My tribute to my friend and colleague, Hon. Bishop Okabe, proceeds from Matthew 22:36-40 about the greatest commandment and that is the love of God and neighbour. Hon. Okabe loved his God, but most especially, he loved his people and served them. All his developmental initiatives were for the love of the people. I want to tell you that he organised Serere. I never missed any function in Serere and whenever I went there, Hon. Okabe was carried by women when he came out of the car, up to his seat. That is a demonstration of how much they appreciated the work he did for them. Hon. Okabe helped TPG – (Member timed out.)He led us to South Korea -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okabe led you to South Korea? MR OSEKU: Yes, Madam Speaker. We have a Parish Development Model, but Hon. Okabe had already started the Village Development Model in conjunction with the Korean Government. Hon. Okabe led us to the UK in development initiatives for the development of the Iteso cultural reunion and we were able to attract the Iteso in the UK to come and support the project, especially in terms of health for the people of Teso, health camps and what have you. There is a lot to say, but we cannot say it all. We can only say, thank you God. May bishop and Toto rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is the motion that has been most spoken to. We have almost 70 Members who have spoken. Kindly, you will bear with me -3.20MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker-THE SPEAKER: The body has to leave for Mbale now because there is a team waiting for the body in Mbale.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences to the family. I am speaking on behalf of the people of Tororo. It is said that on Sunday, while preaching, he focused his sermons on Galatians 2:20 and he spoke for a very short time. His message was, I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I now live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for me. His sermon was just as short as that.I want to end by saying, we thank the NRM Government for constructing tarmac roads in this country, but we need now to focus on the road designs to ensure that the roads - because of indiscipline of the drivers, we should have clear demarcations for the four lanes in this country - no longer two, but four because as we can see, the roads are now a death trap. People died at the same time on Masaka road, people died on Gulu road and more people are dying on other roads.Rest in peace, Hon. Okabe. May I request that we focus on road safety as we talk about malaria and other diseases in this country. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Dual road carriage is the emphasis.6726TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABE3.22MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking God for having given us our dear brother who has departed from us, the late Hon. Dr Okabe. I want to condole with the family, with you, Madam Speaker, and with Ugandans. The people of Agago and Acholi at large have lost someone who has been witnessing, one who has been worshipping God, one who has been giving to the needy. The Bible tells us in the Book of John 5:24, “Truly, he who has heard the word of God and believes in Christ has received everlasting life and he will not be condemned, but will pass from death to life.” Madam Speaker, allow me to make one prayer. There is one thing that we need to work upon besides issues about roads and that is truck drivers. When driving on the road in the night, they do not dim their lights but always beam them. When you try to flash them to dim their lights, they do not. Above all, they know how to identify small cars. I think the ministry concerned should give some lessons and a warning to truck drivers. We –(Member timed out.)3.25THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr James Magode Ikuya): Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: Speak to the microphone.MR IKUYA: It is normally said that death takes place by surprise. It cannot be otherwise because if it were, for me, I would certainly flee from it. It is such a tragic thing that it must always surprise us. When death affects very many people, then it becomes more than a death, but a disaster – THE SPEAKER: Switch on.MR IKUYA: I think this gadget has not identified me yet. I must confess to you, Madam Speaker, that I have not had enough time to do Parliamentary work or to sit with many honourable members here. Indeed, I could not have associated even with the late except once when we met on the Emorimor occasion, and conspired to do a few things together, which we have not done because death interceded. I am also hoping that since we are dealing with a tragedy - both sides of the House are indicating the positive attributes of the late, which they all agree on. Since we have such an agreed position, I do not know why we still have sides in this House. We could begin cementing that so we begin having one common feature in our future dealings together. That is how we can remember Hon. Okabe. Otherwise, we are just saying, “This man was good,” then tomorrow, we do the same dirty things that we have been engaged in when we all agree that he has been such a good example. I call upon us to learn the good examples from him, emulate and carry on his legacy.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We are in a multiparty dispensation; so, we will respect it and move with it. 3.28MR FREDRICK ANGURA  (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo and the Iteso Cultural Union (ICU) in general since I represent it in Tororo Parliamentary Group, I want to thank all Members for the support they have given to us. What Hon. Okabe has done speaks for itself. They say, Res Ipsa Loquitur. Indeed, even the ICU Council is now preparing to receive him and many other people are lining up because of the good works that Hon. Okabe did.As the TPG in the 10th Parliament, Hon. Okabe started the saving model. By the time we closed for primaries, he invited all of us to his office and gave us our savings, which were huge. It supported us in our primaries. No wonder, many of us were able to come back. 6727THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022Those are the good deeds of Hon. Okabe. We shall miss you dearly –(Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have a motion? Okay, let us have Hon. Elijah first, then you can move the motion.3.29MR ELIJAH OKUPA  (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you. Could you, Madam Speaker, give me additional minutes because I have to give direction to the burial place? Madam Speaker, Serere, Teso, Parliament and the country are mourning. It is a great loss, which will be very difficult to forget. On the 15th of December was the last time I was with Hon. Okabe in this Parliament. We were in the lobby. Hon. Okabe told me, “My brother, I have got a facility somewhere and deposited my land title in Mbale.” I asked myself why he trusted me with that information. I just said, “I have noted.” On Monday morning at about 7.15 a.m. Hon. Naigaga Mariam calls me and says, “Sorry for the loss of your brother.” And I was in Arusha. I was shocked. I reflected and said, “Is this the reason my colleague was giving me this information?” I bring that information to honourable colleagues and members of the family such that when all this is done, we are able to see how to handle that situation.Madam Speaker, some accidents – on the 16th, we planned to go to Serere. Hon. Opolot went to Mpingire and I went to Kasilo. When we arrived at Mukula, my driver asked us to branch to a service station. As we drove in, the driver just rushed to the service bay. I asked why and he said to me, “This car is not stable. I don’t understand why.”When he checked the car, three bolts were off. We were only on one. I want to ask colleagues to take note of their transportation. I do not know who could have tampered with the car. We do not know what would have happened to us if it were not for branching to a petrol station. Therefore, as we travel, let us be cautious of our surroundings. You never know what can happen.Madam Speaker, we bring condolences to the family as the people of Kasilo, which is the immediate neighbour, because I pass through his constituency to Kasilo.I have known Hon. Okabe – we grew up in the Pentecostal church - I knew him in the early 1990s when he was at the Bible College where Rev. Emiau was the head. He was with my brother, who is also a bishop in the Pentecostal church. We have grown up in that. I want to thank the Pentecostal church for giving us that foundation. All the good attributes you see here have all come from the church, like you have heard from colleagues. We want to thank the Pentecostal Assemblies of God for that upbringing. Madam Speaker, our brother died in that accident, but there is something that is not coming out. I expected the Minister of Works and Transport or the Minister of Internal Affairs to have given us a full report about the accident. I am told by the family, because Hon. Okabe had also told me, that he would be flying out like he has always done. Every end of year, he goes to Mbale and organises a party for the children and the orphans. Thereafter, he leaves to join his family either in the US or Australia. This time, he was headed to be with the girls in the US and then connect to Australia to be with the sons. He was prepared, that is why he was moving with his wife. There was property in that car, including cash. No one is talking about it. As one travels, they carry some dollars and things. I am told it was something more than Shs 70 million. What happened? Why is the police not giving us a report about that?Also, like Madam Speaker said, that this driver went head on to him; was it foul play? The family is asking for an investigation. The police and Government must tell us what happened because the driver took off. Where is he? This is a non-Ugandan because 6728TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PATRICK OKABEit is a Kenyan registration number. He cannot disappear unless he jumped onto a boda boda and boarded from somewhere, but he would have been got. Madam Speaker, the prayer from the family to the Government is that we need to do a thorough investigation to establish whether there was no foul play in this matter. We have talked about the issues on the road. I think we have the laws, but the problem, in most cases, is enforcement of these laws. Most of you that go through that road know that at that point, it is a very good road. By the way, it even has humps in Naboa. How did this happen? That is why the family is asking for that. Honourable colleagues, we thank you for turning up in good numbers. I add my voice to what the Speaker has stated here; we thank you.Madam Speaker, may the good Lord that has kept us continue to keep you. Thank you for being there for us. My mother died in your hands when I was out of this country. There are many others that you have shown that heart. May God continue to guide and protect you. It has become a habit for you to do these good things. We can only pray to God that he keeps you strong and alive, as we continue this political journey in this country to steer this country. You are welcome to Serere for the burial. I want to give directions. You can access Serere in a number of ways; by water, air or the main route to Soroti Flying School and just drive 17 miles. You will be in Ocaapa. It is not very far from Ocaapa Town Council in Serere. If you are driving, from Kumi you go to Ngora and cross to Serere. It is about 45 kilometres. However, his place is less than 40 kilometres away. The place is not very far from the road from Ocaapa. You can go up to Soroti or if you are coming from Lira - because it is all tarmac all the way to Soroti. Then you come from Soroti to Ocaapa, which is a good murram road. You can also go from Soroti to Serere and then to Ocaapa; you will not get lost. If you are from Kamuli, it is much shorter, if you do not fear water. Within only 20 minutes, you could be on the side of Pingire and you are in Serere or from Bukungwe in Kamuli to Kagwara and then to Serere. However, we advise you to come from Kumi, Ngora on that murram road or when from Soroti to Serere, you will be able to find us there. Madam Speaker, we would like, once again, to thank you. To the family, to our father, thank you for the good mentorship you gave us in the church. To the children, I know one son is arriving. He has just landed. We are expecting the daughters, but we do not know whether they will be able to make it. We thank Papa and Toto. We shall keep you in our prayers, but we remain your children, to try to comfort you. Omoding and Okabe, who are here and the whole family - if the family finds it befitting to have a replacement from the family, we are available to be deployed. (Applause) If the family finds it fit that the replacement must come from the family, I think we should be able to support. I will be leaving that with the family to do that. Finally, Psalm 73:26 is a verse I want to leave with the family and all of us. It says: “My flesh and my heart may fail, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.” May God bless you! May the soul of our brother, Hon. Patrick Okabe, and Toto, rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Prime Minister, do you want to say something? Do you have a motion? 3.40MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also associate myself with all that has been said here, being that I am part of the [Mr Okupa]6729THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 23 DECEMBER 2022Committee on Local Government, of which he was a member. We have really given the motion time. We have other members of the community of Mbale and then later on those of Serere, who are waiting for this very body and still the country has to mourn.I am rising under Rule 59 of our Rules of Procedure to request this House that the House closes debate on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Patrick Okabe, and later on the body is received by other communities. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Aber, Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Wilson, Hon. Nyendwoha, Hon. Iddi, Hon. Derrick, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Minister for ICT and everybody. Thank you very much. I now put the question that this House resolves to pay tribute to the late Hon. Patrick Okabe, former Member of Parliament of Serere County, Serere District.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Clerk, please extract the resolution of this House and pass it on to the family. We, once more, thank you. Honourable Minister of Teso Affairs, would you like to guide us? When is the burial? Honourable members, the buses are available. Even if the whole House wants to go, the buses are available to take people.3.42THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Mr Kenneth Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The body will leave Kampala today and will spend the night in Mbale. Then, tomorrow, there will be prayers at Impact Ministries in Mbale up to 11.00 a.m., when the body will leave. Depending on availability of time, it will either leave directly for Serere or it will leave via Soroti where the Iteso Cultural Union wants to have one hour with the body. Then, it goes to Serere, where there will be a council sitting to pay tribute to our fallen comrade. On Saturday, service will begin at 10.00 a.m. with viewing of the body and later on in the afternoon, the interment of the remains of our brother. That will be on Saturday, 24 December 2022 in Serere. Like Hon. Elijah Okupa has guided you - I do not know why Hon. Elijah did not talk about the road from Mukongoro because I use that all the time. It is also a shortcut. After Oladot, which is the swamp via Pallisa - you cross Oladot Swamp then the next town is Mukongoro. Right from Mukongoro, you drive to the left and that road will take you straight to Ngora and then to Serere. Actually, it is the most direct access to Ocaapa from Kampala. Therefore, we welcome you all to Serere on Saturday. The programme begins at 10.00 a.m. and hopefully by 4.00 p.m., we will be done. Thank you very much. The East African Community Anthem.The National Anthem.Exit of the body of the late Hon. Patrick Okabe.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for today’s Special Sitting. This brings us to the end. I adjourn the House until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. to receive the National Budget Framework Paper.(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 23 December 2022 at 10.00 a.m.) 