

Thursday, 20 December 2018

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As you are aware, this is the last sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament. We had envisaged that we would handle seven Bills on the parliamentary calendar but so far, we have managed to consider eleven. Therefore, I think we have done a good job. Thank you, honourable members. (Applause)

I hope that the Third Meeting of the Second Session, which starts after Christmas, will witness greater efficiency and effectiveness. I call upon all Members to continue working with diligence so that we are able to deliver on our mandate.

Honourable members, on the issue of standing committees, Rule 155 (1) provides that the tenure of office shall be two and a half years. Members were designated on 17 July 2016. Therefore, according to those rules, the term of the members on standing committees expires on 16 January 2019. I have received some proposals, which are already in hand but let the chief whips crosscheck that everybody is accounted for and we shall handle them as soon as we return from the recess.

In relation to the standing committees, I have again written to the Leader of the Opposition to support Parliament work by postponing the changes on the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). They are currently examining the Auditor-General’s special audit on the defunct commercial banks in Uganda. I am writing to the Leader of the Opposition to agree that we change those committees on 20 February 2019 to give them time to close that matter because the investigation has now reached critical stage. Changing the leadership now may jeopardise effective conclusion of this inquiry.

The Parliamentary SACCO will be closed for Christmas holidays from 23 December 2018 to 01 January 2019. They will re-open on 02 January 2019. Therefore, honourable members, if you intend to transact, go there tomorrow –(Laughter)– because you will not have access until 02 January 2019. The SACCO management would like to thank you all for the support and patronage rendered to them and they wish you all a merry Christmas.

The Third Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament will commence on 08 January 2019. As you know, our liberty was taken away by the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), which requires us to do some work on the National Budget Framework Paper during that time. Maybe, we are going to adjust the calendar later to create some time but 8th January is the day we will re-open.

I will be amending the Order Paper to permit a report from the Committee on National Economy on mobilisation of resources. (Laughter) I will also amend the Order Paper to permit the Chairperson of the Parliamentary sports team to lay a report. There are also few matters of national concern.

2.59
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, when hon. Bahati laid the National Budget Framework Paper, you said he should provide what is supposed to accompany it. I do not know whether he has done that. You said you would not pass it to the committee unless –

THE SPEAKER: He did so last evening.

2.59
MS BETTY BAMUKWASA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the health situation in Rukungiri District especially on mortality and morbidity. 

I believe we all acknowledge the importance of investing in the health of women and children. I remember some time back, the Minister of Health was committed in ensuring that every expectant mother gets access to basic reproductive health services and mama-kit that consists of basic supplies that are required at child birth, for example, the gloves, plastic sheet, razor blades and others.

I was in my district on Monday and I interacted with some midwives, who told me that they are suffering and they are about to go on strike due to lack of such basic needs especially simple ones like gloves in health centres. The midwives do not have gloves to assist the women to deliver. They tell the mothers to buy their own gloves. A pair of gloves costs Shs 2,000. To assist deliver a mother, you need five pairs. It is becoming a problem in all health centres in Rukungiri District. When they send them to buy, women do not come back to be delivered from the health centres. The midwives were threatening to strike over that because when the mothers go back, they say they are being asked for money, which means they presume to be bribes.

My prayers are:

    1. Can the Government explain to this House why there are no mama-kits in health centres, which they were committed to some years back?

    2. Can the Government supply, as soon as possible, the simple supplies in these health centres more especially during this Christmas? Maybe, we can call them Christmas gifts for the mothers who are going to deliver during Christmas days so that they are worked on very effectively and properly and be safe during the Christmas season. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health is directed to come and respond to those issues raised as soon as we resume in January 2019.

3.05
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Jinja Referral Hospital is the region referral hospital for not only Busoga but also any other patient that visits that area.

For more than four months, this hospital has not had CD4 count machines. That means patients suffering from AIDS have been finding it hard to travel to Kampala or get helped because they can only be treated after knowing the viral load.

Madam Speaker, this machine was stolen by connivance of the staff and the leadership of the hospital. This machine is kept in a laboratory where access is through biometric system - one must put a thump or fingerprint to access it.

Secondly, the day the machine was stolen, they connived and switched off the cameras. They could not track anybody during that period. Some few people were taken to police just to make statements and they came out on bond. They are working and everything is going on normally, yet, people are dying. Two weeks ago, they made a plan, threatened patients and even power was off for more than a week.

My prayer, Madam Speaker - because we are just breeding theft - a case that I cannot understand as people are dying is that Parliament picks interest in what is happening in this hospital because a lot is happening and have some people suspended or interdicted as investigations are on-going. However, the stories they are giving are that they need footage, which footage cannot be retrieved because they switched off the cameras. 

I pray that Parliament picks interest and you, Madam Speaker, since you come from the same region, so that we save people from this area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kibalya. On the theft, we direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs to expeditiously carry out investigation so that this impunity can be ended. I do not think it is right that our people should be – please, I am responding to what hon. Kibalya raised.

On the issues of the House getting involved, I direct the Committee on Health to go to Jinja and establish the issues raised by hon. Kibalya. We want a report quickly so that we can deal with this impunity.

I do not know if the minister has an alternative or whether there is any machine anywhere that they can take to Jinja Referral Hospital. This referral hospital covers a huge area. Unfortunately, the Minister of Health is not here.

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, this is a matter, which needs quick intervention. It is about a machine, which was stolen and this is a referral hospital. I am going to liaise with the Permanent Secretary or the Minister of Health - I know hon. Jane Aceng was operated on four days ago from India and she came back - Dr Moriku was here but she is also going for treatment. I cannot give an accountability of Dr Sarah Opendi but I will take it upon myself to see whether the ministry can get a machine to be taken to Jinja as we investigate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.07
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter regarding inefficient power supply to Bugiri District. For a long time, we have been experiencing power surges in the district and of recent, the situation has become worse. Power goes off almost after every minute. This has affected service delivery in the hospital and even at the district. They have problems of compiling reports and processing salaries.

Bugiri does not have any industry. We have a few rice and maize mills, which employ a vast number of youths but right now, those people are not working. They are in losses because power is on and off.

Madam Speaker, power in Bugiri goes off and people who have small businesses - these are poor people, who have fridges, they make chapatis at night and early morning, they have salons but right now, they are not working because of the power surges.

The situation is worse right now that it could want Government to compensate those people. Umeme or Government has never come out to explain to the people of Bugiri why this is happening and when it will end. 

I pray that the Government explains to the people –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, I do not know if you can answer now but Bugiri is on a highway, a major transit route, a lot of economic activities, are you able to explain why there is no power in Bugiri?

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, I am not able to explain at this time why the power is intermittent. I beg to be given time to find out and I will come back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, report in the first week of January when we resume.

3.10
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding mismanagement, harassment and the capacity of Mbarara Regional Hospital and Kitagata Hospital as well.
Madam Speaker, on 16 December, a one Julius Muhangi was referred to Mbarara Region Hospital-

THE SPEAKER: Order. Honourable members, there are many meetings taking place.

MR KAHONDA: He was referred to Mbarara Region Hospital from Kampala International University Hospital in Bushenyi for endoscopy. However, on arrival, Mbarara Regional Hospital did not attend to him simply because the two radiographers who were supposed to attend to him were sent to India for training. Therefore, they also referred him to Mayanja Memorial Hospital and Divine Mercy Hospital that are privately owned. It is unfortunate that on arrival, Julius Muhangi passed on. 

In the same vein, my own brother had been referred to Mbarara Regional Hospital from the Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago for care. He had not been initiated on chemotherapy but on arrival to Mbarara Regional Hospital, he was referred to Hospice. He was not even seen by the doctor but just referred by the nurse.
 
My prayers are that the Ministry of Health explains to the public the status and the capacity of Mbarara Regional Hospital to handle referrals and secondly, the Ministry of Health should immediately – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the Minister of Health should come after the recess to advise on the capacity of the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. She should also make arrangements, if it is true that the only two radiographers have been sent abroad - some relief sent there so that our patients do not suffer. 

3.13
MS CISSY NAMUJJU (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to present a matter on the killings in Lwengo District. We have had many killings in the country, which tend to have similar styles like the ones in Lwengo District. For example, there was a recent killing Zahara Nakabugo, a 14 year old teenager, a daughter to Mr Abdu Kabugo Mugendawala, who is a counsellor of Ndagwe sub county in Lwengo District.

Nakabugo was kidnapped on 23 November, 2018 and is believed to have been killed between that time and early December. The kidnappers called Nakabugo’s parents in about two weeks after the police search for the child had begun and asked for Shs 11 million to return their child. This was all for nothing because after a few days, the kidnappers called the parents again asking for Shs 5,000,000 to tell them where the body of their child had been dumped.  It is very unfortunate that until this time, the body has not been found. Madam Speaker, there are about 12 other cases reported in Lwengo District on the death of our people. 

My prayer is that the Ministers of Internal Affairs and that of Defence to give more security and – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I understand you are entitled to some more time. I will give you one more minute to conclude. (Laughter)

MS NAMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Defence to give more committed security officers to guard the people of Lwengo District. 

I also request that all the security agents in the country make it a point to carry out a proper search for the missing child. I pray that we put to an end the killings in my district and the country at large. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Namujju. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, you recall that we have very bad memories of the state of killings in Lwengo, which occurred last year. We hope that it has not started again and we appeal to you to respond to hon. Namujju’s prayers and find out whether it has not come back to the spree that went on for some time.  Thank you very much. 

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, this incident of the missing girl was reported to the police, who are doing the necessary investigations. It is true that it has taken long to locate the exact place where this child is, whether alive or dead. However, investigations are on-going and by the time we come back, we will have a statement on that matter. 

3.17
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Pursuant to Rule 42 (1) of our Rules of Procedure, “A minister shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked of him or her.” It has become a norm for the Minister of Internal Affairs to promise statements for all security questions that are put to him in this august House. 

Madam Speaker, just last week, you ruled wisely - you informed the Minister of Internal Affairs to present a comprehensive report on matters of arson and insecurity by the 20th day of this month, before we wind up. We are here and another matter has been brought up by hon. Namujju and we are waiting for another statement. We may be persuaded to term him as honourable minister in charge of statements because every other time, the honourable minister promises statements without presenting any. 

Madam Speaker, your rulings in this august House are final. The people out there, including the honourable member from Ik, the other time clearly stated that there are several cases of insecurity in Karamoja region. People want answers so that when we sit in this house and questions are posed, when we return, the entire country is watching the proceedings of this august House. The country deserves answers and not mere promises of statements from time to time. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will revert to us on the outstanding statement. 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, your directives were very clear that today, I make a statement on the various issues that were made and I am on the Order Paper to do that, when you call upon me. Thank you. 

3.20
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the forceful eviction of the people of Moroto.

Honourable minister, apparently as I was talking, today my people were sprayed with teargas, beaten up and arrested and some of them have been put in cells. Moroto District Local Government is forcefully evicting the bona-fide occupants of land that it fraudulently claims to own and to have acquired in 1948. 

Madam Speaker, this week, I found that in May 2017, the District Land Office, without consulting the committee, came to survey the demonstration site and fraudulently included more than 200 acres of land that belong to the neighbouring communities in the land it claims for. It now claims that it owns 221 acres of land, as indicated in the title that it has. This land is taken as a fertile farming land by more than 180 families that in the time when there is rain, people get good harvests in this particular land. Moroto District Local Government now plans to give this land for cement factory project said to be implemented under a partnership of companies known as Uganda Development Cooperation, Savannah and Moroto District Local Government. 

The bonafide occupants of the land who are the committee members of Nadunget Sub County, Matheniko County whose land has been stealthily included in a land title acquired by Moroto District Local Government in June 2017 is being forcefully evicted at a fee of Shs 1 million per acre with promises of other benefits in the future. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: It is not maiden but I give you half a minute to make your prayers.

MS ATYANG: My prayer is the respective ministries; Ministry of Presidency, the Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should intervene to check the intimidatory and forceful eviction of the bonafide occupants of the land.

They should also check the due diligence that the land office took before it surveyed the land to get that land title. There is also a donation given to Moroto District by Savannah Company to compensate these communities.
I am also questioning the good will by Savannah to donate this money since there is no agreement put down on the terms and conditions in which she is donating the money. 

I also pray that the people who have been sprayed with teargas and taken to cells should be released since they have a right to claim for their land. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter appears to be more than one ministry because we need a coordinator, for Lands and for Finance. Someone who will coordinate the ministry. Prime Minister, I think that falls in your docket. If you could assist these 180 families, which are being threatened with eviction – what is Savannah? Where does it come from?

MS ATYANG: Savannah is a company that has partnership in the cement factory and it is willing to give around Shs 270 million to Moroto District to compensate the affected families. However, the question is, there are no terms and conditions in which this money is donated. Therefore, I am afraid that the district will have financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That also involves the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We would ask the Prime Minister to coordinate those ministries and find a solution for us and give us an update when we return. Thank you very much. 

3.24
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, today, on the second page of the Daily Monitor, I was shocked when I read that yesterday, at the offices of the Exodus Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Savings, the Police SACCO, the police officers demonstrated against the officers for the following reasons;

    1. They have taken five months without withdrawing their money with no clear reason given. 
    2. Secondly, they have done their savings and these savings are supposed to get interest. There is no reason given on that matter. 
    3. These people have taken eight years without having an annual general meeting and they are almost 35,000 members.
The situation we are in, every Ugandan is looking at the police officers for hope for security in this festive season. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that the minister concerned with that docket settles this problem as quickly as possible so that the Uganda Police Force should have their Christmas when they are not complaining. 
Madam Speaker, I believe if this is not done, our country will have a problem. 
My last prayer is that this support should be audited so that we find out what the problem is for sending the money of the 30,000 more police officers who are members because it seems there is a problem with that.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister for Microfinance. Can we ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take up that issue as quickly as possible. Thank you. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming in the distinguished strangers gallery a delegation from the National Assembly of Malawi led by the First Deputy Speaker Rt hon. Dr Esther Mcheka Chilenge, hon. Lobin Lowe - a whip, hon. Beatrice Mwale, hon. Shaibu Kaliati, hon. Noel Masangwi, Mr Henry Njolomole - Deputy Clerk, Mr Lawson  Chitseko - Clerk Assistant, Mrs Esther Makanjira - Secretary to the Deputy Speaker, Ms Vanessa Manda - protocol officer to the Deputy Speaker. You are welcome. 

Honourable Members, we have on this side in the public gallery, Members of the Uganda Music Promoters and Venue Owners Network. About three weeks ago, I informed you that I had gone to Kasese to deal with some issues of agriculture but I was accosted by a team of these people and I told them I could not meet them there. I told them to come to Kampala and we meet. So today, they brought me a petition. Their main complaint is that as artists, they have been organising their functions and putting in a lot of effort a lot of money but at the last minute, the police stops them and it affects their income. However, I told them that we have a statement along those lines this afternoon and that if their issues are not addressed in that statement, we shall also ask the minister to deal with them. Thank you very much. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) SERVICE REGULATIONS OF FORMER EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY EMPLOYEES
    II) EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY MEDIATION AGREEMENT, 1984

3.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to appreciate the prompt response of the Minister of Public Service on the issue of delayed payment of the former employees of the East African Community. However, Madam Speaker, the minister addressed you on that issue on the 28th of November, precisely on the day you expected him to respond but since she was not the one who read this statement, there was some statements raised in that letter, which needed to be examined further. First of all, he said those who had worked in the community less than 10 years would not be eligible for payment or pension. That is not correct because, in any case, the community itself only lasted 10 years. 

Secondly, there are other relevant legal documents, which I would like to lay on the Table and I would request that before the minister writes to you the third response, he would have through the Attorney-General and professional staff in his office scan through those documents so that he can respond to us adequately. 

The fact is we have people in our constituencies not only in Lango sub-region and Dokolo in particular but all over Uganda who had served in the East African Community and up to now, they are coming to the Office of the Speaker of Parliament. They are coming to the offices of Members of Parliament asking how and when they will be paid. 

In addition, Madam Speaker, you are aware that this money has been used by fraudsters and police have come out. I tabled that list before this Parliament earlier on. The Ministry of Public Service opened the windows and doors for the funds to be accessed by fraudsters. Where somebody has been paid wrongly and the legitimate person has not been paid or their families or the legitimate person has died, how do we handle such cases? This has not been answered by the minister.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay at the Table three sets of documents. One of them is Service Regulations of Former EAST African Community employees, which guide us adequately, that although you had not served for 10 years, you are eligible to pension and conditions are laid there. 

The second document is the East African Mediation Agreement of 1984, which commands each of the three Partner States to pay their nationals their pension and other allowances due to them from the funds that was divided among the three East African countries. I would like to lay the East African Mediation Agreement of 1984 at the Table.

The third is to reinforce the action of the minister to promptly pay these people. Decree No. 6 is signed by Gen. Idi Amin Dada. 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the documents are available for your perusal and use. The papers are available and we would like to invite the Minister of Public Service to look at them. Also, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government should study them in regard to the issues raised on the former workers of the East African Community.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA’S SPORTS DELEGATION TO THE NINTH EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY INTER-PARLIAMENTARY GAMES HELD IN BUJUMBURA, BURUNDI FROM 30 NOVEMBER TO 10 DECEMBER 2018

3.33
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I raise under Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament to lay the Report of the Parliament of Uganda’s Sports Delegation to the Ninth East African Community Inter-Parliamentary games held in Bujumbura, Burundi from 30 November to 10 December 2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the Parliamentary Sports team for the sterling performance in Bujumbura. I am giving the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development notice that we shall be seeking some more resources to support our teams. They are doing a good job on integration. Thank you.

3.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Parliamentary teams for excelling. Discipline was also good. For us to succeed in sports, we have to be disciplined and obey – although there were some small issues. 

It looks like Uganda will host the next inter-parliamentary games. Burundi prepared in a few months. I think they were given almost four months for preparation because it was supposed to be South Sudan to host this year’s inter-parliamentary games but they were not prepared and Burundi took it up. They did their best.

In Uganda, I pray that our Minister in charge of Sports does three or four times better than what Burundi did because our preparation is going to start early.

I know that some of the players complained about certificates or something to motivate them. My prayer is that the high committees of the Speakers deliberate on it and get the best way forward to motivate the players. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Does hon. Jalia Bintu wish to say something about the sports? Anyway, the Leader of Opposition has spoken. We thank you for the leadership on both sides; the men and women’s teams.

3.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice especially in appreciating the Speaker’s and Clerk’s forum for hosting us to the East Africa Inter-Parliamentary Games. The games, which we had, bring us together as Members of the East African region. It strengthens our cooperation and inter-trade. 

I would like to urge the Members, especially next year when Uganda is going to host the Inter-Parliamentary Games - to take keen interest in these games. One of the benefits of these games is that it helps you to lose weight, be healthy and fit. It further helps in doing away with some of the diseases, which you would not have managed to address if you were not doing exercises. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform you that there are certain activities, which the tournament hosts the Members to, especially the game of “tug of war.” I know in Olympics, this game was scrapped off. After “tug of war”, three people passed out. It is a tense exercise, which I feel possibly the Speakers’ Bureau will need to sit and see whether we can do away with. 

I would like to thank you. Uganda performed excellently. We won the netball games. We won the volleyball women’s games.  We won the football game and these are some of the games, which Uganda is good at. I would like to urge the Government to develop the facilities up country so that the youth and those who are in school can also develop these talents. We are proud of the youth who perform excellently. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish everyone Merry Christmas and a happy new year.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Bintu. To complete the picture, I would like to report that in our effort at integration, the hon. Mbwatekamwa assisted the young man who was afraid of approaching Members to sell things. Hon. Mbwatekamwa took it up and sold the things and gave the young man money. That is part of our integration. Thank you very much. (Applause)                  

STATEMENT ON ALLEGATIONS OF BRIBERY RELATING TO HON. SAM KUTESA, MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

3.40
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, this is the interim report of the Attorney-General on allegations of bribery against hon. Sam Kutesa, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in connection with the trial of one Mr Patrick Ho Chi-ping, a Chinese national, in the United States of America.

On 11 December 2018, I was required by Parliament to prepare and present to this august House an interim report on allegations of bribery that have been made against hon. Kutesa, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, in the course of the trial of a Chinese national called Chi Ping Patrick Ho in the United States District Court of the Southern District of New York between November 2017 and December 2018. 

I was required to present the interim report today, 20 December 2018. Before the request by Parliament, I had been directed by H.E, the President to investigate the same matter. The main purpose of my investigation, which is yet to be completed, is:

    a) To ascertain the context in which hon. Kutesa's name featured in Mr Ho's trial in New York and whether he received a bribe 
    b) To Consider and assess any relevant legal aspects pertaining to the matter with a view to tendering appropriate legal advice to the Government.

As part of my methodology, I have obtained, studied and internalised the actual indictment papers for Mr Ho. I also asked hon. Kutesa to explain himself in writing, which he did on 17 December 2018. I have several attachments but I will lay them at the Table altogether.

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR BYARUHANGA: In addition, since the allegations related to international transfers of cash, I requested the Financial Intelligence Authority to provide me with information on the wire transfers referred to in the indictment against Mr Ho. I also requested Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited, the bank through which hon. Kutesa is said to have received the payment under question, to provide me with information on the transaction. 

I also sought, from the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, information on the existence of the foundation that hon. Kutesa and his wife are said to run and into whose account the funds were deposited by the donor.

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that the three institutions have been cooperative and this is the information I have received so far and I am going to table all the three responses and they are:

    1. Mr Ho was convicted by the aforementioned US Court on 4 December 2018. The charges against his co-accused, a one Cheikh Gadio from Senegal, were dropped in September 2018;

    2. While it is true that hon. Kutesa's name is mentioned in the indictment and featured in the course of the trial, he is not an accused or suspect in any criminal matter, closed or on-going;

    3. Hon. Kutesa and his wife, Edith Kutesa, are directors in a company limited by guarantee known as Food Security and Energy Sustainability Foundation. The foundation is a lawfully registered Ugandan entity, incorporated on 24 July 2015;

    4. The foundation received a sum of $499,993 on 9 May 2016 from a Hong Kong-based NGO known as China Energy Fund Committee. The money was a donation to the Food Security and Energy Sustainability Foundation, which hon. Kutesa and his wife started as a vehicle to enable him to continue to champion some of the causes he said he had spearheaded during his tenure as the President of the General Assembly of the United Nations with respect to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals; 

	The pursuit of such causes by presidents of the General Assembly, upon leaving office through foundations, is an established tradition. Indeed, hon. Kutesa, by virtue of his office, was introduced to China Energy Fund Committee, which had a consultative status with the UN Economic and Social Council, which status pre-dated his tenure as President of the UN General Assembly;

    5. Following the receipt of the donation by the foundation, hon. Kutesa, on behalf of the foundation, wrote to China Energy Fund Committee acknowledging the same, on 10 June 2016. I will also lay this at the Table.

Madam Speaker, I am continuing to investigate this matter and to engage with various other agencies and I expect to tender a full report to H. E, the President within a period of six to eight weeks. (Interjections) I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Attorney-General to complete his statement.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table all the documents that I have referred to in the statement, which is already uploaded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, stop the excitement. You have not even allowed him to start. Attorney-General, read the heading, date and author.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the first document I alluded to that I am laying at the Table is a response by hon. Sam Kutesa. The title is: “Allegations of bribery against you in the context of Case No.17-MJ, USA Chi Ping Patrick Ho.” It is dated 17 December, 2018.

The second document is a letter from the Financial Intelligence Authority written to me under the heading: “Allegations of bribery against hon. Sam Kutesa in the context of case No.17-MJ-08611, the USA Vs Chi Ping Patrick Ho.” It is signed by Mr Sydney Asubo, the Executive Director of Financial Intelligence Authority. It is dated 18 December, 2018.

The third document is by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau under reference: “Information on Food Security and Energy Sustainability Foundation.” It is signed by Bemanya Twebaze, the Registrar-General of Uganda Registration Services Bureau. It is dated 19 December, 2018.

Madam Speaker, the fourth is a letter by hon. Sam Kutesa, dated 10 June 2016, addressed to Patrick Ho of the China Energy Fund Committee and its title is, “Funds transfer to Food Security and Energy Sustainability Foundation.” 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. Those are the documents that are referred to.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, we directed the Attorney-General to give us an interim report on what is happening by 20th, which he has done. He has also said that they are still investigating the matter and it will conclude within six to eight weeks, which will be sometime in February.

5.51
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will not go into matters that are still under investigation by the Attorney-General but I would like to raise some three pertinent issues that the minister is not addressing.

Apart from the $500,000 that is alleged to have been wired to the foundation, there is another $500,000 brought in gift bags, through the airport but the minister is unfortunately silent about it. That was the money meant to be channeled and taken to the President. Therefore, without going into the details, that leg is clearly missing in the statement.

Hon. Sam Kuteesa is a Member of this House and when I heard the Attorney-General talking, apart from giving a report to Parliament, a very neutral report as far as the course of the investigations are going, he was repeatedly justifying and agreeing that the hon. Kutesa received this money, which was meant for the foundation. He was more or less justifying yet the purpose of this Parliament was for the Attorney-General to tell us the facts as they were but he has dodged that.

Thirdly, the acknowledgement of the minister dated 10 June 2016, the minister is referring to cannot come too late when the money was wired on 5 May –

THE SPEAKER: You are now going into the merits of the case. Please, take your seat. We said the Attorney-General should come and report in the interim. So, he has come with the interim; he has not completed. Let us go on recess and then come back to receive the full report. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT BY HON. THEODORE SEKIKUBO, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR LWEMIYAGA COUNTY

5.54
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a personal statement, moved und rules 53 and 54 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

While responding to matters of great public importance raised on the Floor of Parliament on 6 December 2018, regarding the undermining of court judgments and the arrest and detention of the Ssembabule District Chairperson, a one Dr Elly Muhumuza by hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, the Minister for Security, my name was adversely mentioned hence the necessity to correct the impression.

Madam Speaker, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine stated that I was the one fully behind this; the one beneficiary of land out of the 16 children who sold their land to the other six families under dubious litigation process, where summons had been hidden to take advantage of the innocent defendants and further that the procedure of acquiring letters of administration was deliberately ignored.

As a consequence, houses were demolished, property destroyed and a one Mandela Tindimureka shot dead, while a one Byeshanika is still nursing bullet wounds and that all this was because of 200 acres of land promised to me. In the minister's statement hence that I am a suspect and implicated in the murder; that I am on record and implicated for making sectarian statements; and that I am involved in similar cases of grabbing land using manipulations like the case of Bagurakayo.

In summary, that if evil-minded people use court to steal people's land instigated by such leaders like Sekikubo, there will be chaos and insecurity, which and I quote him: “We shall not allow that.” 

From the outset, alive to rule 72 of subjudice and the confines of rules 53 and 54 within which I make this statement, I wish to state as follows:

First of all, it is not true that I am behind the debilitating litigation process. It is false and malicious for the minister to state that I was promised 200 acres of land by one beneficiary to cause chaos.

The facts of the matter are that the conflict over this land, situated on Block 29, plot 2 Land at Lwemiyaga started way back in the year 2000, before I joined politics. I only happen to find myself the area leader and as such, I have to take interest to ensure people settle in peace.

It all started when the defendants, formerly neighbours to hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sekikubo, yesterday, I had no time to read your statement but you indicated that the matter is in court. Why don’t you just deal with the issues raised? Otherwise, you are going to offend the subjudice rule by delving into matters that are adjudicated upon. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to stay clear of matters before court. However, I will state like this: the persons who are involved sold their land - and I will not go into what they did - but they came onto the land. It was a very protracted matter leading them not to enter on the land. However, some other persons including the hon. Gen. Tumwine is in this. As you are all aware, we are neighbours; hon. Tumwine comes from Burunga and I stay in Lwemiyaga. Lwemiyaga is the boundary but this is where they came from and entered onto this land.

Madam Speaker, with the difficulty of the subjudice, I want to state here that I never got involved. The alleged meeting in the minister’s statement where I was promised 200 acres - I sat down parties at their own request after the two cases in court. This matter started way back in 2000; it was heard by Justice Eldad Mwanguhya who now proceeded to become Court of Appeal Judge and now he is the Judge of the Supreme Court and the matter is still in court. They came to me and said they could not proceed with this court matter and asked me to sit them down.

I invited all the relatives and opinion leaders from Ssembabule and Kiruhura, where these people came from. We sat down as leaders and convinced the party that had won the case in court to give these people land so that they do not go away. Indeed, in the judgement, court had awarded Shs 170 million to the victor because of the long period of time. We agreed that they forgive these people because if they demanded for money from them, it would be as good as evicting them. 

That is where it was arrived at - at first, he was giving them 40 acres but after protracted argument, they were given 100 acres so that we all sit down together in the same place. Now, that is what the honourable minister is saying that I am the one who apportioned the land. The fact of the matter is that it is not true. We agreed and this is in a way to settle the people.

For people who have suffered in courts and you say, “please, of this portion, you also share and sit down together -“   Once it is agreed, I do not see why the minister should come here and start to use that against hon. Sekikubo. What I know is that the statement that I am making sectarian statements is misplaced. Sectarian statements against whom? When you see me, can I say the Baganda kill the Bahima? Can I say the Bahima kill the Baganda? I can never –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, our rules on personal statements are clear. You should not include anything controversial, please. I am sorry but in this House, there are two groups that bring their quarrels here. Last week, I admonished one group and this is the second. Do not include controversial things and please, conclude. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the point I would like to conclude with is that the trend where officers of Government disregard court orders and court judgements is not limited to this matter alone. There is the case of Joyce Kyomuhangi vs Alfred Kaganda and Kamasanyu and Joyce Kekirehe.

In all these cases, the minister hires lawyers on behalf of Government in a matter where two families are in a land conflict. In that regard, if they are all Ugandans and peasants, why do we have a position where lawyers are hired on taxpayers’ money against one family, yet, they are all Ugandans? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, please, resume your seat.

MR SEKIKUBO: I beg to conclude, Madam Speaker, by thanking – (Member timed out.)

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS

REPORT OF THE 49TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (CPA) AFRICA REGION CONFERENCE 13TH -22ND AUGUST GABORONE, BOTSWANA

4.04
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like lay at the Table the report of the 49th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Africa Region Conference, which took place from 13 to 22 August 2018 in Gaborone, Botswana. This is in accordance with Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I would like to summarise this report. Allow me to lay this report on your behalf, as the leader of the delegation that represented Uganda at this conference. The delegation comprised: 

Hon. Judith Akello Franca; hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe; hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju; hon. (Col) Kulayigye Feliciano; hon. Paul Amoru; hon. Henry Kilabya; hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Jalia Bintu.

The 49th CPA - Africa Region Conference was hosted by hon. Gladys Kokorwe, the President of the CPA Africa Region and the Speaker of the National Assembly of Botswana at the Gaborone International Conference Centre (GICC), in Botswana from 13 to 22 August, 2018 under the theme, “The Role of African Parliaments in Fostering National and Regional Security.”

The conference used the methodology of participation in meetings and ceremonies and presentation of topics. Some of the topics upon which presentations were made were:

i. 	A parliamentary agenda for combating human trafficking and modern day slavery in Africa and the promotion of human rights;
ii. 	Understanding the nexus between climate change and the incidence of farmers /herdsmen conflicts in Africa
iii. 	A legislative framework for the regulation of vigilante groups, private security and military companies in Africa; and 
iv. 	Food security and sustainable growth: the role of the agricultural revolution in triggering economic development in Africa.

During the conference, the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda informed the delegates that Uganda will host the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in September 2019. The Annual General Meeting welcomed the information with delight and appreciated Uganda for her constant readiness to support CPA activities.

In the conference, there were constitutional amendments, which were presented. The Constitutional Amendment Committee met to consider a motion that was tabled by CPA Nigeria Branch during the 48th Annual General Meeting held in Owerri, Imo State, Nigeria to amend Article 46 of the Regional Constitution.

The main objective of the motion by CPA Nigeria Branch was to ensure that there is equity and balance in the distribution of the offices of the association among the sub-regions. The AGM adopted Article 46 to be amended as follows: “In electing officers of the association, special consideration shall be given to: (a) Gender representation (b) Sub-regional representation and that is where Africa lies and (c) Rotation of offices among the sub-regions.

During the same conference, the Speaker of the CPA Youth Conference, who happens to come from Uganda, presented the resolutions of the youth conference, which took place in Uganda. 

During the same conference, the special resolution of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentary Association, which was taken and presented for adoption. This resolution reads as follows: “A coordination office be established in the Parliament of Uganda, coordinated by the seconded staff of the Parliamentary Commission, charged with the responsibility of coordinating the work of the sub-region.”

This recommendation gives us more advantages, especially when you have such international offices hosted within our country. Allow me, in conclusion, to thank the Office of the Speaker and honourable members for participating in these meetings and conference of CPA International and CPA Africa Region. 

Madam Speaker, we appreciate your support and participation during the Youth Parliament and CWP Sensitisation Workshop hosted by our Parliament. Further, we call for your cooperation and support, honourable members, as next year Uganda will be hosting the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the report and the annexes: The 49th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Africa Region Conference held in Gaborone - the resolutions; the report of the delegation; the special resolution of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) Association; the resolutions of the Fourth Youth Parliament of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Region; and the resolutions of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians East Africa Sub Region Sensitisation Workshop held at Golden Tulip Hotel. I beg to lay these on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Bintu. Honourable members, the reports are available for your perusal and information. Thank you very much.  

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE HIGH-LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, NEW YORK, 9-18 JULY 2018

4.12
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I arise to lay on the Table, under rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure, a report on the High-Level Political Forum On the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which was held at the United Nations headquarters in New York from 9 to 18 July 2018.

Madam Speaker, the delegation to the forum was led by the honourable Dr Gorreti Kitutu, the Minister of State for Environment. Members of the delegation included hon. Herbert Ariko, hon. Lawrence Songa, hon. Janepher Egunyu, hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. Babirye Kabanda, hon. Barnabas Tinkasimire, hon. Henry Kibalya, hon. Yeri Ofwono, and Dr Tom okurut, the Executive Director of National Environment Management Authority; Mr Byereta Rauben of the Uganda Mission, New York; and Mr Denis Opoti who was the clerk of the delegation.

Let me say something brief about the report. The third High-Level Political Forum on the Sustainable Development Goals was convened under the auspices of the Economic and the Social Council. It was held from the 9th to the 18th of July 2018 at the United Nations headquarters in New York.

The High-Level Political Forum is a United Nations central platform for follow-up and reviews of the 2030 Agenda for the Sustainable Development Goals. It provides for the full and effective participation of all state members of the United Nations and state members of specialised agencies. 

More than 125 heads and deputy heads of state and government, ministers, vice-ministers and other ministerial level officials, and over 2000 representatives from governments, the UN system and other organisations, civil society and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) participated. The purpose of the annual High Level Political Forum was to take stock of the progress on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). They discussed progress, successes, challenges and lessons learnt on the road to a fairer, more peaceful and prosperous world and a healthy planet by 2030. 

This year’s forum, held under the theme, “Transformation towards Sustainable and Resilient Societies”, concluded with the adoption of a ministerial declaration. Forty-six countries presented their Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) on their efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda. The forum also reviewed, in depth, six out of the 17 SDGs, which included water and sanitation for all, SDG 6; sustainable and modern energy for all, SDG 7; cities and human settlement, SDG 11; sustainable consumption and production patterns, SDG 12; sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss, SDG 15; and global partnership for sustainable development, which is SDG 17.

Madam Speaker, I can skip these and move straight to the issues and observations that were deduced from the meeting, the process and specific lessons from VNRs presented for Uganda’s SDG architecture: 

1. 	In addition to the delegations from member states who were presenting their VNRs, there was heavy attendance by virtually all other member states at all sessions. Those attending were able to learn how other member states are going about implementing the SDGs in their countries. Besides, delegations participated in several tailored side events that were held parallel to the plenary session. The Uganda delegation actively participated in many side events as listed in annex II.

2. 	The Uganda delegation of three from the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) was too thin to cover participation and gainfully engage in the side events as more time was spent at the obligatory plenary sessions. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA), Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development all had events that needed their technical presence. More so, Uganda was a rapporteur at the AU, which imposed a personnel challenge on this delegation that was required to participate in those scheduled meetings.

	Madam Speaker, you realise several meetings were going on, but we were few and we could not attend them all. We could only pick one or two to attend. However, as I have highlighted above, most of these ministries had issues of interest which were presented by different countries and would be useful if these ministries had representatives.

3. 	Both developed and developing countries that were presenting VNRs and participating showed a very organised system for SDG awareness nationally, including at community level, among youth and other specific interest groups. The manner of presentation, which involved government ministers, women representatives and youth representatives, clearly demonstrated effective coordination at country level.

You realise that for us, those levels were not represented as sectors. We went as a parliamentary delegation but there were no people representing women, youth or the disadvantaged, yet other countries had delegates that were representing these groups. When it came to discussing issues concerning them, specific interest groups would handle those areas and they would benefit.

Mapping out what was exhibited here in terms of SDG coordination against what is going on in Uganda shows a glaring difference. We realised a very big difference between how we are handling SDGs in Uganda and how our fellow developing countries are handling theirs.

Madam Speaker, the coordinating arm of SDGs in Uganda, the Office of the Prime Minister, was not represented here neither was it represented in the 2017 conference. The Office of the Prime Minister recently adopted the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) proposed structure for SDG coordination, which is yet to be seen. 

The Office of the Prime Minister did not have a clear representative to take note and understand what was going on yet SDGs are under this office. Therefore, there was a gap and we wish they could be represented in the next conference. In the 2017 conference, the Office of the Prime Minister was not represented and also in the 2018 conference. We cannot say that the Minister of Water and Environment was representing the Office of the Prime Minister because she went in her capacity as the Minister of Water and Environment.

For all the 47 countries that presented their VNRs, the lead presenter was a minister representing the coordinating SDGs system as a full function. These were either ministers in charge of environment in developing countries or the minister in charge of planning like in the case of Uganda. On the other hand, less –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are just supposed to give highlights when you are laying a paper on the Table.

MR KIBALYA: Okay. Let me just go to the conclusion. Uganda has not given the SDGs critical importance unlike other countries that have elevated them already from the level of Millennium Development Goals. The 2030 Agenda and its attendant SDGs targets and indicators, and its role in defining our country’s economic growth path and role played by different actors seem not well understood. It is not clearly seen and defined across the board. 

Lastly, the disconnect between the teams that played a central role in Uganda’s negotiation for SDGs and those implementing them now reflects the poor performance that is seen.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to give the recommendations that we agreed on. These were:

    1. The Office of the Prime Minister, which is now coordinating the SDGs implementation, must be fully supported in terms of resources to help promote the national system.

    2. The different public officers in Government need to be sensitised about the SDGs. This is because some of these officers do not understand what it means and that is why they have not given them the importance they require.

    3. Constitution of the inter-ministerial committee for political guidance – I think there is a committee, which is chaired by the Minister for Water and Environment - needs to be streamlined and aligned with what is going on, so that we can have the same language and understanding of what is going on.

    4. The minister who was the leader of the delegation should present an information paper to Cabinet about the SDGs and how other countries have performed compared to where we are.

The recommendations are many. Maybe I can lay them on the Table so that they can be read later and be disseminated. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, our delegation. I hope that some of the issues you have raised will be handled, now that we have the minister for general duties in charge of SDGs. I am sure that she will participate.

On the general representation of countries, sometimes African countries are over stretched. The cost of a ticket to New York is high as well as the cost of living in those hotels. One can understand why we are not always represented. If we had more resources, we would do better. At least we sent government and parliamentary representatives. Thank you and welcome back. Let us go to Item No.7. 

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda is very specific on the day and time for the Prime Minister’s question time. According to my watch, it is 4.25p.m. and I had a question for the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: I will advise when we reach the 4.00p.m. Let us proceed. (Laughter)

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. AYAKA ROSE ATIMA ON THE INTERVENTIONS BY GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS RISING INSECURITY AND GUN-RELATED INCIDENCES IN ARUA MUNICIPALITY

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs, we are waiting. Who of you is coming up? The statement is signed by the minister. Under what rule do you rise, honourable member?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, rule 77 (d) is clear: upon a point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. I would like to raise a procedural issue. According to our Constitution, we have Cabinet ministers and state ministers who assist Cabinet ministers in absentia. The law is clear that you only delegate when you are not present. 

I can see Gen. Jeje Odongo –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, can’t you organise an induction course for such people? Madam Speaker, help us.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order about?

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a point of order against hon. Nandala-Mafabi.  There are no ministers who assist others; we do not have deputy ministers. Therefore, the honourable minister is in order to come forward and present the statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the rulings are mine. Have you concluded?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am begging you to organise an induction course for such people like ministers of state, so that they can know what they are doing. (Laughter) 

What I said is that you can only delegate when you are not around. On the Front Bench, I can see Gen. Jeje Odongo, the Minister of Internal Affairs, seated. I can see he is healthy, but now I see Okanya – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are busy; I have got your point, so you can take your seat. Minister of Internal Affairs, you were here in person the other day and you undertook to make a statement; take the microphone.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For clarification, I was engaged elsewhere and I feared I would be late. That is why I had delegated hon. Obiga Kania to read the statement in case it came up before I came. However, since I am here, I am ready.

Madam Speaker, in the last two weeks, Members have raised a couple of issues on insecurity. These issues ranged from the general security situation to how the police are addressing the festive season to specific areas of concern including the following: Fire outbreaks, gun violence especially in Rukungiri and Arua districts, and theft of livestock in Karamoja and Nakaseke districts.  These were issues raised in the past sittings of this august House. The role of the police in land evictions was also raised as well as the issue of pastoralists in West Nile and the stopping of concerts to be held by hon. Kyagulanyi Robert Sentamu. 

Madam Speaker and Members, the security situation in the country is calm. Our security agencies are jointly doing a good job keeping us safe and secure, day and night. The insecurity that was beginning to come up, with criminals attacking local and foreign investors, has been sorted out and this crime is under control.

We were able to achieve this through setting up thorough systems of effective policing of these areas and prosecution of offenders caught committing crime. Equally, we are fully prepared to secure the festive season through strategic deployments, extra vigilance and community mobilization. Through these initiatives, we guarantee that Ugandans will have peaceful celebrations with minimal crime incidents. 

We call upon all Members to add their voices to ours in mobilizing their communities to appreciate that the security of any nation starts with them at individual level. Honourable members, your voices in this respect are very pertinent and count indeed.

The Inspector General of Police (IGP) on Tuesday, l8 December 2018 gave a detailed message of assurances on how prepared the police are in securing the country this festive season. They deserve our unwavering support as they sacrifice a lot in ensuring that we are safe and secure in our various environs.

Role of the Police in Enforcement of Court Orders

Madam Speaker and Members, the role of the police in enforcement of court orders is purely to support the process, which is directly handled by the Judiciary, particularly the court bailiffs. The police do not have to participate in the act of enforcing court orders and in as far as I am aware, that is the case. What is pertinent here is that the police do not examine the merits and demerits of the matter and therefore, some of the incidents we are talking about. The question of the merits and demerits of these evictions is a matter for the Judiciary.

Originally, court bailiffs would simply secure orders of court and execute without checks. Currently, the police department in charge of land protection first confirms the authenticity of the court order before it is cleared for execution and enforcement. By this initiative, we have been able to detect and deter unlawful actions by some unscrupulous people trading as either court officials or powerful business personalities.

The matter of Mpererwe-Nakanyonyi, popularly called Lusanja, had its own flaws, which cannot be blamed entirely on the police. The Judiciary is handling it and that is the best I can share with Members. However, if there is anyone culpable for having done anything that contravenes the law and procedures therein, we are open to an inquiry and we shall welcome the results of that inquiry.

Theft of Livestock in Karamoja and Nakaseke Districts

Madam Speaker and Members, during the festive season, theft of livestock and general crime tend to increase in the districts with livestock farmers throughout the country but not limited to the two districts mentioned above. However, the Police Anti-Stock Theft Unit are deployed in many of these areas to avert thefts. The unit closely works with the territorial police to address the crimes related to livestock thefts.

It is important to note that cattle thefts involve a syndicate of thieves and local agents often known by the communities where these acts take place. Such agents and thieves should be reported to the authorities for preventive action.

Gun Violence

Madam Speaker and Members, the police are addressing the problem of gun violence through proactive and long term measures of marking and finger printing of all guns within the police, other security agencies as well as with individuals who have acquired these guns officially. In Arua, it will be recalled that a gun was stolen from a Special Police Constable (SPC) and the next day, someone was murdered at one of the petrol stations in Arua. The suspicion is that it is this same gun that was used. The good news is that on 19 December 2018, this gun was recovered through cooperation between the police and the community. 

The police and sister security agencies are doing all it takes to secure the country.

Fire Outbreaks

I have attached a list of fire outbreaks across the country in the last twelve months and the actions taken by the police. As indicated in this attachment, only nine (9) cases of fire outbreaks have been identified as arson and these are being handled as criminal cases.

However, it is important to note that the police are heavily incapacitated in handling fire outbreaks because of lack of adequate firefighting equipment. At the bottom of page 4 of my statement, I have indicated the equipment available in the various areas in the country as opposed to what is required to handle this problem.

It is important to note that the fire directorate operates 44 fire stations for the whole country. We need an additional 40 fire trucks as a minimum to cover the whole country so as to use our department 599, which is trained to handle these problems.

The Case of Hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi’s Music Concerts

The Uganda Police Force is mandated by law to protect life and property, prevent and detect crime and maintain law and order, among other functions. In view of the above, coupled with the festive season and end of year celebrations which are characterised by partying and merrymaking, attracting gatherings that could be a target to crime and calamities, the force came up with guidelines to ensure law and order. 

The guidelines were to forestall acts of criminality, including and not limited to terrorism, mass murder, possible calamities, sexual assaults, which could occur during these performances and concerts.  We gave guidelines in order to prevent these acts. These guidelines are for all to adhere to for the good of the organisers as well as the revellers. Honourable members, it is not wise to look at the economic benefits alone during these concerts without taking care of public security and safety. 

The Uganda Police Force shared the guidelines I have mentioned with the public, which were popularised through all media platforms. Secondly, these same guidelines were shared with hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi on 5 December 2018. They were thoroughly discussed and he promised to comply and adhere to these guidelines. The other promoters of concerts were equally brought on board in view of the same for purposes of effective policing.

Honourable members, it is on record that many of the promoters have sought security to police their concerts. For those that write to the police and comply with the guidelines, security is availed. A case in point is the Busabala Kyarenga Concert organized by EMMA Promotions and hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi performed during that concert. However, those that do not comply with the guidelines, thereby compromising the health, safety and security of everyone, are further advised on the importance of public security and safety. Government shall not simply look on and abdicate its duty of protecting people and their property.

I would like to now draw your attention to the music concert organized in Jinja on Saturday, 15 December 2018. The promoters and organisers had several planning meetings with security to secure the event. The routes for this event were properly planned and secured to regulate traffic flow, stewards were put in place, and police officers were deployed at the venue and along the roads.
Regrettably, that evening, hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi, who was not on the list of performers, acted contrary to the set guidelines; flouting traffic laws, he held a procession along Iganga Road in Jinja Town thereby disrupting traffic flow and causing disorder and disharmony. The police intervened and restored law and order and thereafter, the concert went on peacefully.

Lastly, I appeal to you, colleagues, to join hands with security agencies to secure the country because security is not only preserved by security agencies but it is a known fact that security begins with you, the individual.

I wish to take this opportunity, honourable members, to wish you all a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year, 2019. Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you for listening to me. 

Just to confirm one of the facts, a gentleman by the names of Denis Bwanika, who was the organiser of the concert in Jinja, has written a statement to say hon. Robert Kyagulanyi was not on the list of the people to perform in that concert. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. As I indicated earlier, I had a delegation today from the performers and among the things they raised was the cost of planning and then being squashed at the end. It involves hiring venues, employing people that cook the food, – they invest money to feed thousands of people - additional musicians who are the smaller people that come to earn money there, people who sell sodas and beer, among others. Therefore, according to them, one stoppage affects thousands of people. They asked me to tell you that this issue needs to be addressed and they need to be assisted to carry out their activities.

The second matter they raised is that the compliance conditions are hard; for instance, they showed me a letter where they were told to indicate the expected number of revellers at the event. I do not know how you can estimate the expected number. They also talked about the other conditions: measures put in place for crowd control; the proposed traffic route control and measures to ensure the safety of motor vehicles of the revellers; measures and resources available for emergency response, including medical provision, fire and evacuation in case need arises; security measures and resources available, for example walk-throughs, which I accept, hand probes and sniffer dogs; measures put in place for crowd control and stewards proportionate to the number of revellers at the event. 

Honourable minister, I do not know whether a small ordinary person can actually meet those conditions. This was written by one of your officers, Asuman Mugenyi, for the Inspector General of Police. They said that these are very hard conditions for a very small investor to be able to fulfil before they can be allowed to undertake their activities. I am just delivering a message. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The minister referred to a document as having been written to him by one of the organisers and I saw him putting it in his coat. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right for that document to be laid on the Table so that we can have access to it and determine its authenticity, since it has implications. 

As far as I am concerned, I represent the area where that show took place. Hon. Kyagulanyi informed me that he had a contract, but the minister is on the Floor with a document, which he has not laid on the Table, saying that hon. Kyagulanyi was gate crashing a function. It would be procedurally right for the minister to lay the document on the Table so that at an opportune time, we can compare the document he has with the statement he has actually uttered on the Floor of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you have mentioned the document, please read the date, the author, the subject and then lay it on the Table. 
GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table a statement made by one Bwanika Denis, who was one of the organisers of the function on 15 December in Jinja.

4.50
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to question the report made by the minister, specifically in relation to the rights of hon. Kyagulanyi. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware and this House is aware that last year, on 7 October 2017, I organised a similar concert in Kasese Municipality. This concert was approved right up to the Inspector General of Police then. On the last day before the concert, having realised and even known from the letter that I addressed to them that the main performer was Bobi Wine, the concert was cancelled at night. The reason for cancelling the concert was “security reasons”. The concert was supposed to be held in my constituency together with hon. Centenary’s. I wondered what security reasons hon. Kyagulanyi could cause in my constituency. 

When I put them to task through you, Madam Speaker, even after defending themselves on the Floor of Parliament, the police went ahead and compensated me. However, this is the same statement I am seeing the minister laying on the Table today. It is the same statement he is giving to the country. 

Why don’t you be clear and state the reason. If you are fearing hon. Kyagulanyi, state it openly that the man is too hard for you, so that we know, rather than threatening his businesses. The country cannot be led using masquerading systems. The police cannot continue masquerading. If they could stop me even when it was not the Christmas season, if they could stop hon. Kyagulanyi from traveling to Kasese – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable colleague that even when hon. Kyagulanyi organised a concert in Gulu, it was stopped. That was about two or three weeks ago - if they want to say that Christmas is the reason for stopping him. Thank you.

4.53
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, as the guardians of the law, Article 21 of the Constitution commands us to respect all the rights of the people and for them to seek equal protection and enjoy equal protection by the law. 

There are various shows that have been transpiring. When we heard hon. Kyagulanyi speak the other time, his only question was why him and why not others. The guidelines are stringent for him. We know he is practicing politics, just like we are doing, as an occupation but he has a profession. Therefore, for every one of us that is here that have professions, we should be given the opportunity to enjoy practicing them without our rights being infringed on. 

In this matter, the police have used the Public Order Management Act and abused it, in most cases, in order to stifle those that are preparing occasions or events that are not within their favour. The parliamentary Imam recently wrote to the police and to the Ministry of Defence asking for Muslims to pray at the Kololo Airstrip. There is collusion in this matter as well. We have just addressed a press conference and they have told us that all the dates at the Kololo Airstrip are booked. Why? This is because we want to come up with a protest on how unfairly the Muslim people are treated in this country before the law. 

In the same faith, this happened to the Kyarenga concert where Namboole was played about with - dilly dallying with the management of Namboole - until, due to public demand, he had to switch the venue to Busabala. That notwithstanding, even after he went to Busabala, he has been here on record to say that all events that were scheduled to take place in Busabala have now been cancelled because the police have communicated to all events organisers that Busabala is a no-go venue. 

That means that this is intentional, to deprive him of his rights to perform and his rights and freedoms economically and socially in this country. Therefore, it is not all about shows and what transpired in Jinja but also his business at the beach in Busabala.

4.56
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Without repeating what my colleague has said, I want to add that it does not matter even if you comply with all the requirements - I am an artist and I know this. 

When the organisers give money to the Officer in Charge (OC), the OC does not even pay the watoto who actually do the work. At the end of the day, they disorganise the function. They also start allowing their own relatives and friends into the event. In the end, the organisers always make losses. 

Let us therefore be very clear about the required number of police to guard a performance. Forget about hon. Kyagulanyi who is at a certain level, but there are juniors who are treated unfairly. When they come to a place like Satellite Beach in Mukono, which I know well, they are required to pay no less than one million shillings for the security provided by the police. However, this should be entirely free, honourable minister, because we have said the police is here to guard people and their property so that every Ugandan can enjoy life without any fear or favour. 

Therefore, our concern, Madam Speaker, goes to the minister. When are we, as artists, going to have freedom? Recently, hon. Kyagulanyi just bypassed my home area, Kisoga, and immediately I started receiving phone calls –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for the opportunity given to me. 

Madam Speaker, in our Constitution, Article 212 is about the functions of the police and paragraph (c) says, “to prevent and detect crime” and then (d) says, “to cooperate with the civilian authority…” I would love to know at what stage the police detect and prevent crime. What if there was a function going on and the police come up and say there is something going on, must we wait until that problem or danger occurs? 

I would love to re-echo what hon. Mbaju said about the function that went on in Kasese when hon. Kyagulanyi was performing but the police came in and stopped the function. This meant that something happened and the police came in to save the lives of the people who were gathered there at that time -(Interjections)- I would like to tell my fellow Members of Parliament that we need to protect life. We must be protected. Police must also be protected because we pay them and these are their functions. We must give them the right to perform their duty.

Madam Speaker, at that point, as the honourable minister reported, it was right because people’s lives had to be protected because crime was detected –(Interruption)

MR MBAJU: Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for two years now. I take time to listen to my colleagues, the Members of Parliament. I made my point very clear; I said that when the day of the concert was about to reach, at midnight towards the start of the function, police called me stopping the function. My colleague is saying that hon. Robert Kyagulanyi   was performing at the concert. Is he in order not to pay attention in the House, not to listen to hon. Jackson Mbaju speaking and begin to mislead this honourable House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this subject is very important. It is not about the Government and hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. In the middle, there are many Ugandans and small people who put their money into these activities. 

In relation to hon. Jackson Mbaju, I had to spend time and I summoned the Inspector General of Police to negotiate for his money. I spent over four months talking to Gen. Kale Kayihura to please pay this man his money. Therefore, balance the boat. (Laughter)    

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I would still like clarification on this matter. At what point does police detect crime? I want to know that because if you get to know that, you will be in a position to really protect the police. At that point, maybe the police detected crime and they had to stop the function that was going on. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.02
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek information from the statement the minister gave us about Karamoja. 

The Government of Uganda decided to disarm the people of Karamoja as a region, which was an advantage for us. However, the challenge we have now is that people from the neighbouring countries - South Sudan, the Kenyan Pokot and the people from Turkana - are the ones terrorising Karamoja sub region. I was in my constituency over the weekend; as we are seated here, my people are driving their cows to the neighbouring districts of Teso. Right now, they are saying that the Pokot from Kenya are coming to raid their cows but on this other side, our neighbouring districts are also putting pressure on the people of Karamoja not to take their animals there for grazing. 

My question is: What assurance does Government have for the people of Karamoja? The cows are the only source of livelihood that they have in the region. They took away their guns and they promised to protect the people of Karamoja. At the moment, we are just on tension. The Members of Parliament from Karamoja do not know what will happen when they go back to the region; for example, our Member of Parliament from the Ik brought up the issue of the killings. Thank you very much.

5.04
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, I would like to re-emphasise Articles 20 and 21 (3) of the Constitution. Article 20 (1) says, “Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the State”. Article 21 (3) reads as follows: “For the purposes of this article, ‘discrimination’ means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability”.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, it is our responsibility to ensure that countrywide, there is fair treatment. We have to respect every person’s right to his or her opinion. Any violation in any way to anyone of us or any Ugandan affects all of us. We must stand upright and firm to protect the rights of individuals. I beg to submit. Thank you.

5.05
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, the statement touched on gun related incidences in the country. As this Parliament is aware, in Alebtong District, a UPDF soldier attached to the Third Division killed four members of the same family. He even led a team of police detectives to where the killer gun was allegedly hidden and it was recovered. 

There are two choices to make here: either for the alleged killer to be produced in the High Court of Lira District and be charged with murder or the UPDF invokes the UPDF Act and the UPDF soldier appears before a general court martial. As the people’s representative from Alebtong District, we would like to appeal to the police, who are currently investigating this case, that the general feeling of the community of Alebtong is that the UPDF court martial sits in Alebtong, charges this soldier, and he is tried and convicted from where he allegedly committed the murder.

The people are not in support of him being produced in the High Court. As a serving UPDF soldier, we would like to send a clear message. The people of Alebtong are a very peaceful community. You are all aware that in 1961, they voted for Dr Milton Obote who came to the Legislative Council (LEGCO) and eventually superintended over the Independence of Uganda. We are the only district that has produced a legitimate field marshal in the history of Uganda and that is Field Marshal Okello. Therefore, our –(Member timed out.)                 

5.07
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. 

Indeed, the theft that we have in Karamoja is not just within but there is also theft in Karamoja from the neighbouring country of Kenya. It has been a big problem to recover the animals stolen by the Turkana. We have so many animals in Kenya but up to date, they have not been recovered. 

The minister said that there is the Anti-Stock Theft Unit. The nearest Anti-Stock Theft Unit is situated in Katakwi District. When theft is reported to the authorities, I wonder how swiftly the Anti-Stock Theft Unit would respond to this theft? It has been a big problem recovering these animals from Kenya. 

I was also wondering whether the minister has thought about having the police liaise with the UPDF to recover these animals. This is because in Karamoja, the UPDF is the main force that has always helped us, but with reinforcement from the police, I think we shall work better. To say that the Anti-Stock Theft Unit is available in Karamoja is not true. It is in Katakwi District. Thank you.

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the youth of Uganda, I would like to say that it is very clear that the majority of them find most of their enjoyment in music. That is where you find the majority of the young people. Not only that, the majority of the investors, stakeholders in this industry, the organisers of these shows like the “EMMAS” among others, are all young people. It is very clear also that 78 per cent of our population is comprised of the young people. Therefore, the subject matter for today is extremely critical because we are touching the lives of the majority of the people. 

It is also clear that of recent, people have found music and concerts as a soft landing for floating their political ideology. Therefore, in actual sense, if we are to be faithful to you, Madam Speaker, there are always political sentiments behind this music. I attended one music launch of hon. Kyagulanyi in the southern region – it was not really a launch but some kind of appearance somewhere. At the beginning of his show, he just came up - the area Member of Parliament in that region is an Opposition Member of Parliament – and he introduced someone else as the incoming Member of Parliament. 

I therefore encourage him and all music lovers, including myself, to avoid extreme political sentiments because this is the future of our young people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The case of hon. Kiyingi is that we should focus on the entertainment; don’t stray.

5.10
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter before us is very critical. When we come to Parliament, we have jobs that we do outside Parliament. You are aware that outside Parliament, I am an engineer and I practice my profession. Today I am in Parliament, but when I leave, I have to go to my engineering job. We have lawyers here and we also have teachers, who have schools. Hon. Kyagulanyi is a musician outside there. I would like to request the minister concerned to allow hon. Kyagulanyi to perform. (Applause) 

The information given by my senior colleague from Kasese is that maybe the ministers fear hon. Kyagulanyi. If the police fear him, for us as NRM, we cannot fear hon. Kyagulanyi. Allow him to perform because even some of my voters love his music but they cannot give him votes. (Laughter) They just love him as a musician.

What I would like to say is that we want the Government to allow hon. Kyagulanyi to perform. In fact, when they squeeze you, they make you popular. (Laughter) Therefore, honourable minister, I would like you to allow hon. Kyagulanyi to perform his music and strictly music. When it comes to the politics, he may have the mob but the ballot papers will tell that he has nothing. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.12
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a question for the minister: Is hon. Kyagulanyi a security threat to this country? This is because other artistes such as Bebe Cool and Jose Chameleon are going to perform - the President is even embracing everything – but they are not being sabotaged in any way. Is hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi a security threat? 

Recently, we have been planting freedom trees for those people who never supported the constitutional amendment. However, whenever they hear that Bobi Wine is coming, they cancel-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no one called “hon. Wine” The MP is called hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Yes, Madam Speaker. Recently, I had a constituency consultative meeting for elders, but the District Police Commander (DPC) called me and said, “I heard you have a function.” I told him that I have one and then he asked, “Do you have any external visitors?” I asked him what he meant and then he asked, “Is hon. Kyagulanyi coming?” I asked him what he meant and I told him, “He is a Member of Parliament, if he is to come.” In the morning, they sent police all over my place thinking that hon. Kyagulanyi was going to attend –(Member timed out.)

5.14
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Article 2(1) of our Constitution eloquently and clearly states thus: “(1) This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda.” Article 20(2) states thus: “The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.”

Madam Speaker, it should pain everybody and it should bother everyone, both here and outside, that the police that are supposed to abide by this Constitution – the supreme law of this land – have gone to the point of even stopping our colleague from worshiping his God. As a country, we cannot tolerate this. (Applause) Madam Speaker, take your authority to command and direct Government to stop this. Enough is enough, Madam Speaker.

5.16
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Justice Forum, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened attentively to the statement read by the honourable Alhaji Gen. Abubaker Jeje Odongo. There are two issues here. The first one is that the police, and indeed Government, is using the Public Order Management Act in matters of music yet realistically, when you read the Public Order Management Act, music shows are not part of the activities regulated under the Public Order Management Act. 

Therefore, these conditions of how many people are there and who is coming are limited to public meetings and public meetings are defined under the Public Order Management Act. If the police want to regulate such activities, they have the Constitution and the Police Act but they should not resort to the Public Order Management Act because the two are completely different.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue at stake is economic rights and the right to practice a profession. When you are dealing with economic rights or rights generally, you must adopt a liberal approach. These guidelines being given by the police are illegal. The police have no authority to issues guidelines of that nature. When you read the Police Act, it is the minister who is supposed to issue guidelines in that respect, not the police. Therefore, the minister is relinquishing his authority to the police. The minister must rise up to the occasion.

Finally, in -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the challenge we face is that even when the guidelines are fulfilled, the police continue to undermine these activities and they will always say, “orders from above”. I would like to request the minster to empower especially the District Police Commanders and Regional Police Commanders (RPCs) to take decisions.

On the 30th, I have a victory function in Bugiri. When I went to notify police about the function, they told me that they would clear that function if hon. Kyagulanyi was not coming. Madam Speaker, hon. Kyagulanyi was my campaign manager in Bugiri, how can police say he should not come? In fact, they said it is a directive.

Madam Speaker, when we met the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) last week, he said that his shows are being denied because he incites violence; that is what the President told me. I challenged him and I said that incitement to violence under section 83 of the Penal Code Act is a crime. Therefore, if hon. Kyagulanyi is committing a crime, he should be arrested and prosecuted. Otherwise, the solution is not in stopping his shows.

Madam Speaker, stopping the shows in that manner borders on violation of the Constitution. I think we need to be very clear on this. This is about economic rights and economic rights must be respected. At no time as Parliament should we allow anybody to disrupt acts that are empowering young people, who are the majority in the music industry. They should stop stifling their income and undermining their activities because at the end of it all, they will become redundant and it will be problem for the country.

5.20
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to respond to the statement presented by the minister, which I find very dishonest.

Madam Speaker, the minister mentioned that I was not one of the artists who were supposed to perform in Jinja. I want to state that I was the main artist with a contract paid to perform there. As if that was not enough, the minister mentioned the show I held at One Love Beach, Busabala, which happens to be my venue. This show happened after police blocked us from accessing Namboole Stadium without any viable reason. 

Even after we held this show, which turned out to be one of the most peaceful shows, I want to inform this House that all the other shows that followed in that exact place - One Love Beach, Busabala - were blocked. Galaxy FM booked the place for a show on the 9th of December but they were blocked. The police told them that they needed to get another venue since they would not be cleared if they were going have the show at Kyagulanyi’s venue. 

This is not just a matter about me as a Member of Parliament. I am lucky that I have a side job. The organisers of these events are in the House today. These promoters organise concerts where Bobi Wine and other artists are supposed to perform; they organise concerts for other artists in the same venues they organise my concerts. The documents they use for my concerts are the same documents they use for other concerts, but other artists are cleared and I am not.

Madam Speaker, when I went to the police to face the Inspector General of Police and his deputy to question why I am being persecuted financially on the 5th of December, I was made to sit - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in one minute since you are the subject matter.

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I went to the Uganda Police Force headquarters, I was made to sit and wait for four hours and there was a crisis meeting going on. Eventually, when the Director of Operations, Mr Asuman Mugenyi, came, he presented new guidelines dated 5th December this year and that was the day I went there.

Madam Speaker, because these promoters have invested a lot of money, which is their survival as Ugandans, they adhered to the new guidelines and they have made everything available as per the new guidelines. However, I want to inform you that the shows are still not cleared. The promoters are in the House today because they expect justice from this august House.

My prayer is that this Parliament prevails over the errant behaviour of the police and delivers justice to these humble Ugandans. I beg to submit.

2.24
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind the Minister of Internal Affairs that the festive season has come and it is during this season that these promoters actually make money. Therefore, if he cannot clear them to carry on with their concerts, he is killing them economically and henceforth creating insecurity. This is because they will look for other means of survival other than what they already know and what they have been doing.

Secondly, the minister talked about nine arson cases on markets. Honourable minister, you know that it is the duty of the police to protect and serve Ugandans. What have you done as a ministry to ensure that markets are secured, where we have millions of vendors who borrow money from microfinance institutions and other different sources? You have not gone ahead to prevent those people who torched the markets yet you are busy wasting time following hon. Kyagulanyi, who is just entertaining people. I think you are abdicating your duty of protecting people’s lives and property 

Honourable minister, I think this Parliament should put you to task to remain in your lane and guide your officers to do their duty as they are deemed to by the Constitution, to clear these promoters. The promoters are here and they have invested enormous amounts of money because they are earning a living from this. If you are persecuting and witch-hunting Bobi Wine as a musician, can you allow other people to –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are all proud to be Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, you have been leading delegations to attend international conferences and so has the Prime Minister, who was at the United Nations. Sometimes we get embarrassed and ashamed by what the police are doing to our people in this country. Uganda is supposed to be a democratic country with freedom of expression and freedom of association. Now the minister comes here and makes a very embarrassing statement. I think the minister also feels sad to come and read such a statement. I sympathise with you on the Front Bench.

Surely, how can you teargas a man who is going to church to pray to God for bringing him to Parliament? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, aren’t you embarrassed by some of these acts? I get embarrassed because I travel to international conferences and people ask us, “We thought Uganda was a democratic country; we thought Uganda was a wonderful country; why do you harass someone who is entertaining people?”

You are violating the human rights of Ugandans and this is bringing shame to Uganda among the international community. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, our ambassadors and colleagues who serve in the foreign service are embarrassed; they do not have answers when they see our –(Member timed out.)

5.28
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a professional teacher, I know that music is a subject. In the Committee on Education and Sports, we are struggling to encourage career guidance for our children. It is quite unfortunate that Government spends money training children in music, and one of those who have learnt music is hon. Kyagulanyi but when he starts practicing his profession, he is arrested.

Madam Speaker, recently, I saw the honourable minister - I was at a party with him - and he danced to the tune of hon. Kyagulanyi’s music. If you are enjoying someone’s music, where do you get the audacity to stop him from making other people enjoy the same music that you have been dancing to at that particular time?

I have just heard it here from hon. Kyagulanyi. The owner of Galaxy FM is my friend; he was given permission and clearance –(Interruption)

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, the Member holding the Floor said I was with him at a party where hon. Kyagulanyi’s music was played and I was enjoying - (Laughter) - I have never attended a party with hon. Ssewungu and I rarely attend parties.

Therefore, is he in order to allege that I was at a party with him and I was enjoying music?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, where were you with the Minister of Internal Affairs? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, you usually throw us parties here at Parliament and at one time, I danced with him the State of the Nation Address party. If he wants to deny - I am Catholic and he is Muslim - I will get the footage. I have danced with him before and even today, we are going to dance together outside there. (Laughter)

However, on a serious note, if somebody has property and you stop him from performing and you also stop those who want to hire his premises, it means you are denying him the right to earn an income. That is quite unfair. 

Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Appointments Committee and you will recall what we talked about with the Deputy –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue in this House is very important because it touches on the issue of insecurity and security of our country. The minister presented his report in two-fold. Part of the report talks about the issue of gun violence and the second one is on economic rights.

I would like to comment on the issue of gun violence in this country, which this Parliament has discussed time and again. We have heard promises by the minister that the issue of gun violence will be addressed squarely. I would like to inquire from the minister whether we really have a gun violence policy in this country. If it is not there, then how are we going to address the issue of gun violence?

I even wonder whether we know the number of illegal or legal guns that exist in this country. I would like to implore the minister that can we have a gun violence policy? If we can have that, we should be able to address the issue of gun violence squarely in this country. However, if not, then we are going to continue discussing this thing.

Secondly, on the issue of economic rights, you have indicated that you issue guidelines. I do not think we have a policy for the Public Order Management Act. So –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for this report. I would like to bring to the attention of the minister the issue of cattle theft that has become rampant. It is paralysing the local government in Agago. There was disarmament of some of our brothers in Karamoja but they face insecurity – which has now changed to cattle theft – and I think it is in the minister’s docket.

Every year, we talk about this. Yesterday, I got a call from Adilang Sub-County where about 12 heads of cattle were stolen. We have lost people in the process of following up on this cattle theft. We have lost people who had gone to follow up on the stolen animals. It is a very big problem, which is affecting the lives of these people because these animals are used for farming and are a source of livelihood for many of these people. This needs to be addressed. It is a serious security matter that the minister should pay attention to.

Our prayer is that this should be solved by easily bringing in the Anti-Stock Theft Unit. There is a unit but they are few in number. We need more UPDF forces deployed in the area. If this is done, it will curb the rampant cattle theft which has been a problem, year after year. Animals are our source of livelihood down there. I thought I should add this to the issue that is being raised today.

Otherwise we need to pay deep attention to this issue. Members of Parliament who are practicing other trades, whether it is law or –(Member timed out.) 

5.35
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to add my voice to the current debate. In this country, we are aware of the big problem of unemployment. Very many youth are languishing on the streets and in the villages. There is no adequate employment in this country.

Many of our brothers and sisters are trying to survive through this music industry. It is quite sad that the people to whom they look to as inspirational leaders in the same profession are being mistreated. It is really sad. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should rise up and match the task that is before them. I do not think it is adequate enough for the minister to simply follow what the police has already issued. The minister should really stand up and be a minister. (Applause) Police issued this statement and the minister is simply reaffirming it. 

It should come from the minister – (Member timed out.)

5.37
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of economic rights and gun violence in this country is giving people sleepless nights. 

Hon. Kyagulanyi simply represents many Ugandans who are suffering down there. The moment they do not want you to make money, however much you try to fulfil all the conditions, they will not allow you to do business in this country.

We really need to think from a different angle about what is happening in this country. I speak with a heavy heart. Up to now, I do not know how to respond to a youth in my constituency who is struggling to put up a disco hall at his level. This boy has been running that business in the whole sub-county. 

However, each time he organises a disco, they keep asking for little sums of money from him. He decided to follow all the procedures to secure a licence but the police and the Office of the RDC stopped him. He called me asking, “Honourable, what should I do? There are no jobs. I have a Diploma but I cannot get a job. I am creating my own job. Do they want us to commit crime? Do they want Ugandans to commit crimes?”

Madam Speaker, the security forces - the police, the army and all the Government institutions are pushing Ugandans too far; you are taking Ugandans for a ride. Please follow the law. If the laws are not working tell us and we find solutions because we the laws are there but you do not want to abide by them.

However much you try to put efforts, it seems there is some silent war that –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I proceed, I would like expunged one of the documents that has been laid by the minister.  

Before I make my submission, I would like to apply rule 223 and expunge from the parliamentary record a document that has been laid by the minister, purported to be a record of one of the promoters. This cannot fit the standard of a minister and a document worthy laying before this Parliament. 

To begin with, it is hand written. There is no heading of this document and literally when you look at it, it does not meet the minimum standard of any document worthy of a General or a Minister of Internal Affairs.

Therefore, I would like, through rule 223, to apply that this document be expunged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you said the document was in the minister’s pocket and you asked him to present it. It was in his pocket. 

MR MUWANGA: The honourable minister referred to this document and he majestically laid it before Parliament. If he said it was not authentic, he should have -

THE SPEAKER: You are the ones who demanded that he lays it. He had kept it in his pocket and you demanded. Just proceed with your presentation.

MR MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, the fundamental law we follow is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The rights are supposed to be upheld, promoted and protected by all persons and agencies. Even limitations that can be prescribed should not constitute political persecution. Even standing here to limit the argument that hon. Kyagulanyi cannot go to a music show and utter a political statement can be in a way interpreted as an affront to our constitutional rights.

Madam Speaker, the people of South Africa, at the height of Apartheid, were left with no option but to resort to music to deliver political grievances. Everywhere there have been political issues, music has been one of the avenues; it is a way of communication in a way, as much as it is entertainment and an economic right. 

Let us not, as the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, limit the scope of rights including the scope of what can constitute a struggle. There is a struggle in this country underway and the young people in this country have embraced this struggle.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda, in the previous election campaigns, used music. They hired a group of musicians under Tubonga Nawe and they sang for the President. They curtain-raised for the President. “We want another rap” was one of the songs the President used to rally support. This was a political campaign.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to this Parliament that political persecution is prohibited in this –(Member timed out.)

5.43
MR KASSINO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In an attempt to encourage the youth of this country to mobilise resources, President Museveni is on record for the programme commonly known as okulembeka; which in English means to tap resources. Therefore, every one of us here in this Parliament is getting a way of tapping resources. Therefore, if hon. Kyagulanyi is gifted by way of attracting resources for his personal development and usage in his constituency, that is an idea that should not be stifled.

Madam Speaker, in 2010 when I was the Opposition Chief Whip, I had an opportunity to visit the Parliament of Malawi. In the even as we were about to depart for Entebbe, we were entertained by the minister for youth who had his own music band and he was contracted by Parliament to come on stage and entertain guests. I wish that talents that exist among us are promoted so that we make use of our own rather than bringing people from other dance troupes to entertain us like we are going to have this evening.

Therefore, I look at a situation where this purposeful attempt to stifle the economic rights of hon. Kyagulanyi is not new. The police are not rewriting the history of the first time. In the past, many members of the Opposition –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kyagulanyi and indeed many others who entertain us - I am a lover of music; I enjoy myself when I listen to music. I dance and that is how I manage stress. 

I would like to ask the honourable minister; aware that hon. Kyagulanyi and many others are making losses from their cancelled concerts and they are tortured psychologically; how are these people going to be compensated? As you are ware, they use a lot of money to prepare for these concerts and when you stop them, it is a loss.

Madam Speaker, about two months ago, I organised a meeting in Masaka - the DP UYD reunion - and the question the police asked was, “Have you invited Kyagulanyi?” It took me a lot of time to explain that of course he was one of the people who were invited. Every Ugandan would want to know why hon. Kyagulanyi; what is behind hon. Kyagulanyi and what threat has hon. Kyagulanyi brought to this country? If this is not explained a lot of questions are going -(Member timed out.)

5.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The focus is on hon. Kyagulanyi but the Government of Uganda or all of us Ugandans must be mindful about our people. When we move, we are always with our heads up that we are the Pearl of Africa.  We must love Uganda and we must love our people and promote the initiatives of our people.

If it was somebody coming from outside Uganda, everybody would be very happy. However, because it is an initiative from inside and that person is a politician, you just want to stifle everything. This is not fair.

When we talk of patriotism, it is one thing that we should promote. What is the fear about? Why are you so afraid? Freedom is a fundamental right. While people struggle to have money in their pockets, you want to go and cut it off. This is unfortunate.

Last week when I was in Gulu, I wanted to meet the political leaders in Aswa County. There was a lot of commotion. They asked, “Did she obtain permission from the District Police Commander (DPC)?” Must I obtain permission from the DPC to meet leaders? Even when one does not have a public address system but rather trying to meet them under a tree or a hall? Must I have to look left and right for permission?

Please, honourable minister, we need freedom, dignity and stability. We know that we must always be mindful of security. We already have that law and that law is to inform you that I am there so go and take care of my security but not to stop my rally, if it is one. You have even announced in the newspapers that you have banned rallies for the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) in Ankole sub-region. You are not even ashamed. 

I was told by a politician that politics is difficult in every country but ours in Uganda seems to be the worst. It is because we are not ashamed to have the military and the police blocking our freedom. 

Give hon. Kyagulanyi freedom to do his work even if you are afraid of him. You are even selling him; everybody is mad about him because you have sold him. Ugandans, you are listening to us. If these ministers do not know their work, we will push them to know their work. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, but they must know that freedom, dignity and stability are most important.

5.51
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. If you had not brought it, we would not have known the position of Government.

Allow me to mention three things;
First, even the Bible recognises the relevance of music. Psalms 95:1 says, “Come, let us sing for joy to the Lord; let us shout aloud to the Rock of our salvation”. That is the Bible. Even king David danced – and I am David. 

Music plays three major roles;
 
    1. It is basically to praise God.
    2. To celebrate victory
    3. Even in mourning, people sing to mourn their dear ones.

My view, it is not proper for us to stifle the principle of democracy that we have fought for in this country – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, hon. Abala is my good neighbour; he comes from Ngora and I come from Kumi. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that in the Bible that he is quoting, there once lived a king who invited people for a party. A certain girl came and danced to a very good music tune and the king was so excited. 

The king asked, “What do you want and I shall give it to you?” The girl asked for the head of somebody and it was offered. That is how important music can be. (Laughter)

MR ABALA: Secondly, I wonder about a country or a community without music. If we stopped music in Uganda, I am sure this country would be in total chaos. 

My view is that let us handle this matter with a lot of intelligence and a lot of concern because there are so many youth in this country who are practicing and surviving on music. There are so many DJs in this country. All of us here at least at one time hired a DJ to play and dance at your campaigns. Now when you stop like this – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when those music concerts take place, there are people who are selling water, meat and chicken; those small people earn from such facilities. (Applause)

5.54
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, whether I agree with it or not. 

I would like to address myself to mainly an aspect of the statement of the minister. The Constitution guarantees freedom of expression and freedom of association. 

Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees equality and freedom from discrimination; this means that the law must equally apply to all Ugandans. No one should be discriminated or treated differently.

If you treat Chameleon in one way, you should also treat Bobi Wine the same way. I do not see why one of them must be treated differently from the others. It is definitely wrong and honourable minister, it is something you should definitely address. 

I heard you say that under the Public Order Management Act, there are guidelines which you have set. These guidelines must apply to everyone and not leave out others –(Member timed out.)

5.57
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of rights, constitutional and legal provisions has already come out clearly and strongly for many Members. 

I would like to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs as far as the issue of blocking the performances of hon. Kyagulanyi is concerned; I know the police has intelligence departments and intelligence officers and even the other security forces have these officers. I would like to find out whether these intelligence officers have ever bothered to get down on the ground and find out the opinion and the feeling of the public on blocking and frustrating these performances.

If the police and the Government are critical – they say, “Order from above,” has this person who is above and giving orders bothered to find out how the public feels about this? Has it been a concern to you, honourable minister? You need to give us this information.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, in his submission, the minister –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you may recall, in the Ninth Parliament, I used to sit in that corner because by then I was an Independent. Right now, I sit here. I do not know, Madam Speaker, maybe or maybe not at one point I will be sitting in the corner where hon. Kyagulanyi is seated. I, therefore, cannot sit here and witness the Government I support apply the law selectively and I keep quiet.

I think it is high time that we separate matters of politics from matters of economic empowerment. Whether politics or not, all Ugandans must be economically empowered. Therefore, sabotaging the music performances of an individual, who has a big following of people earning out of his performances, would be –(Interruption)

MR KUMAMA: Thank you, hon. Kafeero, for giving way. I would like to inform you that during our time we enjoyed music from Congo. These young men then brought the music industry to where it is today and somebody called “Above” comes and sits on them; you are killing the industry. Those that are killing hon. Kyagulanyi are not targeting him but targeting the music industry.

6.01
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said about music but I want to address myself to point No. 5 concerning the fire outbreaks. The minister has not said much yet we wanted to hear about these fire outbreaks.

Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, we had a very serious fire that gutted many houses in Malaba and particularly one arsonist case that brought down a very big house of one gentleman in my constituency called Gerald Tabong. The investigators who went to the crime scene told us that the people who could have set this fire were very professional. This put us in a state of fear because we do not know if this will continue across the village.

I would have loved the minister to say more about these arsonist cases because we are losing lives as a result of arson. Madam Speaker, the minister has told us of a meager budget but maybe this is the right opportunity for him to bring up this matter such that the committee responsible, when we start the budgetary process, can help us improve on the interests as far as fire is concerned.

Madam Speaker, Gerald Tabong lost a big house - a house that was ready to be occupied, valued at almost Shs 400 million. You can imagine the kind of –(Member timed out.)

6.03
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the stifling of hon. Kyagulanyi’s concerts, I am looking at the bigger picture like you said. When we have these concerts and the people that come to attend and enjoy, there are so many people involved and a lot of money involved.

The people who do the transportation – the boda bodas, the taxis, the special hires gain from this. The people who roast meat, those who sell water – and wen this concert is stopped at the last moment, there is a lot of money lost. 

We are talking about people getting empowered economically, we are talking about unemployment in this country yet we are stifling activities that generate income to our people. Therefore, as Government, we should be looking at the bigger picture and not looking at one individual – hon. Kyagulanyi.

Regarding the allegations that there are political sentiments, inciting violence and all that - I studied music in secondary school and music is one way of communication. We are talented differently; even in this Parliament, we are of different professions, talents and different capabilities.

Hon. Kyagulanyi may not be able to address a rally to solicit for votes but he uses music to campaign and build his political career. Therefore, by stifling –(Member timed out.)

6.05
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a different opinion. We have talked about everything and my simple opinion is that it is the NRM Government that has created a conducive atmosphere that has allowed all these talents to sprout. The talents that are in this country are incredible but where were they? 

They have sprouted only in this regime. Therefore, we should separate political rallies from concerts. What I observe is that most of the rallies of our colleague here are turned into political rallies. Either he is aware or he is not aware. If he can separate these gatherings - these mobs - to an enclosed place where people go pay, enter and dance, I do not think there is a problem – (Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I never wanted to speak in this debate because it is very emotional. The honourable member who has been on the Floor said that it is very difficult to differentiate between a concert and a rally.

It is on record that several times my brother Robert Kyagulanyi has been organising concerts fully sponsored by many people and it is those concerts that we are talking about. Is he, therefore, in order to insinuate that all the concerts that hon. Kyagulanyi has organised were political rallies? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I told you that this morning, I received a petition and those people are sitting up there. They told me that all of them are organisers of concerts and hon. Kyagulanyi is only one of the performers. Therefore, when a show is cancelled, all those small people - the dancers, the singers, the food vendors, the venue owners - all of them lose. That is what happened.

COL. (Rtd) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I am not denying that. I support any talent development including that of our colleague but we should be mindful about the security of this country and the property. It is very clear in the law and the Police Act is very clear. You should read it and see. It is the duty of the police to protect Ugandans and their property –(Member timed out.) 

6.09
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, we thank the minister for the statement. This is the festive season; in two or three days we will welcome Jesus’ birth. We are waiting to sing “Halleluiah.” The problem is with the police. They have failed to read the writing on the wall. Everybody is waiting to dance during this festive season; we have been stressed throughout the whole year and we are waiting to dance. 

Madam Speaker, the police is failing to properly engage. I was recently handled by the police like a chicken thief in my constituency, where I had gone to rescue my people. They were evicted at night with the police involved. I was called out of my bed by my voters and I went to the constituency only to reach the site to engage both the police and the public. The police was so trigger happy to smash everywhere with teargas, gunshots and live bullets. I failed to help the police because they were not engaging properly. 

This is a festive season. Honourable minister, I would like you to listen to me –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, I hope you are adding money to his budget.

MR KASULE: As Parliament, we need to guide the police on how and when to use teargas, live bullets and counsel – (Member timed out.)

6.11
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read Article 211, which provides for the establishment of the police as well as Article 212 which provides for the functions of the police. In both articles, I have not seen anywhere where the concerts of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi contradict with the law.

Secondly, in 2013, when we were processing the Public Order Management Bill, I rose on the Floor of this House - hon. Amama Mbabazi was the mover of the Bill. I remember he said that the best law that Ugandans were yearning for was the Public Order Management Act not until he was supposed to go to Mbale and organise a rally. At the same time, we had a rally in Kasangati. We were all arrested while on our way and none of us made it to our rallies. I met him in the cell and I told him, “God is good that you have been arrested because you were the proponent of this stupid thing.” 

Finally, I see that there are double standards that are being played. Honourable Prime Minister, I do not know whether you ever dream that you will leave power one day. These ministers here will not be – (Member timed out.) 

6.13
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the report of the minister. To begin with, when the President is appointing ministers, he appoints the popular ones. If you lose an election, he will most likely not appoint you. 

In the same spirit, when the organisers are organising music shows, they will look for the most selling artiste of the time. Therefore, if you are doing that kind of business in Uganda, you cannot avoid calling people like hon. Kyagulanyi and Sheeba; the list goes on. It is just common knowledge that you use the most selling product. 

Madam Speaker, the minister brought a report likening specifics; in terms of crime, we have told the minister and the police many times that they should bring for us what we call a Crime Prevention Strategic Action Plan. However, they keep coming with their reactionary approach. That is why he just mentioned it but he did not even say what the police is doing for security during the festive period because there is no action plan in this country. 

His report lacked in the context of who exactly is promoting stock theft in Karamoja. Where are they coming from? If you have deployed the Anti-Stock Theft Unit, where exactly and what would be the specifics of the number of animals you have lost over which period of time? However, you came here giving the same “wolokoso” that he did on Friday, 6th February when he actually connived – you are a lawyer. When a witness stands against his own client, he is also called a hostile witness. 

This minister was a commandant and he ordered the Force to go for an early morning parade, leaving their guns in the armoury so that Kabamba would be attacked. The other time he also gave us a report on why women were being killed in Entebbe. He said it was the “Illuminati” killing the people, without any evidence or report laid on the Floor of Parliament. 

I think we need to look into this kind of taking Uganda for granted. For example the deaths in Arua, three months ago, a man called Rasul was threatened by people who wanted to rob him. After three months, they came and killed him and then the minister told us that that gun had been stolen a month ago and was used for killing Rasul in Arua Town in Awindiri. We have so many Alurs in Awindiri and that is why I know that information clearly. 

In nutshell, these kinds of – you are telling us that Bobi Wine got somewhere and started organising a rally – under section 4 of the Public Order Management Act, we put it clearly  that spontaneous crowds will not fall under the Public Order Management Act. If I stop somewhere and I am greeting people and the crowds gather, really – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this is a very big subject but we have other issues to deal with. I would just like to address the minister on three issues; 

First, we are definitely going into the festive season. The people of Uganda are looking forward to attending parties, concerts and other activities up to January. Secondly, the operators are also looking forward to making money and thirdly, I have been told by several people that the entertainment capital of East Africa is Kampala. Everybody comes here for happiness; people from Nairobi, Rwanda, among others. 

I do appreciate the need for security and I thank the police for the work they do to keep us secure. However, I would like you to balance that with Article 40(2) of the Constitution, which I would like to read. “Every person in Uganda has the right to practise his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation…” for example, selling meat, ice cream, nsenene, cigarettes, trade or business. 

Therefore, honourable minister, if you could you assure us within those rights and your duties, we will appreciate it.

6.18
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, thank you once again for this opportunity. I would like to thank my colleagues for the interest they have shown in the contributions they have made. On my record, I have about 34 Members who have contributed in the course of this afternoon, on this debate. 

I will quickly summarise our contributions and make a few responses because a number of them can be grouped together.
First of all, the Right Honourable Speaker raised a fear of the stringent conditions which the police have put in place as guidelines in preparation for these concerts. The catch word is “guidelines.” Indeed you are invited so that we can talk in order to be able to see how we can help each other for you to be able to conduct your business. These are guidelines so that you can come and we discuss.

Secondly, I am a Muslim by religion. It has been raised in the course of this debate that Muslims are being mistreated before the law. I have no facts to that effect – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can meet the minister in his office for details.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, with due respect to Al-Hajji Abubakhar Jeje Odongo, I have no doubt that he is a practicing Muslim. I equally have no doubt that we have the Imam of this Parliament, who is our leader he does not object to that. 

Aware that we have written to the Office of the Inspector General of Police seeking permission and notifying him to grant us security and the Ministry of Defense to grant us Kololo Airstrip to perform prayers uniting us in support of the Muslims that have been tortured like a one Ssenfuka, who we even discussed in this august House, as having been tortured in Nalufenya – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the issue he is addressing is the refusal to allow you to use the airstrip. 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister, to whose office we have addressed this matter in writing and who has responded to us in writing, to state that he is not aware that Muslims are being persecuted in that manner?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I cannot rule on that matter. I have neither seen the letter you wrote nor the response. I cannot.

GEN. ODONGO: In the course of this debate, Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution were quoted, which protect our rights. I would like us not to read the Constitution in isolation. Read Articles 21 and 22 against Article 43 of the same Constitution.

In the course of this debate, it has been alleged that the minister has abdicated his responsibilities to the Inspector General of Police. I would like you to read the Police Act Section 21(2) to understand what the rights and roles of the IGP are.

The question of the incident in Alebtong was raised. I would like to share the information and developments in relation to this incident so far. Yes, it was a soldier; yes, he came home with his weapon and yes, he killed three people of his family. That soldier has been arrested and we are processing how to try him against that crime.

I would like to share with you a very grave concern. Many of us, in the course of debate, have applauded the role of entertainment but we must also remember that as we enjoy, we must also be safe. Therefore, let us balance entertainment with our safety and security. One must not overshadow the other.

I, therefore, would like to state that no one of us is above the law. The law cuts across for all of us. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, you recall remember the directive that you gave to the minister on Tuesday; that the minister should tell Ugandans why they are blocking hon. Robert Kyagulanyi from practicing his profession. Right now, he has started talking about protecting people during the festive season. 

The minister also stated clearly that the safety of our people is very important. I would like the minister to tell us clearly what insecurity hon. Kyagulanyi normally causes during the concert -

THE SPEAKER: Where is the point of order?

MR OLANYA: Is the honourable minister in order to insinuate that hon. Kyagulanyi normally causes insecurity during his concerts? 

THE SPEAKER: The minister will substantiate, if that is what he said. 

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that no one is above the law. All of us must respect the law. It is we, the honourable members of this august House, who have passed these laws. My duty and my colleagues’ is to enforce and we will do that.

In the course of this debate, an appeal –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you. It is unfortunate how insincere some of us can be. The honourable minister is talking about no body being above the law and in the same vein, we are decrying the implementers of the law abusing the law. 

Is he in order to pretend to be abiding by the law, when actually the department he superintends is the one abusing the law by stifling our rights, by harassing us and abusing our human rights? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on the Floor of this House, there have been many complaints from different Members about blocking their activities. I think when talking about that issue, be cautious that there are cases in this House, which have been recorded by your agents.

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. Finally, I would like to say –(Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am disturbed by the statement, which the minister has just made. He said that they are implementing the law that was made by this House.

One of the laws that were made by this House is Article 40, which guarantees the economic rights. In his statement, the minister invoked the Public Order Management Act, which is very clear that commercial activities and concerts for that matter are not regarded as public meetings, which are supposed to be regulated. This is a clear indication that by blocking hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and the like from performing, it is an abuse of that very Act that the minister invoked. 

Is he, therefore, in order to insinuate that he is implementing the law yet his docket is the greatest abuser of the law? It is on record that Human Rights in Uganda are majorly abused by police. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the minister and his agents have been acting in violation of the Public Order Management Act then, he is out of order.

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, thank you for your ruling. As I conclude, in the course of this debate, hon. Kiyingi made an appeal that we should not mix politics and entertainment. I would like on the same note, to inform you, that on 14 December 2018, His Excellency, the President hosted the national thanksgiving luncheon. In the course of his address – (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister said that we should not mix politics and music. I would like to find out from the minister whether politics is banned in this country? We are politicians - whether we are not supposed to practise politics yet there is politics in the church. The other day, when Jose Chameleon had a music concert, the Government Chief Whip was invited. She went and talked politics.

Therefore, I would like to find out from the minister, whether politics is banned in this country yet we are politicians. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to complete this issue. Order! Are you invading the microphones?

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wish to ask the honourable minister, under which law is mixing politics and my profession prohibited or accepted? Can you cite the law?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. A few weeks ago, you blessed the national dialogue process. I would like to thank the President, who on Wednesday, launched the national dialogue. The minister seems to be moving to the contrary. 

I thought the Prime Minister had briefed the minister and the department of Internal Affairs that the President has given this country a Christmas and a new year’s gift in form of national dialogue for consensus building, for coexistence and tolerance.

I was going to boycott this year’s Parliament celebration if there was no national dialogue. I am ready to go down there and dance. I thought the organisers have hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Judith Babirye as part of the presenters. (Applause) 

Can you imagine the pressure and tension, if members of Parliament went down there and found that the minister has deployed against that dance. 

Madam Speaker, the clarification, I would like to seek from the Prime Minister because it seems this matter is now beyond the minister who did not attend the national dialogue. Possibly, the Prime Minister has to update and bring him on board; that we are ending this year in the spirit of national dialogue. Therefore, you are not going to stop people; we are now saying that gone are the days when people are going to have a coup or are going to the bush. We are now saying, you can use music to express yourself.

I would like to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker and also the intervention of the Prime Minister, to prevail on the minister so that when we leave here, we know that the freedom of the musicians as an industry is given and starting now, when we go to dance. 

I hope hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Judith Babirye are ready with their music so that we show the country that Uganda is a tourism destination. We are therefore, going to enjoy, starting with Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the issue of separating music from politics may be difficult. For instance, the Prime Minister may go to Kabale to do something in the church and a small girl says I want to sing for you and she sings, “You are a good Prime Minister. You should remain there. You should become President.” (Laughter) 

Yes, I think let us find a meeting point. When I go out, I do not even know the people whom I am going to see and they sing, yet I have never met them. Let us find a middle point. 

Honourable minister, answer my three questions and close.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I will answer the three questions with just one simple phrase. In effect, you are advising that we should “balance the boat”. We will do that.

Finally, I was telling honourable members that on 14 December this year, H.E the President held a thanksgiving function at State House. In his remarks, he advised the performers – the choir – that it was a function to give thanks to God; that they should bring those songs about the NRM another day. That is what I am saying; do not mix politics and music. 

Before I sit down, I would like to say that all of us have suggested and emphasised that we are a democratic country. Democracy means patience with one another –(Interjection) - when I speak and you jump to interfere, that borders on impunity. Let us practice what we say. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just wanted to hear in plain English; are the entertainers going to do their things?

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Madam Speaker, certainly entertainers will do their things, according to the law.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017 ON 115 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 41 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS AND 63 TOWN COUNCILS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose that we just receive the report and do not debate. Give us just the highlights.

6.42
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Okin Ojara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have indicated, we are not going to read the full report. To start with, allow me to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings conducted by the committee while considering the report of the Auditor-General on the district local governments and municipal councils for Financial Year 2016/2017. 

I beg to lay.

Allow me also to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) on the Auditor-General’s report of Financial Year 2016/2017 on 115 district local governments, 41 municipal councils and 63 town councils. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, allow me to present the overview.

Rule 179 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) to examine the audited accounts in relation to the report laid before Parliament by the minister. The committee considered the detailed audit reports of 115 district local governments, 41 municipal councils, 63 town councils, making it a total of 213 entities and this is the report that we have just laid on Table.

The overall approved national budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 was Shs 26.360 trillion while the one for local government was Shs 2.596 trillion. This budget allocation indicated an increment of Shs 235 billion, which is 10 per cent in comparison to Financial Year 2015/2016. This is nominal in terms of figures. However, in terms of percentage the local government grants were the same in the financial year.

Madam Speaker, the overall issue in this report, which I would like to conclude with, is that the committee observed that in all the local government entities, we still have poor accountability and outright corruption, which is indicated in details in this report. We have also had a situation whereby Government sets standards in the different entities but they are not able to meet those standards. 

For example, in the health units, we have had standards being set right from health centres III, IV and hospitals. However, those standards are not adhered to in terms of the dispensation. This has caused a big problem at the lower levels in terms of the country meeting or even going closer to meeting the Sustainable Development Goal No.3, which talks about good health and the wellbeing of the people. 

This is our general observation, which I thought would be important for us to highlight when considering this report.

Most of the issues that the Auditor-General indicated are very clear and repetitive. When you look at the audit report for financial years 2015/16 and 2016/17, similar issues are raised; meaning that we have not been able to address these issues that have been raised by the Auditor-General. We hope that when the treasury memorandum comes this time with these audit reports, the ministry should be able to highlight how they are addressing it.

Madam Speaker, I end here and want the committee and the ministry to receive the report and then we wait for the response of the treasury memorandum. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). We shall resume with that issue after the recess when the debate takes place. Next item, please.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 120 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (AFD) FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF WATER AND SANITATION INFRASTRUCTURE FOR THE SOUTH WESTERN CLUSTER (MBARARA–MASAKA AREAS)

6.49
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal for Government to borrow up to € 120 million from the French Development Agency (AFD) for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure for the south western cluster (Mbarara–Masaka areas).

Madam Speaker, permit me to present the following documents:

    a) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s brief on the loan request
    b) The project appraisal document
    c) The French Development Agency Aide-memoire for the Appraisal of water-related projects 
    d) The draft loan agreement between the French Development Agency and the Government of Uganda
    e) Minutes of the meeting for the negotiation of the draft loan agreement between the AFD and the Government of Uganda
    f) The National Planning Authority clearance letter for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the south western cluster towns of Masaka and Mbarara Project 
    g) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development letter confirming that Government of Uganda will avail counterpart funding to the south western cluster towns of Masaka and Mbarara project. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I am aware that we are time-constrained but I think there are a few important things I should highlight. 

Performance of loans in the water and environment sector

When you look at table one, it is very clear that the performance of loans in the water and environment sector is very good except for those still ongoing. This project is to improve the health and living standards of target populations, including vulnerable and disadvantaged groups.

The specific objectives of the project 

The specific objectives of the development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the south western cluster towns of Masaka and Mbarara project are to –

    i. ensure adequate water provision in each of the supply areas by addressing the growing water supply challenges;
    ii. improve the sanitation situation in the towns of Masaka and Mbarara by rehabilitating and improving the existing sewer network and waste water treatment facilities; and
    iii. ensure sustainability of water supply and sanitation services in the targeted towns through establishment of efficient and effective institutional support systems.

The development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the south western cluster towns of Masaka and Mbarara will be done through upgrading, expansion and development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the following towns and settlements:

    a) Mbarara Supply Area: the en-route towns and rural-grown centres and settlements in Isingiro District including Bukanga. 
    b) Masaka Supply Area: including towns and settlements on the corridors leading from Masaka service area to Lukaya, Kyamulibwa, Kalisizo, and Mbirizi.
    c) The towns of Kyotera, Sanje, Kakuuto, Mutukula, Rakai, Lyantonde, Rushere, Kazo, Kyazanga, Katovu and Sanga. 

The direct beneficiaries of the programme will be the population of the large towns of Masaka and Mbarara, including some of their surrounding small towns, and rural-growth centres and townships in Isingiro District. It is estimated that by the year 2021, around one million people will benefit from the project.

The project has these components: 

    a) The first component is upgrade and expansion of existing water and sanitation infrastructure in Mbarara town.

    b) The second component is construction of a new water treatment plant in west Kagera River Bank to supply Mbarara town and some location towns in Isingiro District.

    c) The third component is upgrade and expansion of the existing water and sanitation infrastructure in Masaka town and its surrounding.

    d) Component four is provide technical assistance to NWSC dedicated project team to enhance project management and implementation.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time and mindful of more business to follow, please permit me to quickly go to the recommendations. Since the report is uploaded on our iPads, colleagues can read it.

The conclusion of the committee report which is signed by majority of the Members is, that the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to € 120.0 million from the French Development Agency to support the development of water and sanitation infrastructure in the south western cluster towns of Masaka and Mbarara project be approved. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Before you bring the motion, on behalf of the people of Isingiro who have been crying for a long time, I thank Government for bringing this. The Member for Kashongi is saying that he has not been considered. So, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Kashongi needs to be supported.

6.57
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, bearing in mind that water is life and considering that even yesterday, the eastern parts of this country secured a loan and today we are looking at the south western cluster - 

Madam Speaker, aware that this boat is now being balanced – (Laughter) – and Isingiro and other parts being water-stressed for long and that the committee, with delegated power, looked at the loan request and approved that euro 120 million be provided and approved by this Parliament; I therefore move that a question be put so that this loan is approved to provide the much needed services for the people of south western cluster.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems there is support for the motion. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the request as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 150.0 MILLION FROM THE AGENCE FRANÇAISE DÉVELOPPEMENT (ADF) TO SUPPORT THE KAMPALA WATER–LAKE VICTORIA WATER AND SANITATION II (KW-LVWATSAN II) PROJECT

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: What rule are you addressing, by any chance? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: It is not a specific rule but I draw your attention to Rule 20 –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no.

MR KATUSABE: It is Rule 20, Madam Speaker. Out of your generosity that you apply all over the country in your national service, you honoured the people of Bukonjo County West with your dignified visit. One of the cries they put before you was safe, clean drinking water. 

THE SPEAKER: I have not heard. What is it you are asking for?

MR KATUSABE: I am talking about another loan for water. I was wondering whether it is not procedurally right to aggregate our national water needs so that every community is covered, including my community that cried before you, to be served with clean water.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are speaking when there is no report. Please take your seat.

7.00
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to euro 150 million from the French Development Agency to support the Kampala Water-Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Phase II project.

Allow me to lay on the Table the following documents which the committee considered in assessing this loan request:

    1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development's brief on the loan request
    2. The re-scoping project document
    3. The French Development Agency Aide-memoire for the appraisal of the water related projects
    4. The draft loan agreement between the French Development Agency and the Government of Uganda
    5. Minutes of the negotiation of the draft loan agreement between the French Development Agency and the Government of Uganda
    6. The National Planning Authority clearance letter of the Kampala Water-Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation project, and 
    7. A signed copy of the report.

I beg to lay.

I note this also being on water; I can only say the performance of implementation of projects in the water sector is, as I have stated, very good. 

I will talk about the project briefly. This project – (Interjection) – No, it is not true that Kampala does not have water.

This is a Phase II project and follows the Phase I Kampala Water-Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation project, whose performance is very good. On 27 April 2011, Parliament of Uganda approved the request by Government to borrow euro 75 million from the French Development Agency and another euro 75 million from the European Investment Bank to support the Kampala Water-Lake Victoria project. 

The financing agreements for the project were signed by Government of Uganda and the lenders on 28 April 2O11. This four-year project commenced on 28 April 2011 with an initial closure date of 2015 but an extension was secured up to 30 October 2020. The project was hindered by delays in conducting feasibility and diagnostic studies, which were preconditions for accessing financial resources for the major infrastructure developments. Therefore, the physical progress of the project was delayed with only one of the five main project components having been completed, that is, the rehabilitation of Ggaba I and II treatment plants and new transmission lines. I think I should skip that.

However, this is basically a project that is intended to improve uptake or processing and distribution of water within the Kampala area. Permit me to move to the components of the project.

    1. Immediate measures for upgrading the Ggaba water treatment plant complex and providing additional water transmission and storage capacity.
    2. Network restructuring and rehabilitation.
    3. Improvement and extension of water supply and sanitary services in informal settlements.
    4. Construction of a new treatment plant, east of Kampala, transmission main, and associated networks, and
    5. Accompanying measures.

Permit me that after thorough consideration of this loan request, the committee concluded that the request by Government to borrow up to euro 150 million from the French Development Agency (AFD) to support the Kampala Water-Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Phase II project be approved. I beg to report. 

7.06
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, this is the second phase of the Kampala Sanitation Project. I think I can only be supported by hon. Mukitale who processed the first loan and that ever since we contracted Sogea to do the work all those delays have been ironed out.

Therefore, I would like to move a motion that the second phase of this loan is also approved by this Parliament to serve the entire metropolitan area of Kampala. It is not only to serve Kampala but the entire Kampala Metropolitan Area. I beg to move.

7.07
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, certainly I am not enjoying this. However, in accordance with our National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy specifically XII, the people of Bukonjo County West were honoured with your physical presence. 

One of the cries that they put before you was the continued situation of drawing muddy water from the swamps. While I totally support the loans to serve our brothers and sisters anywhere, it will be important for us to have water needs aggregated together so that we serve the people of Kasese, Bukonjo County West and as well they are in the same system.

Madam Speaker, it grieves my spirit that this Parliament passed the loan to provide enough water for animals in Isingiro and yet the same Parliament finds it difficult - I would like to believe that this Parliament cannot find it difficult to provide water for all Ugandans including the people -

THE SPEAKER: Where is the loan for animals?

MR KATUSABE: That was last year, Madam Speaker. I will crosscheck the Hansard - (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I am utterly very sorry that I have to put my colleague to order. My point of order arises from the loan we have just unanimously passed - for which I want to thank you.

Isingiro people have has the worst of times as far as water is concerned. This is known by everybody in this country since time immemorial. This is a district with almost now 700,000 people with water coverage of a mere 11 per cent. Tell me anywhere else in this country where this has been the case.

Madam Speaker, is the Member, therefore, in order to continue lamenting about the loan we have just passed unanimously insinuating that maybe this House has made a mistake? That for once they should allocate some little money to give water to the people of Isingiro South and North and Bukanga. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after the chairperson has read his report, I made one comment that on behalf of the people of Isingiro, I am really happy because I have been there. Each time I go that is what they tell me. Therefore, it is not for animals. There are people in Isingiro and they do not have water.

Please wait, honourable member. When I came back from your constituency, I reported to this House and I wrote to the minister, saying that I have been to Kasese and these are the problems. I came to your constituency and I wrote to that minister and reported to this House.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise guidance. I would like to state very clearly - My honourable brother, I did not indicate anywhere that I was against the loan. My first submission was that I totally support the loan to serve our brothers and sisters in those areas that are going to benefit from this. Certainly I support. Therefore, I did not indicate that my brothers and sisters in Isingiro should not benefit from this.

However, I was only saying - and if you remember - 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t you people raise an order while seated?

MR OKIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You made a very wise ruling that due to time constraints we should just receive these reports. You indicated that there will be time for us to deal with other matters. I am seeing a situation where we are almost getting into debating in some ways. Is it in order for a Member, in light of your wise ruling, to come and try to take time when we are pressed for time? Is it in order? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, although the issue the Member is raising is important, I will instruct the Committee on Natural Resources to evaluate the water coverage in the country and bring a report here for debate fully.

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to our honourable colleague that last week you directed the finance and water ministries that after we have covered the urban areas, we should concentrate on taking water to the rural areas.

Therefore, our resource mobilisation effort should focus on rural areas. I would like to assure our colleague and relative that we are going to concentrate on rural areas and Kasese is going to be part of that effort.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 19TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2016

7.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving us the opportunity to present the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 19th annual report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission covering the year 2016.

However, I would prefer and I pray that this report be presented when there is time for Members to be able to debate it and come up with resolutions for Government to adopt preferably immediately when we come from recess. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It will be reflected on the Order Paper as soon as we return. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, can I, therefore, take this opportunity to wish my colleagues a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$33,000,000 FROM ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING  THE LOCAL ECONOMIC GROWTH SUPPORT PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with your report. 

7.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am presenting the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow up to $33,000,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the local economic growth support project.

Before I proceed, I would like to lay the following documents on the Table: A copy of the signed report, signed minutes, a brief on the proposal to borrow and the contract for consultant services; the agents’ agreements, the loan agreements, project appraisal agreements and the framework agreements.

The loan request was presented and referred to the committee on 18 September this year. We reviewed it through meetings, documentary review and the field visit to Isingiro where similar projects had been implemented.

The local economic growth support project coverage will be in the following areas: Alebtong, Bunyangabu, Gomba, Kabarole, Kibuku, Nakaseke, Kyenjojo and Ntoroko.

In addition to the above 10 districts, the project will cover rural finance scheme that will cover eight additional districts namely: Adjumani, Buyende, Buikwe, Nwoya, Tororo, Luweero and Rukungiri.

Madam speaker, the criteria for selection of the project districts were the following: 

    1. Severely water-stressed areas.
    2. Status of development indicators.
    3. Potential for economic activities transformation and contribution to national growth.
    4. Population and demographic features.
    5. The distribution and status of basic infrastructure.

The objective of the project is the overarching development goal of the local economic growth support project to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) especially those related to eradication of poverty, hunger, ensuring good health and wellbeing; quality of education, clean water and sanitation, among others, in the selected beneficiary districts.  

The project will use a holistic and integrated approach based on scientifically proven interventions in agriculture, education, health, infrastructure and business developments.

The project has three components, namely: water for enhanced agricultural productivity and environmental conservation; support to household livelihood and value chain development; and support to project coordination and management.

The total cost of the project is estimated at $50.4 million. All taxes and custom duties will be paid by Government through the counterpart funding. The estimated cost is provided under Table 2 and the detailed project cost by component is provided under Table 3. 

The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) loan terms and budgetary implications:

The IDB will make available $43 million, corresponding to 85 per cent of the financing of the project. The rest will be provided by Government by way of counterpart funding.

The terms of the loan under the arrangement are provided under Table 4. The above loan, based on what is provided in those two Tables, is a market based loan, which requires that the project starts generating revenue for Government over the medium term as provided for.

Table 6 gives an indication of the “concessionality” of the loan. Table 11.2 and 11.2.1 provide the loan terms under the loan facility. The loan is highly concessional since its grant element of 53 per cent is higher than the threshold for concessional loans of 35 per cent. Therefore, the IDB funds a bread of commercial loan facility and concessional loans.

The budgetary provision during the financial year 2018/19:

During the financial year 2018/19, Government has made a provision of Shs 0.06 billion as part of the counterpart funding to kick-start the project. The project will be implemented over a period of four years and the Ministry of Local Government will be the executing agent for the project.

On sustainability, the project is economically, financially, socially and environmentally sustainable. On the current debt situation, it is within the threshold.

I now move to the observations and recommendations. 

Coordination with Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs):

The committee recommends that for this project to succeed and be implemented smoothly, the Ministry of Local Government should –

    1. liaise with the local support units of ministries, departments and agencies in respective areas of project implementation;
    2. harmonise the project with the source per village principle in order to improve service delivery and increase water coverage in areas of project intervention;
    3. The irrigation infrastructure planned under the project should be cognisant of the new national irrigation policy;
    4.  manage the development interventions. Vibrant local groups of entrepreneurs should be created and supported so that there is business to support the development process in the rural areas.

The second recommendation on taxes is that in order to curb delays in the implementation of this project, Government should ensure that provisions for counterpart funds for this project are adequately provided.

On the national co-operative development policy, the committee recommends that Government expedites the formulation of a national co-operative development policy and implementation strategy to empower and guide co-operatives in the country. 

On the mode of financing, the committee recommends that all projects, which are social in nature, should be financed with highly concessional finance or cheaper credit or grants. The returns to investments have a longer gestation period when compared to other public investment projects in energy, transport, agriculture, among others.

On the rural finance support and project area, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should coordinate with other public projects implementation teams in various sectors to harmonise interventions and avoid service duplication, and also spread interventions in areas where other projects are not present of the same intervention. This is meant to ensure that no single area is over endowed with this kind of projects. It should be spread out.

On the local content during project implementation, the committee recommends that during project implementation, local content schemes should be created to offer contracts to local companies up to at least 40 per cent of all procurements. The irrigation schemes to be developed should use local manufactured equipment like pipes and support small scale farmers.

On water for production, the committee recommends that the project should identify all potential water sources with a view of opening them up for local communities to manage and facilitate farmers to acquire equipment to irrigate their fields.

On counterpart funding the committee recommends that Government should provide adequate counterpart financing starting with the coming year, and over the medium-term to expedite projects implementation.

Madam Speaker, with those recommendations, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $33 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the local economic growth support projects be approved. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.28
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by the chairperson and I support the loan. My only concern is the assessment of these loans. I do not know what has happened before in the past; we need to know how these loans have been performing.

I would request for an assessment for these loans so that we know how we have performed because we have very many types of loans, and I do not know whether we are receiving the evaluation or the performance report of these loans as comparable to the projects in question.

We would also get to know the total sum of the loans that we have so far borrowed and to know the projects that have taken most of this money that has been borrowed. That is my concern, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I directed the Clerk to list down all the loans which have been taken so that we can evaluate them. I gave out that instruction yesterday.

7.28
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Considering that even our sugar levels have lowered and knowing that we have the time for grooving and considering the urgency of this loan, I move a motion that a question should be put for those people who support this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the loan request be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

7.30
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by a number of Members.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the policy behind this Bill is to operationalise the constitutional provisions relating to the Judiciary by providing for further application and enforcement of chapter 8 of the Constitution.

Charter 8 of the Constitution buttresses the institutional, operational and administrative independence of the Judiciary. Madam Speaker, Article 126 of the Constitution provides for the source and exercise of judicial powers.

Article 127 provides for the participation of the people in the administration of justice. The Constitution, under Article 128, provides for the independence of the Judiciary. It makes the Judiciary self-accounting and protects the administrative expenses and emoluments for persons serving in the Judiciary by charging them on the Consolidated Fund.

It empowers the Judiciary to deal directly with the ministry responsible for finance in determining the retirement benefits payable to or in respect of persons serving in the Judiciary. The intention of this Bill is to re-buttress these provisions. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

7.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee has considered this Bill which was referred to us. I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings to process the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 and the signed report on the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018.

Madam Speaker, as it has been guided, and considering these reports have already been uploaded on our iPads, I beg to say that for the harmony, the committee has proposed amendments that can help us reach a common ground and these and other in-depth analysis and recommendations are all contained in the report. We pray that this Bill is passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chair and the members of the committee. We shall go in details into that Bill when we return from recess.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE HUMAN RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT) BILL, 2015

7.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconders are available. Justification?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to give effect to Article 50(4) of the Constitution by providing for the procedure of enforcing human rights under Chapter Four of the Constitution and related matters.

Article 50(4) of the Constitution requires Parliament to make laws for the enforcement of the rights and freedoms guaranteed under Chapter Four of the Constitution.

However, since 1995 when the Constitution was promulgated, Parliament has not enacted any law under Article 50(4) providing for the enforcement of human rights by all persons, institutions and organs of Government.

In order to fill the gap created by the absence of the law made by Parliament for the enforcement of human rights, the rules committee established under Section 40 of the Judicature Act issued the Judicature Fundamental Rights and Freedoms Enforcement Procedure Rules, 2008, Statutory Instrument No.55 of 2008. 

However, these rules were challenged in the Bukenya Church Ambrose v. Attorney-General, Constitution Petition No.26 of 2010 and were set aside by the Constitutional Court. 

The Constitutional Court set aside these rules and held that it was not the role of any other body, other than Parliament, to make laws except under authority delegated by Parliament under Article 79. 

Moreover, the Judicature Act Cap 13, under which the statutory instrument was made, is not a law for enforcement of rights and freedoms as it is a law intended to consolidate, revise and take account of the provisions of the Constitution relating to the judiciary in absence of Article 50(1) of the Constitution. 

The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide a law on enforcement of human rights, as required by Article 50(4) of the Constitution. The Bill seeks to provide a framework for the enforcement of human rights and freedoms and also empower the rules committee of the Judiciary to make rules in respect of the specific procedural matters relating to the protection of human rights and enforcement of the fundamental rights and freedoms. 

Madam Speaker, since the Bill is uploaded, I beg to move that this Bill be passed by Parliament and will be a landmark in this country, as there is no specific law for the enforcement of human rights and freedoms, as guaranteed by Chapter Four. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is there a report on the Bill?
  
7.40
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad to report that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has concluded their consideration to the Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015 and we would like to report. 

Madam Speaker, at this point, allow me to lay the report of the committee and a set of minutes of the proceedings of the committee. Due to time constraints, I will not go into the details of the report, which has been well captured and the report was also uploaded on our iPads. 

All I can say, as the private member indicated, this was a Private Member’s Bill that was brought up in the Ninth Parliament and it was reopened in the Tenth Parliament. We have considered it and essentially the Article in question is Article 50(4). What we have noted is that the lack of observance of the human rights law is because there are no criminal sanctions for human rights violation. Essentially, this is what the Bill intends to do; these are the proposed amendments which we will deal with at a later time. That is essentially what we are doing here. I beg to report. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, for the report. We shall consider it in details, when we return from the Christmas recess. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Sseggona here? He is not. Okay, let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister for Kampala here? She is absent. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

7.42
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018” be read the second time.  

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. Okay, just read the justification. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the use of movable property as collateral for credit, provide for the creation – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I think it was a condition precedent. We did not give it a second reading last week because there was a reason. Please address the reason – the gazette. Was it laid here? 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the Bill was gazetted. 

THE SPEAKER: Please lay it - the gazettement of the other Bill which was being repealed.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, we tendered a copy of the gazette. It should be with the Clerk to Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: I saw it and I am told that it is in the Clerk’s office. It will be shared with the House when we return. 

MR RUKUTANA: I am much obliged, Madam Speaker. As I said, the object of the Bill is- 

    i. to provide for the use of movable property as collateral for credit;
    ii.  to provide for the creation and perfection of security interests;
    iii.  to provide for the rules for determining priority of claims among competing claimants; 
    iv. to provide for the registration of security interests in movable property by notices; 
    v. to provide for a register of security interests in movable property;
    vi. to provide for the enforcement of security interests;
    vii. to provide for search of the register and for related matters. 

Madam Speaker, this is an important Bill because hitherto we have not had a law providing for regulating movable properties as collateral for roads. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Do we have a report, honourable chairperson? 

7.45
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to report that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Bill referred to us and I wish to lay on the Table the following: the minutes of the committee proceedings processing the Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018 and the report on Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018. 

Madam Speaker, we have an executive summary of the report, which I wish to just peruse quickly, in the interest of time. 

The Security Interest Movable Property Bill, 2018 is a Government Bill which was referred to the committee on 27 March 2018 under Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The object of the bill is: 

    a) To provide for the use of movable property as collateral for credit. 
    b) To provide for the creation and perfection of security interests. 
    c) Provide for the rules for determining priority of claims among competing claimants. 
    d) To provide for the registration of security interests in movable property by notices. 
    e) To provide for a register of security interests in movable property.
    f) To provide for the enforcement of security interests, search of the register and for related matters. 

This Bill in effect is:

    a) To mainly repeal Chattels Security Act of 2014 and to provide for the use of movable property as collateral for credit. 
    b) To provide for the creation and perfection of security interest. 
    c) To provide for rules of determining priority of claims among competing claimants.
    d) To provide for registration of security interest in movable property by notices. 
    e) To provide for a register of interest in movable property.

I will go to the conclusion. Madam Speaker, the chattels as collateral for repayment of debts are not well developed in Uganda. They are mostly used by individual lenders. 

The committee took this into consideration and made observations arising from the proposals made in the Bill including the proposal to repeal the Chattels Security Act of 2014 rather than amending it.

The issue the committee was to include was whether or not it is legally permissible to repeal a law that has not been commenced. Fortunately, this has been addressed. The Act was commenced last Friday.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chair and members of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee. We shall go into the details of the Bill when we resume after Christmas.

I am really happy that we shall have no shortage of business. Business is guaranteed from the time we arrive.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) MISCELLANEOUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

7.49
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The object of the Bill is to amend the Penal Code Act Chapter 120. I beg to move that the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by several members, even the finance minister. Give us the justification.

MR MWIRU: The object of the Bill is to amend the Penal Code Act Chapter 120, Laws of Uganda, the Anti-terrorism Act, 2002, the Uganda People’s Defence Force Act, 2005, the Trial and Indictment Act Cap. 23 to remove all references to the mandatory death penalty prescribed by the laws and to restrict the application of the death penalty to the most serious crimes by converting the maximum penalties prescribed in those laws into imprisonment for life.

To remove the restriction on mitigation in the cases of convictions that carry a death sentence. 

To define “life imprisonment” or “imprisonment for life” and provide for related matters. I beg to move.

7.51
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to report that the committee processed the Bill entitled, The Law Reform (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

I beg to also report that the committee came up with a report and I have a signed copy which I beg to lay on table. I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the committee in processing this Bill.

This Bill was referred to the legal and parliamentary affairs committee on 10 November 2015. A detailed report has been uploaded to the iPads whose details I pray be captured in the Hansard.

In conclusion, we came up with a number of recommendations as a committee and suggested amendments in the Bill all of which are contained in the report. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Again we shall go into the details when we return after Christmas.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister assigned to read the message, please do.

7.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to move that the Bill entitled “The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. Justification?

MS NANKABIRWA: The object of this Bill is to amend the Kampala Capital City Authority Act which was enacted in 2010 and we intend to streamline and strengthen the governance of the city. 

This is in line with Article 5(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which is to provide for the Lord Mayor to be elected by the council from the councillors. 

To clarify the roles of the Lord Mayor and Deputy Lord Mayor. To merge the planning authority with the structure of the provision relating to the Kampala Capital City Authority and for related matters.

I have attended a number of meetings with the committee when they were inviting clients to appear before them and I beg that this Bill is read a second time so that we can internally discuss the provisions that have been outlined and then we pass it.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chair of presidential affairs committee, please take to the Floor. As the chair prepares, honourable minister, there is a pending issue on the salaries for the 250 Kasilo teachers.

7.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. It is true we handled the mentioned objectives of the Bill. Under objective one, we did a lot of amendments where we did not accept all the proposed amendment areas.

On objective two, on the election of the Lord Mayor, we amended and maintained the status quo where it is through adult suffrage (Applause).

Under objective three, about the roles of the Lord Mayor where it is reflected the Lord Mayor is the presiding officer, we have provided for the office of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. We also provided for the office of the executive committee to support the Lord Mayor.

We also devolved powers to the lower urban councils so that they will have their role over the budget. On the establishment of the metropolitan physical planning authority, we said “No” because Government has taken a decision on the mushrooming authorities but we agreed on having a department to coordinate the metropolitan areas.

Madam Speaker, our report was uploaded two days ago. Therefore, Members can read it. That is the summary I can give as per now. I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs and your members.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the copy of the report. I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings we had in the course of processing this Bill. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

7.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, as people are going for Christmas, the teachers of Kasilo are going to suffer.

THE SPEAKER: I had already told the minister about that, please.

7.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have been struggling to ensure that we pay everybody before Christmas and the report I have is that all civil servants’ salaries have been processed as per today including for those in Kasilo and Mbarara whose issues were raised here. Thank you very much. I wish everybody a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was the issue of the stolen CD4 count machine from Jinja. We instructed the Minister of Internal Affairs to follow up on the theft but we would like the minister to tell us what will be done in the interim.

7.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I would like to first apologise. My vehicle had a mechanical problem and I had to find alternative means and I arrived after the matter had been raised. It is true that the CD4 count machine was stolen in August and the matter was reported to police. The police are actually investigating, although they have taken long to apprehend the culprits. 

However, in the meantime, you are all aware that the CD4 count machine is normally used to test the immunity of the HIV patients. In the absence of the CD4 count machines, we are using the viral load test which is available at the central public health laboratory. We have a sample network. Therefore, for all patients that go to the regional referral hospital, their samples are taken and sent to the central public health laboratory network and results are relayed within a turnaround time of about one day.

Madam Speaker, the viral load test is even much better because it actually shows how the patients are progressing with the treatment, issues of drug resistance and so on. Therefore, it is a more superior model.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work we have done. We have done quite a lot. I would like to thank the Government side; the Opposition side; the Clerk and her team; Sergeant-At-Arms and the Hansard team, whom we never see but they are busy working there. We thank you very much for all the work done. I also thank the staff who support us in writing these reports and doing the research. 

I wish you all a Merry Christmas. You are invited to proceed down there for the “charmcation” (end of year party) and that is the next item over which I must preside at 8 o’clock.

I just have to remind you that we will resume on 8th of January. Thank you very much and have a good evening.

(The House rose at 8.01 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 January 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

