Thursday, 12 December 2013

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I want you to join me in welcoming district councillors and opinion leaders from Buikwe District – I do not know whether they are the ones on this sideor the other side. They are represented by hon. Kakoba and hon. Mpiima. Are you from Buikwe? Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, I am happy to announce that the Parliamentary Football Team and the Parliamentary Netball Team have both reached the semi-finals of the Inter-Parliamentary games. This afternoon, they are both playing and we look forward to see them reaching the finals on Saturday. I do hope that this time, Members will be available to support the team on Saturday at Namboole Stadium. We have also invited the President to officiate at the finals matches of the Inter-parliamentary games.

Thirdly, sadly, hon. Members, I wanted the Minister for Works to take an interest in the activities of Rift Valley Railways and specifically the management of the level crossings near Mukwano. On two occasions, including last night, I was nearly run down by the train. The trains just came out of the darkness; the barriers are there but there was nobody in charge. This is the second time it is happening. If my drivers were not alert, I would be history.

So, someone must take an interest; there is nobody there to alert the public but the barriers are there. You just see something huge coming towards you. I want the Ministry of Works to really take an interest in that and make sure that the lives of Ugandans are protected.

Fourthly, I will be making a small adjustment to the Order Paper to permit the Prime Minister to make a statement and so when the time comes, we shall allow him. I thank you. Hon. Kwizera had a small problem. Two minutes.

3.01
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Rt. Hon. Speaker, thank you very much. I am raising onan issue of national importance. The people and civil servants of Kisoro are wondering why the civil servants, including nurses and teachers should continue getting half salary when they have worked for a month. The salary for last month delayed and some other people have not got salary. I would want Government to explain why someone can work for 30 days and then get half salary. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, I do not know whether you have heard that the people are getting half pay –I do not know but people are going for Christmas. 

On Monday I was in Kamuli and the teachers did not even want to look at me;they were angry because their salaryis delayed. The Minister for Finance, can you tell us what to do and tell them about Christmas in view of the situation?

3.02
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General Duties) (Mr JachanOmach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, salary is a right and it should beavailed on time. The one for the month of December, we are in agreement with the Ministry of Public Service that they should submit to the Ministry of Finance by 16th of this month so that by 20th of December, the salaries have all been paid. However, the one for last month, I will consult and come back to the House.  

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I have had complaints from my district that teachers and medical people missed their June and August salaries and they have never got those salaries and they do not know who to talk about their salaries.

THE SPEAKER: But we are dealing with the one of the half salary paid to people in Kisoro. The other one may require you to give details. But this is for last month and why have they got half salary?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sincerely we are in a terrible situation where we have the Minister for Finance who has to tell us something to do with the teachers’ salaries and he is just going to consult. What are you doing there? Sincerely hon. Minister, tell us because you know we agreedin the Committee on Education that the teachers and any other worker should get their money in time because the money is very small. This is November but the teachers arestill complaining about the issue of half salary. Why are you not giving teachers their money?Through you, Madam Speaker,sincerely, what can you say? They had striked but they decided to call off the strike and you are not paying them but telling this House that you are going to consult, who are you going to consult? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I was a lecturer in Mbarara University of Science and Technology but I never received my salary of June and July in 2007 and I gave up because I had a private clinic, I went and just made ends meet there. (Laughter). My problem is very simple and I am very happy that the Government is here.

Sincerely speaking, what is the punishment for those technocrats in the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Public Service that are delaying salaries of teacher and nurses? Why can’t you punish them? Must we remain here like this? What do you do when these things happen? Be given promotion or sack them?

3.05
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The problem is bigger than just getting a half salaryand we put the problem on Ministry of Finance. The problem is in Ministry of Public Service. That is where the big problem is and it is bigger than what we think and I do not know what is going to happen. When they delete some people on the payroll this month, those that they have deleted this month will be paid next month and another time they will get half – it is a big mix up.

To make matters worse, Parliament resolved that doctors be posted toHealth Centre IVs and be given Shs 2.5 million as directed by His Excellency the President. I want to tell you, Madam Speaker thatmany doctors are not getting that money and so it is bigger than what we are talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you coming to say something?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Government is one but our responsibilities are different. The Ministry of Finance released the second quarter to all ministries, departments and agencies. The ministry responsible for payment of salaries is the Ministry of Public Service –(Interjections)– so if there are some delays; I have to consult with them as to why - 

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon, Prime Minister.

3.07
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise to take responsibility for the delays and I want to make an undertaking that we will do everything possible to make sure that the dues of all public servants are given to them in time. Those who are responsible for undue delays will obviously have to answer. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourablemembers, as I had indicated, I will allow the Prime Minister to make a statement. Let me invite you now to make your statement.    

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I find myself in a position that is of course familiar to me in terms of what you know. I rise to make a statement to pay tribute to President Nelson Mandela. Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you may be aware, Cabinet had planned to hold a Cabinet retreat from December 8th to 11th at Lake Victoria Serena Hotel and we were supposed to be there for three days prior to the sudden passing on of former President Nelson Mandela but the retreat itself had been organised earlier. 

As a result, the minister were unable to be present in Parliament on Tuesday, December 10 when a motion paying tribute to President Nelson Mandela was moved and passed on the Floor of this House.

The Executive wishes to record its gratitude to Parliament for having considered the motion to pay tribute to President Nelson Mandela for his contribution.We support the resolution and we affirm President Nelson Mandela’s immense contribution as a leader in the struggle for freedom of South Africa, Africa and indeed the entire human race.

My statement this afternoon therefore is meant to serve three purposes:To support the motion moved on the Floor of Parliament to pay tribute to the late President Nelson Mandela of the Republic of South Africa; to explain the absence of the Executive in Parliament on Tuesday, December 12, 2013 and to eulogise the great contribution by President Mandela particularly the strong connection between Uganda and the struggle against apartheid in South Africa and Africa as a whole.  

As we reflect on the passing on of comrade Nelson Mandela, we celebrate his life and exceptional legacy that has touched many and indeed left an indelible positive impact on the people in Africa and the whole world. 

President Mandela has been a colossus of a personality, who for decades embodied the enduring spirit of self-determination and struggle for equality and freedom for the oppressed people in Africa and across the Globe. 

In South Africa, he endured 27 torture years of incarceration by the then apartheid regime which suppressed the quest for universal equality of people, humanity and self-rule.

In 1994, when he became the first black person to be elected President of the Republic of South Africa, he put his past differences with the former leaders of the Republic of South Africa and promoted reconciliation with the perpetrators of the oppressive system of apartheid. He embarked on nation building, paving the way for a stable, united and prosperous multi-racial South Africa that we are proud of today.

During the struggle for freedom, the ANC combatants were based in Angola. After the battle of Cuito Cuanavalein Angola and the defeat of the apartheid South African forces in 1987/88, the run up to the Namibian independence hinged on the withdrawal of all foreign forces in Angola. Against threats from the South African Government and internal fears, the Government of Uganda welcomed the ANC combatants and offered them bases in Kaweweta, Nakaseke District. It is instructive to note that when President Nelson Mandela regained his freedom, he deemed it fit to make Uganda one of the first three countries to visit in Africa when he came in June 1990. 

Whereas independent Uganda expresses solidarity with the anti-apartheid movement like many other African countries, the commitment to Pan-Africanism, the NRM Government saw it fit to provide the ANC a home it needed for its combatants when others had feared to do so. Indeed, President Jacob Zuma hailed this support in his speech to Parliament here in March 2010 when he said, “When the ANC approached some countries for bases for its armed wing, they were fearful but the Government of Uganda under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni received us with open arms”. Many leaders in senior positions in the South African Defence Forces received initial military training in Uganda. He added, “Our gratitude to the people of Uganda for the sacrifice, solidarity and support during the struggle against one of the worst crimes against humanity should be heard by all young and old”.

We have enjoyed maximum cooperation in defence and security with South Africa since her independence in 1994. It is important to note that the counter insurgency operations against the LRA were significantly boosted by the acquisition of anti-tank land mines equipment through the personal intervention of President Nelson Mandela. This equipment was anti-mine and not anti-tank – mines which are meant to blow tanks. So we acquired equipment thanks to the cooperation of President Mandela and in fact his specific intervention because at that time there was a restriction against the sale of these arms to Uganda.

It should be recalled that landmines planted by the LRA had proved a menace to our people and public transport which was a challenge to humanitarian relief operations to the IDPs.

The combat and transport equipment acquired from South Africa strengthened the UPDF’s capacity to guarantee internal security, peace and stability. Regionally, the UPDF has been able to contribute to the independence of South Sudan because of this enhanced capability. 

It is important to note that this same equipment has proved critical in the support of South Sudan because of this enhanced capability. It is important to note that this same equipment has proved critical in the success of the AMISON Mission in Somalia. Indeed, many parts of Somalia are enjoying peace because of its contribution. 

In addition to the defence corporation, the South African Ministry of Defence has constructed the Oliver Reginald Tambo School of Leadership, a memorial monument in memory of the fallen ANC combatants who were buried there - an office block, a primary school and a Health Centre IV in Kaweweta which serve the people of the area and we have signed a framework agreement for strategic partnership on matters of defence. 

Across Africa, President Nelson Mandela will always be a role model and source of inspiration for many leaders and freedom movements struggling for equality on the continent. He will always stand out as a visionary leader, a paragon of hope and a source of inspiration. Ugandans, East Africans and Africans as a whole must further celebrate President Nelson Mandela’s historic contribution to peace, law and order in the Great Lakes Region in particular the case of the Burundi Peace Agreement. 

The East African leaders, chaired by President Yoweri Museveni, after deciding to avert a possible genocide in Burundi given what had befallen Rwanda in 1994, decided to bring together the Barundi Tutsi and Hutu groups to a round table for peace talks in Arusha under the leadership of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere as the facilitator. Bringing the Barundi together for talks was an intractable task given the historical divide between the Hutu numerical majority and the Tutsi social power majority. The President Buyoya coup had polarised the ethnic divide following the death of Hutu elected leader President Ndadaye. 

Mwalimu Nyerere, up to his death in October 1999, had chaired the Arusha talks for years from 1996. His death left a big gap which was immediately filled by the authoritative and powerful Nelson Mandela at the beginning of 2000. Nelson Mandela who had bridged the canon between the whites and blacks in South Africa with their perforation of apartheid came in handy to rid Burundi of ethnicity leading to a radical change in that country. President Mandela was such an exemplary leader that the Barundi had no choice but to see the clear benefits of a new society in Burundi. He transferred the talks to Burundi. The entire facilitation team went to Bujumbura, led by him and included former President Buyoya and other leaders of the ethnic political based groups as he entered the prisons ordering the release of political prisoners, breaking ethnic barriers as he toured the Burundi political landscape. 

A teleconference chaired by President Mandela and President Clinton of the United States of America in Arusha and finally the presence of Clinton at the signing of the agreement in August 2000 expanded the base of agreement and support for the emergence of a new society in Burundi. Since then, the Burundi conflict resolution has remained a model of conflict resolution on the African continent, thanks to Mandela. 

We also hail President Nelson Mandela’s role in the DRC Peace Process when he offered to meet President Mobutu aboard a navy ship off the coast of the DRC. This demonstrated his humility since President Mobutu had refused to travel to South Africa for peace negotiations. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, at the economic front, South Africa has been a major source of investment in Uganda since 1994 when the late President Nelson Mandela assumed power. South Africa has been the second largest source of foreign direct investment from the African continent to Uganda. Foreign direct investment from South Africa is concentrated in a wide range of sectors contributing significantly towards employment, food security and revenue generation. 
The major sectors of investment include energy, telecommunications, manufacturing, financial services, whole sale and retail services. Some of the largest investors from South Africa include ESKOM, Umeme, MTN and Stanbic Bank, among others. Actual investment from the private sector investors by a 2012 survey was US$ 2 billion by the end of 2011. The companies have generated more than 2000 jobs and several joint ventures are beginning to be explored to enhance trade and investment flows between Uganda and South Africa. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the life of President Nelson Mandela and his death has bequeathed a lasting legacy and fundamental lessons for Uganda, Africa and the entire humanity. He was a true son of Africa and a pan Africanist. He was selfless, passionate and reconciliatory. He put others before self and was a true servant of the people. He maintained a high level of discipline and stayed focused on the ultimate goals of humanity. He inspired his followers and valued people and he was decisive and did what he thought was right and not necessarily what was popular. 

During this period of sadness and celebration of the life of President Nelson Mandela, the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the entire population of Uganda stand in solidarity and prayer with the family of the late President Nelson Mandela, the people of the Republic of South Africa, Africa and indeed the whole world. As we reflect on the passing on of comrade Nelson Mandela, we celebrate his life and exceptional legacy that has touched many and indeed left an indelible positive impact on the people of Africa and the world at large. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourablemembers, this statement is made under Rule 41and may be commented on briefly, for not more than an hour. I am aware it is actually a conclusion of the debate; it is complementing our debate and 66 members had contributed last Tuesday. So, I will allow just a few members, if there are any who wish to add to the Prime Minister’s statement, those who were not here. 

3.25
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to salute the Rt Hon Prime Minister for making a very appropriate and good statement about this African hero, world hero, symbol of liberation, symbol of freedom, Nelson Mandela. Nelson Mandela was recently referred to by President Obama as the giant. He was actually a giant in politics; he was a giant in the struggle for freedom, and he was a giant even when he was in prison. He was a giant after prison; he was a giant when it was required to use um katowice to fight for freedom because he was a commander but he was also a giant at reconciling people when the war had ended. This great man literally excelled in every field that he got involved in, incidentally including even boxing and sports.

Mandela and his life had another additional meaning. Many people have tended to look at Africa as backward, as still behind and as a continent full of conflicts. But actually, Mandela with his leadership and life has demonstrated that Africa has a lot to offer even in terms of leadership. And what we saw at his memorial service, in Soweto on Tuesday, 91 heads of states and governments gathering to say farewell to him from all corners of the world, developed and otherwise, it was a clear illustration that this great son of Africa is indeed recognised not only on the continent but also away beyond. 

He has touched many lives. Again, if I may quote Obama, he said, when he was a young man, he came to know Mandela and Mandela impacted on his life and shaped him politically. So he has mentored many, shaped many and will continue to do so even when he is not alive because the ideas and principles that he stood for remain very clear and will live after him. 

This man Mandela, great as he was remained ultimately a humble human being. He was able to reach the high and big, but he was also able to go down and establish adequate rapport with the humble, the poor and children. So he cut across divides and I believe that his life should remain a towering example to all of us. 

Madam President –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I believe that honourable members are not surprised, because they know that the Ministry of Health very closely works with President Museveni and I always say, Mr President. So this was a mere slip of the tongue and I can see it causing a bit of excitement. I call on those who are excited to cool down because President Museveni is firmly in charge. 

Madam Speaker, the point I want to make is that Uganda has been playing a critical role and the Rt hon. Prime Minister has made reference to the battle in Southern Angola. The South African Defence Forces came out from South Africa to defend and fight for UNITA while at the same time our traditional and reliable allies the Cuban forces came and supported the MPLA Angolan forces. This battle was one of the biggest battles the African Continent has had and at the end of the day, the liberation forces of Angola were victorious. 

However, an agreement was reached that in order to have peace in Southern Angola, ANC must leave Southern Angola. It is true there was a problem as to where ANC should go because the Boa Regime in Southern Africa had already intimidated many frontline countries. They had bombed Zambia. Portuguese planes had bombed Tanzania and at that critical moment when ANC had no proper home, the people of Uganda took a historic decision in 1989; they said we are ready to sacrifice along our brothers in South Africa and ANC. President Museveni led his Cabinet in taking this decision and ANC was able to come. 

As the Prime Minister has said, the cadres of ANC were housed, looked after, trained in Kaweweta and I am not surprised that today many of the leaders of the forces in South Africa, even political leaders are graduates from our training school at Kaweweta. 

Today, our brothers and sister of South Africa have not abandoned Kaweweta. They came and put up structures, health facilities, training schools and the like as expression of solidarity with the people of Luwero and Uganda. Some of their comrades are even buried on Ugandan soil and this will make a permanent bond between us and our comrades in South Africa and ANC. 

What lessons do we learn from Ndugu Mandela? One, we should know that first and foremost, we are human beings and none of us should arrogate himself or herself to be anything else but humility. 

Number two, as again exemplified by Mandela, is courage to fight for a just cause. He had the courage to fight for the freedom of South Africa. 

Number three is consistence. He was intimidated; he was imprisoned for life but he refused to bow to the pressures of apartheid. He remained steadfast and no wonder that eventually he was victorious. 

Now, I must say that everybody was worried about what was going to happen to South Africa. People expected bloodshed. They thought there was going to be war between the blacks and whites. But Mandela was a great freedom fighter and the commander of MukotoWesuze this time became the commander of reconciliation. Today, South Africa is a leading example of how hostile communities and how adversarial camps can be meaningfully reconciled for the benefit of all. 

So, Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to pay special tribute to this great son of Africa; a great son of humanity who had made Africa proud because of the courage, the leadership and commanding effectively, not only liberation but also ensuring that there is reconciliation after liberation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.36
THE MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to join millions of others in the world both powerful and weak; blacks and whites-coloured as they used to call them in South Africa- millions of all religions; those who came from the North, South, East and West that have paid tribute and saluted President Mandela for his life and contribution to humanity. 

So I feel happy and proud that I am here at this historic moment to add my voice and put it on record to salute this great son of Africa and indeed the great son of the world. And I thought I should just quote two statements from Mandela. One quote is this: “Reconciliation means working together to correct the legacy of the past injustice.” And he said this long before he became the President.He went ahead and indeed corrected the legacy of the past injustice in South Africa. This is for all of us to learn from the good deeds of others,  even at times when we think we do not have and cannot have any reconciliation to make.

The second quote is: “A good head and a good heart are always a formidable combination.” I hope we can check our heads and our hearts to ensure that they are both good so that we can have a formidable combination even for our own country, especially at times when our unity and peace are being debated and sometimes threatened by ourselves.

So I want to join others in saluting President Mandela for his leadership. President Mandela has been talked about, written about and has been heard but all his history – and thank God who gave him the 95 years. Right from his youth when he joined the ANC around 1942, he was a leader; he was a leader in prison for 27 years – imagine leading others while in prison for 27 years. He was leader as President and I just do not want to add much from the statement by the Prime Minister and indeed my colleague, Ndugu Rugunda – that he knew his allies and friends. And as soon as he was out of prison, he even had time to tour other countries to thank them for the contribution they made to the ANC struggle to free South Africa from injustice and apartheid.

And therefore, I recall a statement by Baganda, which says, “Munnomukabi, ye munnoddala.” we learn from history that supporting any good cause at any time – (Interjection) – Should I translate it into English? It means “A friend in need is a friend indeed.” So let us support good causes because they do not die. Otherwise, Mandela’s cause and struggle for freedom would have died in the 27 years when he was in prison and others were in exile. But the right cause eventually made South Africa what it is and we all now admire it and go there not only for visits but other things like medical treatment and so forth. Let us support good causes. Even when we are talking about causes, let us reflect with this good head and heart – whether the causes we are talking about are good for us and the future.

Knowing that there are many colleagues who want to contribute and knowing that for any consistent man, everyone will say the same thing, I do not want to say much more than that but only to add my voice to salute Mandela’s life, struggle, contribution to South Africa and the world and his leadership even when he had retired, and no wonder even when he had died. That is why the 10th of December, when the world gathered in Johannesburg for a memorial service, it became a pilgrimage of leaders. May the soul of Nelson Mandela rest in peace.

3.43
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to extend my thanks to the Prime Minister for the very rich statement that he has made on behalf of Government about the late Nelson Mandela; it is the best statement I have ever heard about him.

Secondly, when you listen to what has been said about Nelson Mandela; when you read the books about Nelson Mandela; when you reflect on the history of Nelson Mandela, it is a clear manifestation that Africa actually has the best brains and that these brains that God gave Africans, when utilised meaningfully, can prescribe solutions to the problems and challenges of Africa. 

So Madam Speaker, I learn a very strong lesson that actually the challenges amidst us as black people can be resolved using our very resources in terms of intellect – the way Nelson Mandela did throughout his life. And that what we only need is good will from friends who are far – but for me it is very clear that we have very good brains that can help us to solve our problems.

I would like to reflect on a quotation that is popularly referred to and that Nelson Mandela at one time articulated. He said, “Education is the best weapon that anyone can use to transform society or to change the world.” Madam Speaker, I know that Nelson Mandela mentored President Museveni. So it is little wonder that President Museveni –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would not wish to repeat what they have said. But what I have heard them say is that President Nelson Mandela actually mentored President Museveni and therefore President Museveni is like Mandela. (Applause) (Laughter) – Madam Speaker in the Bible, when Jesus was taken to Pilate and he asked Him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus said, “You say so.” So, this is very clear. It has been articulated by members from the other side and I think it is a shared view of the whole House.

But Madam Speaker, the point I would like to reiterate here is that I was very emotionally moved one time when President Yoweri Museveni was in the West Nile sub-region and he was moving hand in hand with hon. Christine Abia on one side and hon. Wadri on the other, when they were planning together with the leaders of West Nile to establish a public university in the West Nile sub-region. This is in light of strengthening the very big numbers of the enrolment which are in UPE and USE; and this was also a clear demonstration that President Museveni works with all colours and that education in Uganda has matured at all levels. And what I was saying is that President Nelson Mandela mentored our great leader here in Uganda and we have benefitted from the ideas of President Nelson Mandela through President Museveni and we are still standing to benefit from those ideas.

Madam Speaker, I would like to once again thank you for giving me the opportunity and I stand to say that may the soul of President Nelson Mandela rest in eternal Peace.

3.49
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the opportunity of being a representative of Uganda in the Burundi peace talks in Arusha. Those talks were facilitated by the late Mwalimu Nyerere up to his death. By the time he died it was so difficult to get together the people of Barundi. In fact I do recall the last meeting that Mwalimu chaired. He was so disappointed that he said, “I am going home,” and when he went he never came back.  But the region had been determined to have a solution to the Burundi problem because without a solution we were likely to have a situation like we had in Rwanda; Mandela was the right person to take over immediately. I had been in the talks for more than three years and he came. 

Now, I want to describe to you an experience of a man whose presence you could not ignore. We were all present butsome of us had to announce that we are present but Madiba was so present that you could not ignore his presence. And those of you who have even seen his pictures, his eyes look deeper than the eyes that you normally see;and because of that the Barundian who had always despisedMwalimu, which was so painful to see, could not resist the presence of Mandela. 

I recall when he called President Buyoya, who was very difficult to bring on board, to a meeting and he said- and I am almost quoting what he said, “President Buyoya, make history. You are in power but you do not have everybody behind you. Bite a bullet and you will be remembered.” I am almost quoting what he said exactly because we were all there and I am glad that history has produced that kind of person. 

Was he the man he became because of the 27 years in jail? Who knows? Mandela converted personal disadvantage to an objective correlative. In other words, the historicity of his experience has touched all of us. Was Mandela the one chosen by God to break apartheid? Probably so,but how does God choose anybody, if we are to ask that question? Thank God anyway that Mandela was chosen to be the leader he became; to be the person that he was and delivering not only the end of Apartheid but also the Burundi peace agreement.

There are many of us who will say, “Take the example of Madiba.” If anybody says that, well and good. Here is somebody to emulate. But the one who says so should first do the emulation. That person should have the humility of discovering whether he has the quality of Madiba in himself or herself because we tend to simplify the weaknesses in ourselves and exaggerate the weaknesses in others. As we talk now, in memory and in respect of Madiba, in Uganda we need to reflect very seriously particularly those of us who are aspiring to take the mantle of power. Does power come because you speak loud or you walk the streets? Does power come because you have a message for humanity? It is not that simple to say, “I am the leader,” or “I can move people and they follow me.” You must be accompanied by a historicity of a message. Madiba, retire in peace and let those of us who are still around look to you for inspiration. 

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for the statement. I do support the statement. We have leaders and very many men in this world but I do not know how many will fit or can fit in Mandela’s shoes.  No leader has united people in the world like Mandela has in this century. Ex-president Nelson Mandela lived his life for others. He spent 95 years on earth but 75 of these he spent fighting for the freedom of others. Like my senior colleague said, they may not be perfectly the same but His Excellency President Museveni is equally one of those who have lived his life for others. Because somebody cannot leave his comfort to go and fight for the freedom of others and we have seenthis in very few leaders. 

Mandela began his struggle when he was still a youth and I want to say that he was born a liberator. He fought for the freedom of others and when he was released from prison, one thing that I heard is that he told his people that he will lead ad hand over power. Many people were very uncomfortable with this but this is what Mandela told them and I quote: “Leaders should lead from the back and leave others to be at the front.” And he said, “I have done my best, so let the others carry on with the mantle.”

Madam Speaker, Mandela loved children and the children of South Africa really loved him. At the time of his death, I was in South Africa and I watched all through the television stations how very many children were being interviewed and most of them crying; some cried because they had not met him and they had wanted to meet him. A story is told about how most times when he was driving home and found children gathered somewhere, either at a football pitch, he would get out of the vehicle and join them to at least say hello to them. 

Mandela openly spoke about HIV especially when he lost his son to this scourge. His out-spokeness on this matter definitely turned the landscape in the fight against HIV/AIDS in South Africa and today, South Africa is a model country in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 80 percent of their budgets for the HIV/AIDS are funded by the Government of South Africa, thanks to Nelson Mandela and just 20 percent comes from the donors. In Uganda, we are also getting there slowly and steadily.

Madman Speaker, Mandela will forever live in our hearts although he is gone. May his death mark a new era amongst the people who are still left behind. May those who are killing others, the Al Shababs and all those killing innocent people learn that at some time we shall all go. We need to love each other, we need a peaceful world and we must all know that we were born for a purpose and we shall someday go. Fellow colleagues, may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. 

4.00
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Colleagues, I join colleagues to salute the Prime Minister for a deserving salute he has registered in memory of the late Madiba. But is Madiba dead? I think the physical Madiba is gone but what Madiba stood for remains with us and that is a Hindu philosophy that a person goes but what he did remains behind him and for others to be reminded of. 

Madiba lived and he did all that he did and the world has mourned and celebrated him. You saw South Africans dancing on the streets and in the stadium and you wondered whether it was a birthday party for the late or there was something else but they were right. You mourn, yes, but you thank God and celebrate that such people like him did live and that is what they were doing. So, when the world pays tribute to the late, it is simply to immortalise his deeds, to immortalise his memory, to salute his heroism and to salute those whom he worked with. 

In 1994, when South Africa became independent, the foreign occupation of the African continent ended and Africa was free from Cairo to Cape Town and we salute him and his contemporaries who stood with him the likes of the late Nyerere, the likes of Kenneth Kaunda, the likes of Museveni the likes of the late Samora Machel, the likes of Mugabe who is still living that they struggled to end foreign occupation of the African continent. Phase one of liberation of Africa had ended and they had put Africa on the new path of prosperity and transformation. So, as we stand here in our own Parliament dear colleagues, we can only remember what he did and all those who stood with him. 

Madam Speaker, I will quote from one book of one wise man like Mandela called Frantz Fanon. He had this to say. “Each generation must out of relative obscurity discover its mission, fulfil it or betray it.” Mandela never betrayed his mission. He did all that he could. South Africans - the blacks - lived in obscurity and he liberated them. He left them very happy people with challenges like others but they are free people and very happy.

Another quotation from this same man is that each generation must discover its mission, fulfil it or betray it in relative capacity. Mandela did not betray the mission of his generation. He worked all that he did and liberated South Africa and impacted the whole of the African continent. He has left us quite a number of templates. Is it a template of being a resolute leader to stand for just causes? He has left us with that template. He has left us a template of being peace lovers; when it is time for peace, work peace. He left a template of how to reconcile with the opponents; it has been said. So, the late Mandela left us a number of templates and I believe the leaders of today or the generation of today will do whatever it takes to use some of those templates and ensure that the remaining changes of the continent are dealt with and completed.

There are some lessons we learn from Mandela; that the great nations of today in terms of prosperity and progress have been where they are because of people like Mandela. They were not like Mandela. May be since Jesus Christ, there isn’t any man who lived like him, maybe there are others but we are yet to see them. The way he was mourned and celebrated, maybe he was the greatest man since Jesus Christ. He was a patriot per excellence and what is patriotism, at time? Patriotism, the Madiba way, is thinking for the future. For all the 27 years in incarceration, the ANC having started the struggle in 1912, never lost hope of creating a South Africa that there is today. Mandela and his contemporaries, Mandela as a leader was a future thinker and looked forward until South Africa freedom was won. So, that is patriotism - thinking about tomorrow and thinking about the future and a better future. He was a patriot who thinks for others when the moment comes. When others weaved, he was an individual who did not weaver and struggled on until South Africa, Africa and the whole world was impacted. He was a patriot who was a nation’s thinker; he thought for the rest of his comrades in South Africa, for the people of South Africa until they believed in his cause;they joined him and liberated South Africa. 

So we salute his memory; we take seriously the template he has left us of restless struggle for just causes; of transformation and prosperity and reconciling with opponents when the time comes. May his soul rest in eternal peace; the giant of a man that he was. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that concludes our tribute. The clerk is requested to extract that text of the Hansard, place it together with the Hansard of Tuesday, and when the condolence books have been completely signed at the end of the week, they will be transmitted to our mission in Pretoria as I had earlier directed. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.09
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Rt hon President – I beg to lay, Madam Speaker the report of a delegation of the CPA Uganda Branch on the 44th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Region Conference held in Windhoek, Namibia at Safari Hotel from 17July to 27 July 2013. I beg to lay. 

During this particular Africa regional conference, there were resolutions that were made to all the Parliaments in Africa and those that subscribe to the CPA. Therefore, I beg to read the resolutions of that conference to our Parliament. 

Resolutions adopted by the 44th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Region Conference, Windhoek Namibia, 26 July 2013. The motion was moved by the National Assembly of Zambia and was seconded by the Parliament of Uganda. The conference theme was, “Utilising our Commonwealth Partnership to promote peaceful conflict resolution and economic development on the African Continent”. 

Resolutions adopted by the 44th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, CPA, Africa Regional Conference:

REALISING that having laws and constitutional provisions which address gender based violence, many Governments lack political will to implement these laws; 

NOTING that peace and security are a prerequisite for social economic development in Africa; 

NOTINGFURTHER that the supply of adequate energy is key to unlocking the economic potential of Africa; 

RECALLING the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women of 1979, which in principle condemns all types of violence directed towards women through the creation of legal and social protection; 

NOTING that in September, 2000, world leaders came together at the United Nations Headquarters to adopt the United Nations Millennium Declaration and committed their nations to a new global partnership to promote development through a series of time bound goals, with a deadline of 2015; 

CONCERNED that youth unemployment is on the increase on the continent and needs to be addressed urgently; This conference therefore resolves as follows:

    a) Elimination and prevention of all forms of gender based violence. The conference stresses the need for all Parliaments and Governments to exercise strong political will in the implementation of laws that target gender based violence. Calls on all Parliaments and national Governments to revisit their laws that address gender based violence to determine their effectiveness; Urges all African men to advocate against violence towards women; emphasises the need for consistent education in overcoming cultural and traditional buriers as well as attitudes that contribute to gender based violence and Calls on Members of Parliament to strengthen the income generation potential of rural women to reduce their vulnerability. 

    b) Youth unemployment in Africa challenges and solutions; what can Parliament do? The conference recalled that African countries should revisit their education curriculum in order to enable students to gain practical and technical skills which will prepare them to enter the job market or develop as entrepreneurs; urges CPA Africa to consolidate best practices in parts of Africa in the area of structural arrangements in response to youth development by organising youth tours involving speakers; to visit identified countries to gain in-depth understanding on how such work and calls on youth participants to establish discussion forums to facilitate sharing of information with their peers on matters relating to CPA and youth development. Urges Government to ensure that there are relevant to education and training colleges and internships dedicated to development of practical skills thereby building a pool of skilled youth to respond to African economies skills requirements and calls on Governments to recreate incentives that will attract the youth to develop skills in agriculture which is a potential employer. 

    c) The attainment of the MDGs is Africa on its way to meeting the 2015 deadline. The conference reminds Parliaments to accelerate and increase their oversight of the executives regarding the implementation of the MDGs in order to yield tangible outcomes which could change the lives of the people. It calls on Government departments and the executives to reflect on the MDGs in their policies, speeches and national budgets for the periods 2014/15 before the laps of the timeframe of the MDGs.

    d) Energy security an imperative for Africa’s development. The conference urged Parliaments to enact the right legislations that will guarantee energy by focusing on sustainable energy policies capable of giving priority to modern energy access to the poor and promote investments in cleaner energy technology. The conference urges Parliament to enact enabling legislations that will support the efforts of the executive arm of various countries of Africa to improve the deteriorating base, including the energy infrastructure so as to attract the right kinds of investments and mobilise adequate financing. It encourages Parliaments to enact enabling laws for the adoption of energy efficiency measures and energy conservation policies as well as related public awareness programmes that will affect positively in the energy economics of African countries. The conference encouraged African Parliaments to speed up fostering integrated energy policies based on sustainability and regional cooperation and encourages Africa to move towards using clean renewable energy which will involve Africa taking advantage of existing resources such as deserts, the sun and the winds of Africa.

    e) Peace building and conflict resolution; finding an African agenda to aid economic development. The conference encouraged Parliaments to create national consensus through national policy dialogue to strengthen conflict prevention and poverty reduction. The same conference urged the CPA to continue to organise regular meetings and dialogues so as to forge and strengthen relationships between Parliaments on peace and conflict resolution as well as matters of sustainable economic development. It urged the CPA to provide a neutral space for dialogue while helping to mediate disputes between various countries and urges the CPA to provide for  – 

THE SPEAKER: Someone has an issue, here. 

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just asking – on the Order Paper, I read, “Laying of Papers” and yet my colleague is reading through the whole document. I am inquiring whether it is procedurally correct for her to go through the whole document instead of just laying the paper on Table because Members can access that later. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member just lay it; we shall make copies for the Membersfor them to read.

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had come to a conclusion on that. If you could allow me – because the resolutions are the things that MPs are supposed to speak to when the time comes. The actual paper is already laid; what is here is the resolution from the secretariat. So I beg that the remaining two bullets are read as fast as possible so that you interpret them at your own time.

Madam Speaker, the CPA was urged to provide a neutral space for dialogue while helping to mediate disputes between various countries. And it was also urged to provide a forum for knowledge-sharing on learning experiences, best practices policies that foster democracy, good governance and sustainable economic development.

And finally, the CPA was encouraged to monitor all stages of mediation in conflict-resolutions and play an active role in election-observation missions. I beg to submit and lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members can read them and then we can debate them at a later stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BILL, 2013

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I recall that yesterday we had said that those who have amendments should put them in writing so that we can follow logically what we are doing.So yesterday we had gone as far as clause 11; let us now have proposals for clause 11. Are there no further proposals? Did Members put these proposals down in writing? (Interjection) Oh, the Minister has them? Okay. No, you cannot be writing them here. (Laughter) Okay you present yours because the others are not ready.

MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Yesterday we stood over clauses 3 and 6 and you asked us to come with written amendments. And Madam Chair – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us start with clause 11 and then we shall come back to clause 3 later.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chair, if it is starting with clause 11, then ours still remains the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, there was a proposal from the committee chairperson. Can I put the question?

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee had proposed an amendment but I do not know if the Minister is in agreement with the committee’s proposal or she has a different proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Since she appears to be happy, I now put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by the committee chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes under clause 12 to insert a new provision immediately after sub clause (1)(d) to read as follows: “(f) mobilising resources for the scheme”. Justification is to broaden the scope of the provision.
Secondly, amend sub clause (1)(c) by substituting the word “perform” and “performing”. Justification is for the proper flow of the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to create a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2) to read as follows: “Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2) the board may provide for payment of salaries, allowances, pensions, gratuities or other retirement benefits to its officers and employees and may require them to contribute to any pension, provident fund or scheme.” Justification is for clarity and precision.

Secondly, amend sub clause (1) by substituting the words “in the exercise of functions under this Act” with “in the exercise of his or her duties under this Act.” The justification is for clarity.


MR FREDRICK RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I do not see where the part of the amendment comes in, which says, “Amend sub clause (1)…” I believe reference is made to clause 13(1) but I do not see the expression “in the exercise of functions under this Act” in clause 13 (1).

MRS SSINABULYA: I am sorry Madam Chair. This is supposed to be an amendment to clause 14; it was not captured here. It is only the one on top of page 13 which refers to clause 13.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are introducing a new sub clause 13(3)?

MRS SSINABULYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed by the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, under clause 14, the committee proposes to amend it by substituting the words “in the exercise of the functions under this Act” with “in the exercise of his or her duties under this Act”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you had forgotten to indicate the clause where you wrote (b).

MRS SSINABULYA: Where there is (b) is supposed to be clause 14.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are going to have one – you are just amending the last part of the sentence, isn’t it?

MRS SSINABULYA: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, it is clause 14 – the last part of the sentence to read “in the exercise of his or her duties under this Act”.

I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that clause 15 be deleted. The justification is that this clause was transferred to create a new part (ii) immediately before the establishment of the board and the justification then was for proper flow of the provisions of the Bill. – 

Now the new part 4 would read, “Loans and scholarships” and the justification for this has been that the scheme has been established under part 2 and part 4 is now dealing solely with loans and scholarships.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I believe we discussed this yesterday. I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, clause 16.The committee proposes to insert a new sub-clause 1(d) to read as, “Aids and Appliances for Persons with Disabilities.” The justification is to cater for special needs of learners with disabilities.


The committee also proposes to amend sub-clause (2) by deleting the words, “to provide for those items,” and inserting the words, “based on the needs of each student,” immediately before the words, “in addition,” and redraft the provision to read as follows, “A loan may include specific amounts in respect of accommodation or meals where the board determines that the funds are sufficient based on the needs of each student in addition to fees prescribed in sub-section (1).” The justification for this proposal is that determining the need for accommodation should be based on the needs of each student.

Amend sub-clause 16(3) by inserting the word “annually” at the end of the provision, this is for clarity. 

Amend 16(4) by inserting the words, “the National Gazette and,” between the words, “in and at.” Justification: for wider information coverage. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not have a problem with all those amendments but hon. Attorney-General we met some road block on the issue of publishing in the Gazette and other papers when we were handling the LC elections. We met some difficulties from the Electoral Commission relating to costs because this is the type of amendment we made when we were amending the local council elections? There is something we did and we blew up the budget.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, it was the amendment we passed here amending the Local Government Act. The Minister of Local Government had come here to cut costs from about Shs150 billion to about Shs60 billion for the election of LCs. But when we came on the Floor of the House, an amendment was introduced to publish the polling stations and eligible voters not only in the register but also in the media; and when the costs were computed it came to over Shs500 billion. Up to now that is one of the problems that we have faced in the holding of the LC elections. 

MR OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, somebody is misadvising Government. I will talk as a journalist. The Minister had told me that they were given Shs400 billion to run an advert.But the easier thing to do, Attorney-General, is to print your own information and negotiate with the paper to carry your information. It will not cost that much. What you are telling us is that you counted each page and computed against the price of each page in the newspaper and therefore the money will be very huge of course but you can go around that one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I just wanted us to be sure because after we passed that law, the Chair of the Electoral Commission wrote to me to say that we had made it impossible for him to conduct the elections because he cannot afford it.  

MR RUHINDI: Good enough, Madam Chairperson, I discussed this matter with hon. Wafula and he even advised accordingly. But when I discussed the same proposal with the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Local Government, they simply recomputed and found that that measure would only be simply mitigating but would not be very helpful in redressing the meagre resources that we have for the purposes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still insisting that you want, in addition to the Gazette, these two newspapers? Because there are costs involved. 

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee had proposed an addition of the National Gazette because it is the official Government publication but also it would enable wider coverage. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, let the Attorney-General advise us on this matter. I am looking at a situation where Ssewungu was elected a Member of Parliament and was not gazetted. Definitely I am not yet a Member of Parliament! You see what happened with the Rubaga North election and hon. Singh Katongole. 

Secondly, this is the official publication of Government. If we are to be taken to court and any citizen complains that he did not get any information, the only binding instrument is the National Gazette because it officiate Government information. I am not sure of the expenses but it should be gazetted because even the Bill itself was gazetted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Members it ought to be in the Gazette but I am asking: Are we prepared for the costs we are proposing- two newspapers in addition to the National Gazette? That is what I am asking. Sometimes we make laws here and then it is so hard to implement. I have no problem; we should pass it but –

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, sincerely I was not for the newspapers; I was for the Gazette but because of committee work- We had our strong arguments but the official publication would bethe Gazette because it is the official publication of Government. 

Secondly, in Uganda, let us ask ourselves, if we are to go by the newspapers, some people speak Luganda, others speak Acholi, how will you decide the two papers? If you go for English it is okay but then, you never know, if it is my father who will get a chance to get the paper and he cannot read English. How will he know that? But if it is officially gazetted, the National Gazette is a legally binding document and it is enough because even these students must have the interest to know their fate. It is not a matter of saying, “Let us wait for newspapers.” You applied, find out. But Members were complaining that the Gazette is not widely spread. How can you say that? It must be reaching every part of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members I want us to decideon the two newspapers that have wide national coverage? Is it Orumuri, Etop, Bukedde,  or New Vision?

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chairperson I stood up to support the idea that we drop newspapers and we go with the National Gazette. Otherwise maybe we stand over it and we consult then we come with a written –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, sincerely when you talk about two papers, how are you going to consider them? Will you write here, “The New Vision and The Monitor?” In case they close; it is very possible;but the Gazette will remain there.

MRS ONGOM: Thank you so much. I do not know whether I am only backward but a number of these Members of Parliament will agree with me that it is rare for us to read the Uganda Gazette but we access the newspapers so easily and the majority of our students in Uganda access the newspapers. We have never seenlists of admissions in the universities - all these government universities and private universities - being published in the newspapers and the students access the papers. I really would wish that we publish them in the newspapers and the moderate newspapers in this country are The Monitor and The New Vision. At least they will see their names and then they will come and confirm. I think that is a little cheaper. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am just wondering whether we do not have to deal with these issues first of all on their own merits so that we decide where the priority goes. I am thinking how else a statutory instrument would be made public because sub clause 3 says, “The minister shall on the recommendation of the board by a statutory instrument…” Now since it is a statutory instrument, those in Government have to help me. The right place is the gazette. So then we don’t have to even discuss the gazette because it is by a statutory instrument and that is its home. The other bit of it then is how the minister plans to get the rest of the world including – if she is still the minister then - her people of Usuk to know because the gazette will not reach the people of Usuk. So, that is why we think she would have to do with some form of notification in some newspaper. So, it is not either or, I think it is the intention. On a statutory instrument, she has no choice; the minister has to go to the gazette. On dissemination of information, they have no choice unless they decide to keep it to themselves but they have to go to the newspapers. So, I think that the amendment proposed by the committee is still very valid and I think it is worth supporting. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: On clause 17,  we agreed that we are going to delete the words “with interest” that is what was agreed yesterday and I think it is fair that we delete this because if a student borrows money and takes 10 years without getting a job, that interest could be very prohibitive.  

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the idea that we need interest on that loan. One, in the first instance, this loan is a subsidised loan. Borrowers do not pay back the full amount after that time. The interest is charged below the market rate and secondly, there is a long grace period. Thirdly, there are also chances of default which are even high and also, the administrative costs are not usually passed on to the borrower. So, you find that in reality, when you look at this interest, it is a “no-gain, no-loss” interest loan and at the end of the day, what we are actually calling a loan is some form of hidden grant. Therefore, it is important to have the interest on the loan. It is not aimed at making profit but this fund is a revolving fund and it has to be sustainable.

And we want to borrow from experience. Korea tried to have an interest free loan and they borrowed from the pension fund of the country but it was killing the pension fund and later, they had to introduce interest. Let’s face the reality. We would be saying that we have an interest free loan if the economy was very okay. You very well know it is the obligation of Government to educate its citizens but we are introducing the loan because Government is not able, because higher education has been mystified. Every Tom, Dick and Harry can go into higher education because of the changes in technology, because of flexibility and all that. So, for sure if you look at it critically, we need the interest on the loan. Thank you. 

MR OPOLOT:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I join hon. Kwemara in justifying the need to maintain interest on the loan. Yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition stated here that world over, there is no interest charged on students loans and I disagree with that because in the parts of the world that some of us have visited to benchmark, it is being charged. I want to give you information here that from the countries where we benchmarked, Tanzania has 6 percent; Kenya has 4 percent and 12 percent for post graduates, Rwanda is at 5 percent and Ghana is in between 5 and 7 percent. 
Madam Chairperson, this is because we want to have a revolving fund to benefit more people because the object of this Bill is to increase access to higher education. So, if we do not provide for interest, then the money keeps losing value year in year out and secondly, this is a loan which has to be repaid over a longer period. Someone can even repay it for 20 years. I have someone who told me that he went to NSSF to try and claim his money and he was told that for the period that he worked in the 80s, he qualifies to get only Shs 20,000. So, money loses value over time. Therefore, this interest would cater for trying to stabilise the value and benefit more children. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, just one small thing on this particular clause because if you read clause 17(2), it says the interest shall be determined by the minister in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance and upon the recommendation of the board. My view – I am not a financial expert but there are financial experts in this House. My sister, Cecilia Ogwal, is there and others – I think determination of interest is a monetary fiscal measure. I do not know how the committee can really sit and deliberate and make recommendations to the ministers. The best that can happen is the ministers also to consult the board but to say that you leave it to the recommendation of the board, that the board recommends to the minister is not certainly monetarily or fiscally possible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask hon. Opolot to simplify our work and tell us how the Tanzanians, the Kenyans and the Rwandese determined their interest so that we can know. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the countries that I have referred to get annual communication from the minister responsible for Finance on the interest rate that can be charged based on the rate of inflation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, then we should remove the recommendation of the board. Is the board an expert on interest? Why don’t we stop at the Minister of Finance? 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Actually that way, it makes more sense. Madam Chairperson, if we peg it to the rate of inflation- Leaving it as it is now, it will give a lot of powers to the minister and the board and that is very risky. They will determine all – it also depends on how the economy is doing. They might decide to put up a very high interest. So it would be better for us to peg it to inflation. 

MR WAMAKUWU: Madam Chairperson, I do not see any harm leaving it as it is because the board – this is a specialised product. We cannot tag it on the rate of inflation. If you look at inflation, for instance last year, inflation went up and banks raised the interest rates. We should not tag anything on inflation; this is a specialised product for which Government should decide what rate to apply instead of tagging it on inflation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But why don’t we just leave it for the Minister responsible for Finance?

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, even yesterday, Members expressed concerns about the board determining the interest rate and we were guided by the Attorney-General that sub clause 2 should read: “The interest shall be determined by the Minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, clause 17(1) remains intact, and clause17(2) will be amended by a deletion of the last 6 words. I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 18(3) amend the provision by substituting the word “Shall” with “May”. Justification –(Interjections)– I beg your pardon, Madam Chairperson. Amend sub clause II by substituting “Shall be guided by schedule IV” with “Shall be guided by key development areas as specified in the national development plan”. The justification is to make it clearer. 

On (d), amend sub clause 18(3) by substituting the word “Shall” with “May”. The justification is to grant the board discretionary powers to determine whether a student should be awarded full scholarship or not. 

(c) 	Insert a new provision immediately after paragraph 18(3)f to read as follows: “Aid and appliances and personnel assistance for persons with disabilities”. This is a consequential amendment. 
d) 	Redraft sub clause 18(6) to read as follows: “a student’s scholarship shall be non-refundable by the beneficiary except where a student:
a) 	Abandons the course without reasonable cause
b) 	Changes to a course not approved by the board or
c) 	Fails to comply with any other terms and conditions of the scholarship as may be determined by the board.
(e)	Insert three new sub clauses immediately after sub clause 7 to read as follows: 
8) 	A student scholarship may be terminated by the board at any time where the student performs or omits to perform such acts which violate the terms and conditions of the scholarship as determined by the board. Justification, to act as a deterrent for students who might unreasonably fail to complete the course awarded to them. 

9) 	The board may bond the beneficiary to the scheme for a specified period as the minister may by statutory instrument determine. Justification is for Government to benefit from the services of the beneficiaries of the scheme. 

10) 	External scholarship shall only be awarded to students who qualify for academic programmes that are not offered in institutions of higher learning within Uganda. Justification is to avoid wastage of resources. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 18(3)f, I propose an amendment on what she has added. Instead of being research fees, let us change it to research expenses. There are students who pay research fees at the university and get a receipt. But here  all the additional costs like transport to the field, it is better to put it as research expenses to solve the problem. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with clause 18(1). I should even propose for its deletion. It talks about students’ scholarship being awarded to an eligible student to pursue her education in a field of study determined by the board as critical to national and economic development. 

Madam Chairperson, I am not even aware that as a country, we have agreed on what particular courses are critical to national and economic development. I have a problem – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there is an amendment on that one, honourable member. The committee has proposed that it should read as follows: “Shall be guided by key development areas as specified in the national development plan”.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, they stated it in their proposals in sub clause 2 and my problem is in clause 18(1). Let me first get the correction; has the committee moved for deletion of sub clause I? Okay from the response of the committee chair, it seems they think sub clause I should stay. I have a serious problem with it. There is no national consensus in this country where we sat and agreed that lawyers, teachers and musicians are not necessary for the development of this country. We have not sat down to crystallise that position. I think that this on its ownis a very discriminative provision. 

Secondly, if we pick out that provision as of now- where we are in the history of our education system, we are going to further marginalise areas that have been marginalised for a long time. I want to speak for Karamoja or Northern Uganda in particular. If you talk of sciences in those areas; they do not have the laboratories; they do not have nursery schools – the system has inherent problems that have discriminated scientists. Not because those children cannot afford to do sciences; not because they do not have the brains, but it is a systematic problem. So if at a level of giving scholarships, you even do not want artists who gambled on their own, then there is a huge problem. Yesterday I heard an argument on professional course. They saidthere are only four professional organisations registered in this country and they include lawyers. Now this argument of scientists who eliminates lawyers and say you are not professionals if you are not a scientist- Then the other ones are engineers and doctors and then those of us who are teachers – who you want to debate whether we are really professionals – and accountants.

This type of thing, Madam Chair, on its own has a lot of inherent problems and we cannot afford to have it now. That is the reason I would like to move that that section be deleted. (Interjection) I have moved an amendment for its deletion – let sub clause (1) be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to ask the Minister to give the rationale for this provision – clause 18(1).

MAJ (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chair, let me first thank my sister, hon. Alaso for the concern. But “critical to national development” does not exclude those courses which you have enumerated – including lawyers, journalists – who are now capturing what we are discussing, accountants;all of them are critical to national development. And Madam Chair, when we were initiating the first courses or programmes for students to benefits, we were biased towards science courses – for the Shs 6 billion which we have now. And these are the courses which are here. But we are going to widen and deepen the variety of programmes to the extent that we shall even go to Masters and PhD with more resources being availed to the scheme. So Madam Chair, we should leave it as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Members, I do not know whether you meet as many people looking for jobs as I do. Sometimes when I child tells you that she has been on a private sponsorship, studying guidance and counselling, I ask myself, “Oh my God, where am I going to take this child? Do I contact the church or TASO to give her a job?” Honourablemembers, we should try to focus and agree on areas where we should invest money. Sometimes children spend years doing some courses and then for 10 years they are on the streets; I do not think that is fair.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate the facts that were raised by hon. Alaso. I know that as a country, we are still wanting in some sectors but I am also aware that in Uganda today – if the figures are not wrong, we have over 3,000 to one doctor. And I am sure a doctor cannot attend to more than 20 people in a single day. Therefore, if we are to achieve value for money, it would be imperative for us to re-focus other than generalising. Like the Minister has said – she has made a good statement; that let us first focus on sciences. In fact if I were the Minister of Education and having guided the education committee to come up with this Bill, I would have specifically been keen on medicine, because we do not have doctors; midwifery and other courses like engineering because we are not going to spend money oncommunity psychology. Those other people can access –Madam Chair, my proposal is that we take the recommendation as it is in the amended draft; that we refocus our resources to particular courses for now and then we can cater for the rest in future.

MS MONICA AMODING: Madam Chair, I appreciate hon. Alaso’s comments. Many members have been battling with that issue given the fact that Uganda has many issues. But I want to deviate a little bit to support the proposal by the Ministry of Education. I sit with many young people out there and the biggest challenge they are always raising is that having studied for many years and then you graduate; look for a job for another three years simply because you studied a course which was not appropriate for our labour market. Therefore, you will find these young people disgruntled. The policy direction that the Ministry of Education has taken at this juncture in our country is very important, given that the graduates we have been receiving on the labour market have not only been irrelevant to themselves because they cannot do much for themselves; they are also irrelevant to their communities because they cannot be problem-solvers;and so they are irrelevant to Uganda at this point.

And therefore, Madam Chair, the Ministry has adopted a good policy direction for this particular – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I would like to give information to hon. Amoding and the rest of the House. The issue of the human resource need and the policy direction for this country; what we need today and the next 50 years is not going to be determined by this law. It is we, who have crafted that curriculum and allowed Ugandan children to be trained on community psychology. If the Ministry had not sanctioned that course in our universities it would not be there. So as long as it is there, we are not going to penalise any of the Ugandan children who undertake that course. It is our fault and the Minister should reorganise and prioritise where do we want the country to go? But we should not to penalisechildren and discriminate against them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, maybe let me just read out the proposed courses: Medicine and surgery; pharmacy; nursing; dentistry; medical lab science; medical lab completion; clinical medicine and community health; medical radiography; Bachelor of veterinary medicine; Bachelor of Nursing completion; Bachelor of Pharmaceutical sciences; Bachelor of physiotherapy; BSc Education; Bachelor of  Agriculture mechanisation; Water Resource Engineering; Agro-Processing Engineering; Animal Production and Management; Mining; Agriculture and Entrepreneurship; Vocational Studies in Agriculture with Education; Electrical Engineering; Civil engineering; mechanical engineering; BSc Petroleum Engineering.

MS AMODING: Madam Chair, what you have read has hit the nail on the head. This is because the courses that you are reading are really relevant for this era. And so the information that I want to give to hon. Alaso is that the Ministry of Education has finalised reviewing the primary school curriculum and now they are working on the secondary school curriculum. 

The issue before us now is that the Ministry of Education needs to fast-track that curriculum review,and so all these things are happening at the right time. It is an appropriate intervention given the fact that they are left with few months – maybe the Ministry should tell us how far they are left with in terms of reviewing the secondary school curriculum. But in my view, this is good.

MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA: Madam Chair, I will start from where hon. Amoding just left because that is the reason I stood.  Madam Chair, we debated here when we got a report about patriotism and we pronounced ourselves as Parliament that we wanted the Ministry of Education to study the courses that the students offer at higher level and we were assured by the Minister in the Ministry of Education that they were looking at those curricula like the hon. Amoding rightly put it. 

I raise to ask whether we are taking what the national curriculum development centre is doing to study these courses and come out with the courses that we shall call relevant  to all of us, or now we are turning to the NDP to guide our curricula? So, I would like the Minister to clarify whether they are now pronouncing themselves that it is the national development  plan that is going to guide what we call relevant courses or the national curriculum development centre is going to come up with what they have sieved as the relevant courses for the development of this country.

Secondly, Madam Chair, I like the list of the courses that the hon. Minister is proposing.But I wonder, who teaches those people on those courses and whether we shall not leave their teachers. I thank you.

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, I want to clarify that clause 18 is about scholarships and clause 16 was on loans so really I do not think it would be prudent for the board to give a scholarship for someone to study Bachelor of Arts in Guidance and Counselling or in Arts. The scholarship should go to very critical courses relevant to national development. So, clause 18 is on scholarship and we should leave it as- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Ogwal is burning to say something.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chair, my concern is that we could be debating something which is constitutional- which borders on constitutional rights. I have looked at this clause 18 and also looked at Article 21 of the Constitution of Uganda,we cannot make a law which is discriminatory;that is fundamental. We cannot make a law which is discriminatory, so we have to go back to the basic law. That is my concern and I am seeking for your guidance. 

As a lawyer, a very distinguished lawyer and an accomplished lawyer you could guide me whether we are really proceeding properly, Madam Chair on this particular section. That statement is discriminatory and it is against the Constitution of Uganda. I thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson- why are you looking at me like that? (Laughter) I appreciate the concerns of hon. Cecilia Ogwal. But you and me and many other- it is good that you are in the chair- know that the Constitution distinguishes between certain cases. There is actually affirmative action in the Constitution which reaffirms discrimination but which is positive. “Equal opportunities” simply means that you come into this world and you compete for the available opportunities. It does not mean that you should actually –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chair, it is very unfortunate that I did not do law but I am a very good student. I try to understand and obey. When we decided to agree on affirmative action we consciously did it through the Constitution. We had to amend the Constitution in order to allow positive discrimination. Now can we now agree that the Ministry of Education first comes up with an amendment of the Constitution which allows discriminatory courses at the university? What I am trying to say is that the law says you cannot make a law which is discriminatory. Full stop! It has nothing to do with affirmative action. Affirmative action was agreed upon as a programme and it has been entrenched in the Constitution, the supreme law of the country. 

So, Madam Chair, is it therefore in order for this distinguished lawyer in this country who is even the Attorney-General guiding us on matters of human rights- is the Attorney-General guiding us on matters of human rights? Is it in order for him not even to read the checklist of human rights which has been given to all Members of Parliament? Is he really in order? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General. Read the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: I think Madam Chairperson, hon. Cecilia Ogwal is now nearer to the law-(Laughter)- in making reference to the article she is referring to,open your constitution and look at Article 32. It says, “Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups.Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the state shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them”.

Let me say this, actually under the National Objective and Directive Principles of State Policy, these questions come impromptu and we haven’t actually even had time to reflect on them, and redressing such imbalances is certainly acceptable. 

So, I really do not think that the minister may have to go back and come back with an amendment to the Constitution. The Constitution simply sets out the broad guidelines and principles within which we should operate given our peculiar circumstances, and mind you when you are reading the Constitution, please endeavour as much as possible to read all the relevant provisions in respect of a particular subject matter not simply singling out one and making reference to it alone. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Members I want to encourage us a country to use this provision to start thinking and focussing on what it is that we really need as a country. We have been asking how did the Asian tigers do what they did? Singapore 30 years ago took a decision to focus on technology. They went so far as to making sure that every investor in that country funds the education of the workers in particular areas. That is where they are today. So, for me I look at it as an opportunity to reorganise our thinking and planning. I mean, really –(Laughter)

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chair, besides that maybe just to give more information on far how the national curriculum development centre has gone in reviewing our lower secondary education curriculum.

The review has already been completed and now the Ministry and the National Curriculum Development Centre are developing tools and learning material and also a plan is being made to retool the teachers to be able to teach the new reviewed curriculum. 

So, there are all efforts by the Government to ensure that by the time those students reach the higher institutions of learning, those managers of higher institutions of learning will also have adjusted their courses to be suitable to the National Development Plan Programmes and Vision 2040 programmes.  I think members should not be worried on the courses - (Interjections)- So, Madam Chair I would like to support the Attorney-General that we take that clause as it is.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Clarification, Madam Chair – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kiboijana and then hon. Nyakikongoro.  

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is that whereas she is submitting that the National Curriculum Centre is developing a policy on retooling to get the teachers, only today when we are meeting the Ministry of Education and it is on record that much as we want to promote science teaching out of the 13,000 science teachers needed in this country only 8,000 are available. 

The submission from the ministry was that it is very difficult for them to avail these teachers to the schools as required.  How are we to overcome that impediment? How are we to overcome that gap? This is the clarification that I am seeking. 

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: I wanted to seek clarification from the minister. When she says that there are plans for Government and Ministry of Education to overhaul the whole curriculum to fit within what we are discussing today, what is going to happen to those people that you are discriminating when you say that you are promoting development related disciplines? What is going to happen to that age group for sure if you begin saying that we pass this Bill as it is? For instance you are saying you need scientists but you very well know that by regional balances if you go to the rural communities, how many rural schools have laboratories that are fully equipped? How many of our girls really get into secondary school education, continue and pass sciences at higher levels? What are the statistics that you have that we are not going to discriminate our own girls who are biased against sciences and yet we continue talking about one discipline?  

I think that if this Bill is going to go through, we should put a percentage in regard to those who are taking certain disciplines with regard to rural areas that do not access data, science teachers, better laboratory –(Interjection)– information from –(Interruption)

MAJ (RTD) ALUPO: Let me give you information

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: I am taking this information so that you respond to both, Madam Minister.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much honourable for giving way.
This point is premised on the thinking that Uganda today needs only scientists.But I want to inform the honourable member but also agreeing with hon. Alaso that we have not come up to agree on what we want as a country.  

Madam Chair, I want to inform the member and the House that at one time, Nigeria decided to support footballers and at one time they reached to about 702 young men who were playing competitive football outside Nigeria in Europe and they were getting a lot of money through that. And indeed even today if you looked at our resources that are coming to this country, much of this money is coming from people who are doing funny jobs or kyeyo from abroad. 

As information, we have not really come to this stage to agree on what we really want as a country and unless we do that, we shall not discriminate against these other courses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite you to read both clauses 1 and clause 2, including the proposal by the committee that we use the basis of the National Development Plan because that is what the committee is proposing? That you answer the proposals under the National Development Plan - that is what the chair is proposing – yes. Hon. Boona.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Clarification. But Madam Chair, the list that you read here – clarification – the list you read is - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Boona.

MRS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed Schedule IV gives us the guidelines for determining critical fields of study.  It mentions key development areas as specified in the National Development Plan; it mentions affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. It also mentions other special need determined by the Minister in writing which is very perfect. 

Indeed, I support bench marking. You have mentioned Singapore which was very wonderful but I am sure Singapore did more than what we are doing now. Right now we are talking of scientists - I have not said anything on, Madam Chairperson –(Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The thing just went off. 

MRS BOONA: Can I go on?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, complete your sentence.

MRS BOONA: Thank you very much. I was saying that we need to do more than simply mentioning the fields that we need. We need to empower where these children come from. Right now these loans will be for schools like Namagunga, Budo and Gayaza but in the area I represent, we have the seed schools but the seed schools need more than what there is now – so we cannot have it perfect. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us get information from the Minister. Let us hear what the minister is planning.

MAJ (RTD) ALUPO: I thought we were debating and making amendments. Now the honourable member from Mbarara District seems to suggest that the board will start choosing students from Namagunga and Kisubi –(Interjections)– so, I would like to make a clarification for her and other members who are worried about the criteria. What we said yesterday when we were tackling the functions of the board is that they will from time to time take care of the geographical interests and so the students whom they will enrol will be of national character, gender and people with disability.

This clause that is now derailing us is not discriminatory in anyway because when we talk about enhancing more science teachers, what we are trying to cure is lack of science teachers in rural areas or in many of our schools. When we say midwives, we are trying to cure high maternal mortality rates and what we are saying is that let us start with critical courses but with resources available as we move towards the Vision 2040, all courses can be given priority. But what we have also said as a country is that we are now reviewing our curriculum because we know that there are some courses which are offered in higher institutions of learning which are not relevant in the world of work. Madam Chairperson, I have made my clarification, thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I really want to agree with what the minister is saying. But what hon. Alaso raised really has a lot of issues because as I am seated here, I represent a constituency, a district that has just emerged from conflict and actually the courses you read there that would qualify the students to benefit from this scholarships – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, those are for the loans. The loans are different from the scholarships.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for that guidance, Madam Chairperson but in clause 18where they suggest that a student scholarship shall be awarded to an eligible student to pursue higher education in a field of study determined by the board as critical to national and economic development is really very okay. I come from Northern Uganda which has just emerged from conflict and psycho-social support programmes are really required because courses like community psychology which you are rubbishing here would really provide such services and that would really make me – because when I look at the performance in my district last year, you wouldn’t see any child qualifying and that is not only in Agago District, it is in most of the rural districts in this country. Like hon. Alaso said, when you visit all our secondary schools in the rural districts, you will never find science laboratories; you will never find science textbooks. You will never find enough science teachers; you will find a lot missing. So, as we look at how to realign our curriculum in this country, we should be mindful of the children today – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, I do not know why you are labouring. What you are saying is actually supporting the proposal here because the words “critical and national” will come out in those areas. I do not know why you are labouring the point. You are supporting the clause. Hon. Members, let us move. I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend the provision by inserting a new clause after sub clause 1 to read as follows: “In determining the eligibility into the scheme, the board shall take into consideration the following: 
    a) Regional balance
    b) Gender 
    c) Social economic need 
    d) Equity”

The justification is to help guide the selection process.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

This will cater for hon. Franca’s needs.

Clause 20

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 20, the committee proposes – and this is under application for loans or scholarships that we rephrase clause 20(1) to read as follows: “An eligible student may in a manner prescribed by the board apply to the board for a loan or a scholarship.” The justification is to be specific about the body that shall prescribe the application. 

The committee also proposes to amend sub clause 3 (b) by inserting the words “the gazette” and in between the words “in” and “at.” The justification is for consistency. The committee also proposes to amend sub clause 4 by inserting the words “where necessary” at the end of the provision. The justification is to be cost effective. 

We also propose to amend sub clause 6 by substituting “seven days” with “14 days.” The justification is to give the minister ample time to consider the appeal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend sub clause 3 by deleting the words “in accordance with section 28.” The justification is for clarity and proper drafting. 

The committee also proposes to amend sub clause 5 by deleting the words “not employed” and the words “from which deductions may be made” and redraft the provision to read as follows: “Where a person has no income for the repayment of the student loan, the person shall within 14 days after receiving the notice under subsection 4 in the prescribed manner inform the board accordingly.” for clarity. The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to introduce a new sub clause to read as follows: “A person who contradicts the provision of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment of six months or both.” The justification is to penalise defaulters. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether the chairperson means contravenes or contradicts. I think it should be “contravenes” and when you say “…the provision of this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment,” it should also be not exceeding six months because you can’t make it specific really. Normally, this would be unconstitutional because it would be cutting down the discretion of the courts. It should be not exceeding six months or both. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 25 we propose to amend sub clause 5 by inserting the words “knowingly” after the word “who.” The justification is for clarity. Proof of knowledge is an important element in a criminal offence. We also propose to amend sub clause 5(b) by deleting the words “does not” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph. The justification is for proper flow of the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MS NAMABIDDE: On clause 26, the committee proposes that we delete the words: “And repayment out of employment”, appearing on the headnote. Justification is for grammatical correction.We also propose to delete the words: “Who is not employed” and the words; “Outside the repayment schedule determined by the board” and insert the word, “Early” immediately before the word: “Repayment” and redraft the provision to read as” “A person who wishes to make early repayment shall repay the student loan in a manner determined by the board”. This is for clarity and precision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MS NAMABIDDE: We propose to amend clause 27(2) by substituting “Social security deductions” with “other statutory deductions”. The justification for this is to be all inclusive and cater for all the other deductions.

We also propose to join sub clauses one and two and redraft the provision to read as: “A student loan shall take priority over all deductions except the taxes and other statutory deductions shall be made before deducting any income of the beneficiary for the repayment of a student’s loan. The justification is for clarity. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I do not have any major objection. But I thought that the wording could be improved as follows: “A student loan shall take priority over all deductions except taxes and other statutory deductions which shall be made before deducting any income of the beneficiary for the repayment of a student loan. I feel that makes it clearer. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we could modify. You know, when you make them sequentially, they come out clearly rather than rapping them together. In the existing clause two and one have been lamped together. But we could still maintain this order. One remains the way it is, subject to sub section two. “A student loan shall take priority over all deductions and payments on the salary or income of an employ. 

Then two should read, “Taxes, social security and other statutory deductions shall be deducted before deducting any student loan repayments”.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from the Learned Attorney-General whether taxes and social security deductions are not actually statutory deductions. Because we might find ourselves repeating –(Interjections)– I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General and I would benefit if it goes on record. 

MR RUHINDI: For the avoidance of doubt, it does not harm; so that it is clear that we are talking about taxes, social security – those ones are always key. Then you can say, “Other statutory deductions” it is okay in my opinion. Although your umbra clause could also be okay, but this is for purposes of clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed by the Attorney General.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 28, amend sub clause 2 by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph e to read: 
f) Proceeds from any investments undertaken by the board. The justification is proceeds from investments should form part of the income of the board. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed – 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, thank you. By stating that proceeds shall form part of the sources of revenue of the board, we are actually accepting that the board shall be able to invest money in other businesses.That is found in clause 33. 

But, Madam Chairperson, we need to go carefully on this. Just last week, we passed the Prisons Bill and among the things we deleted from that Bill was the issue of investing in other businesses. Now that this board is going to be focusing on funds for scholarships and students loans, I do not see why it should undertake investments with these funds. 

Why don’t we remove this and consequently handle section 33 accordingly and state that this board shall not invest any funds available to it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, would you have a problem if the board acquired a huge building, a ten story building which they rent and get money to support the fund? 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, apart from a possible investment like in real estate, supposing the fund has received funds from Government which they are not going to disburse immediately? Those could be put to a short term fixed deposit in a reputable bank and they could earn interest which is income. 

In fact, even for the free zones bill, I was about to protest deleting that part about investing. I feel we should always provide for a situation where by you have funds which are not going to be used immediately. 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, I am not satisfied with the explanation he has given. That assuming the board receives money from Government which it is not ready to use. This money is appropriated according to the plan of the year that they submit. So how can they receive extra funds to invest elsewhere as if the money is not appropriated by Parliament?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I want to give you an example. The kingdom of Saudi Arabia, donated King Fahad Plaza to Uganda, here in Kampala to support IUIU. The funds from there support IUIU. So why do you want to close the door? We are looking for money to support children; why do you want to close the doors yet we are looking for money to support the children?

MR SSEWUNGU: The board can even get premises where they can have weddings every Saturday. And they say, “You can hold your function here but you have to pay Shs 500,000.” If you do not have a protective law for that money, you will not see it. These are facts you cannot run away from. Go to Kitante Primary School; how much money are they getting from their amphitheatre? Those are all investments and we should learn from that.

MR JOHN MUYINGO: Madam Chair, we should not only look at this board getting money from Government; there are very many other sources.You may find that after concluding one offer for admission, money comes in and it is not going to be used until the next academic year; what do you do? We should not limit ourselves to what comes from Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, let us not close the doors; I will put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, for clause 29, amend sub clause (2) by substituting the words “after consultation” with the words “in consultation with”. The justification is for proper wording.
We also propose to insert a new provision to read as – now this will be sub clause (4): “The borrower of the fund shall subscribe to a loan-protection fee which shall indemnify the borrower against payment of outstanding debt to the fund as a result of death or permanent disability.” Justification is to protect the beneficiaries in the event of death or permanent disability.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.


Clause 32

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose to re-number the provisions as sub clause (1) and (2). The justification is for proper numbering of the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.


Clause 35

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, for clause 35, amend sub clause (a) by adding letter “s” to the word “account”. The justification is to correct a typographical error.
(b) Re-number the provisions as sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3), consecutively. The justification is for proper numbering.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose that we delete sub clause 36(2) because it is a repetition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourablemembers, I put the question that we delete clause 36(2) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose that we replace “24 months” with “two years”. The justification is for proper drafting.

MR JAMES KYEWALABYE: Madam Chair, maybe we need some advice from the Attorney-General because I do not see a difference between 24 months and two years. And normally for – (Interjection) Yes, but in this case – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it really substantive?

MR KYEWALABYE: And we normally use 24 months rather than two years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you used “years” elsewhere?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Madam Chair, looking at the justification that the committee is giving, I am not satisfied that “two years” sounds better than “24 months”. (Laughter) Or it is anything less or more. In fact for clarity, “24 months” is better in sentencing but “two years” would mean two financial years or something else. Unless the Attorney-General has a contrary opinion to this but I feel that “24 months” should be retained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 37 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to insert a new clause after clause 37 to read as follows: “General penalty: A person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, where no specific punishment is prescribed, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment of six months or both”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to re-draft the provision to read: “(1) A person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal to the minister. (2) A person aggrieved by the decision of the minister may appeal to the high court.” Justification is to provide for a proper appeal process.

MR OBOTH: I have no serious objection to the provision but I felt the original drafting where a person aggrieved by a determination – we are looking at the board sitting and determining or making decisions –  I am comfortable with retaining the word “determination” or “decision” included in this drafting. And going into the differences between “decision” and “determination” would also be very interesting because not all decisions are determined and not all determinations are decisions. But here we have an applicant who has raised an application and the determination could be to leave the person out or to give no response to the person – not even an acknowledgement. But a decision would be, “You are not qualifying; you are not eligible.” 

So, Madam Chairperson, I would love that in addition to the proposal they have given, the word “determination” should come before “a decision” and that is purely a humble request that the committee will not have any problem with. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want to add determination just before decision?

MR OBOTH: Yes. It sounds the same but it is quite different.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Otherwise you have no problem with the two-tier appeal? 

MR OBOTH: Yes, hon. Chair.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Clause 38(2) which says, “The person aggrieved by the decision of the minister may appeal to the High Court-” My concern is the issue of the High Court. Do we have, on such a decision, really to tell the person that you must appeal on this administration issue to the High Court and probably not the Chief Magistrates Court?

MR OBOTH: Thank you hon. Kenneth Lubogo. Under our good ConstitutionArticle 42 gives provision for anybody aggrieved by the decision of any authority or tribunal to go for judicial review and here the High Court- the format is already provided for not only in the Constitution but in the rules of procedure in this country. So, it is well thought out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the point hon. Lubogo is raising-

MR OBOTH: Judicial Review is in the High Court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the High Court accessible to everybody in Uganda? A child from Kotido will have to go to Mbale to file the appeal. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, the dilemma is- and I thought it is correctly drafted- the remedies of judicial review are only available in the High Court by Constitution and by other rules of procedure under the Judicature Act and other provisions, unless the Attorney-General has revised some of these things lately.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to confirm the submission of hon. Oboth Oboth because as he rightly puts it, Article 42 is instructive: a right of appeal on any matter; and the only worry would be what the Chairperson is saying- accessibility to justice. But we have done commendably well in the Justice, Law and Order Sector. If it is not at district level at least it is at regional level and mind you we are talking about a progression of decisions; and this is an appeal process. Certainly by the time one decides to object to a decision of a board he should be in position to access the appropriate body to appeal to. That is my view but essentially it is the High Court.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, I have seen the appeal but we need to put a time frame on the appeal. It is not included.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing? 

MR WAMAKUYU: Thirty days? (Interjections) – That is one month. Other Members are suggesting 14 days but 30 days is ideal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Fourteen days may be short. You collect the records, have them typed and take them for filing. It may –

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, I propose 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Within 30 days?

MR WAMAKUYU: Within 30 days.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, clause 39: we propose that we amend sub-clause (2) by removing the words “prescribing for” appearing at the beginning of each paragraph and inserting them at the end of sub-clause (2). The justification is to avoid unnecessary repetitions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question-

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair wouldn’t it be better to put that “prescribing for” at the very beginning where it says, “Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the minister may make regulations prescribing the-” and then later on you have all these instead of putting it at the end because they are proposing that we remove the words “prescribing for” from the beginning of each paragraph and insert them at the end of sub-clause (2).But wouldn’t it be better to put them at the beginning where you say, “The minister may make regulations prescribing for,” and then you list all those things down?

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair what hon. Kabajo is saying is exactly what the committee proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Schedule 1

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose that we insert a new proposition immediately after clause 40 to read as follows- This will be part 4: transitional provisions.Clause 41 will now read: “41 Management of Existing Scholarships-
(1) 	All scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships existing immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall vest in the board.

(2) 	Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, bilateral scholarships shall be awarded subject to conditions of the donor country.

(3)	The Central Scholarship Committee of the Ministry of Education and Sports existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to exist on such a date as the minister may, by statutory instrument, publish in the Gazette.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chair, I do not know whether you can amplify No.2. Sometimes friendly countries give you scholarships for the sake of it, including useless ones and children go there, spend seven years, but they have given you.  So when you say “subject to…” I do not know whether you have addressed that issue.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. How about if we put it like this: Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, bilateral scholarships shall be awarded subject to conditions as agreed to with the donor country.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chair, I want to request for clarification from the Minister on how bilateral scholarships have been managed so that we can ably contribute on this one, otherwise as you rightly said, bilateral scholarships are awarded, in many cases, according to the wishes of the donor country. So, unless we really get some clarification from the Minister we are at risk to just include bilateral scholarships. We are at a risk by including it there.

MRS ONGOM: Madam Chair, we are still on that bilateral scholarship where we are saying that, “Notwithstanding sub-section 1 of the section, bilateral scholarships shall be awarded subject to conditions of the donor country.”

Sincerely, they award us this scholarship but we have realised from what you have just said that some of their scholarships are useless because they study for about six or seven years and if they come to this country, they have nowhere to be placed as they cannot work in any place. You would rather think that they studied from this country other than there.

But above all, sometimes our children who are taken there on scholarship, the cost of living is too high. We travelled and we met with some of the students who are abroad and most especially we got those ones who are in UAE and some in Israel.The cost of living is too high. They give them money on weekly basis but sometimes they cannot afford to buy anything for themselves. This is uneconomical and we see that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe what I can add is thatsometime back we went to Cuba and we met very many Ugandan students. They were receiving something like US$ 20 a month and they were unable to live on it. That is what they were getting from the Government. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you. Following your wise guidance, I am even wondering and permit me to wonder aloud whether this proviso is necessary. Should we regulate subjecting this good country to the conditions of the donor countries? Bilateral scholarships by nature come with conditions. Must we add in our laws that yes we are tying ourselves to commit this country to the conditions of the donor country? We are not giving any opportunity to renegotiate – (Interjection) - I will take information from the vice-chair.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much. I beg the indulgence of my committee chair as I pass on this information. I actually think it was a typing problem where the words, “as agreed with the donor country” were missed out. But we at committee level said that scholarships shall be as agreed with the donor country and we shall believe that those agreements will be based on the critical needs of the economy.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, you are on the Floor.

MR OBOTH: Given the information from the vice-chair of the committee, would it still be valid, because my understanding is that there is no bilateral relationship without an agreement.  If you are a good student of internal law, you know bilateral- So the issues of economy and other things are discussed - we do not need to say that subject to the conditions of the donor country. I am at loss if we are buying into this and that is my only worry.

MS AMUGE: Thank you. On the same Floor, there was some debate here; that the scholarships were being abused at the ministry level if you remember. And therefore, I would imagine that this is the right time that we needed to also   streamline the bilateral scholarships which come from our partners. 

Therefore, I would imagine that much as we disagree that we do not totally go by their conditions, I would still insist that we need to mention it in this law. However, I want us to have a stronger kind of bilateral bargain so that we just do not get scholarships to any country. You have mentioned Cuba. If you want to know some of the students who went to some of those countries and because of diplomatic reasons, I cannot mention them; they only learn Spanish and come back with Spanish.  What would you use Spanish for here in Uganda? But there are also very good scholarships like for medicine and engineering but they evaporate and you do not know who benefits from these scholarships.

Therefore, my plea with honourable members is that let us draft something which does not make us stand at a weaker position and we need a law to streamline that. I thank you.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Chair, our cry to know how our scholarships are being managed has a very strong relationship with this sub-section (ii). It relates to how we relate to the scholarships and the needs of our country. 

We need to communicate this to the ministry and the relevant Executive people who are negotiating this on our behalf and negotiating these scholarships on our behalf – not to give us lip service by just accepting any scholarship. We need to say based on our National Development Plan or the critical areas of study that we need;not just anybody to say you need to go and study Spanish when it has nothing to do with Uganda. We need to guide the Executive in these negotiations. I agree that we need to say based on the critical areas in need of our country and not just any scholarships. We need to really be specify.  

MR WAFULA OGUTTU:  I wanted to respond to what hon. Oboth said. We cannot definitely delete (ii) because if you read (iii) they are proposing deleting or dissolving the Central Scholarship Committee which has been processing scholarships for people going abroad. So definitely, we have to leave it.

But I agree that we should maybe put something to the effect that they will consider – the scholarship will be agreed and if they are given to us for free, we should put in mind our national planning requirements but we cannot delete it otherwise nobody will process those scholarships any more.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister clarify and then hon. Ogwal.

MAJ (RTD) ALUPO: I agree with the proposal of the committee to have this clause the way it is but on sub-clause (ii), I am with the Members of Parliament who are proposing that we should come clear on the type of courses that we would wish to take from our bilateral friends that we have.

Why we need this clause is that the conditions as they have already been said are a requirement within these bilateral scholarships.  Sometimes they can tell you that they want people of 35 years of age and above for a master’s degree; sometimes they can say they must have an upper second for a specific degree. Other times, they say they will pay a particular amount of money and the student will pay the additional amount. 

So, if the course is relevant and this clause is in this law, then the board will be empowered by this law to help that student who has been asked to pay the other amount. But I really support the idea that we need to encourage our development partners who would wish to give us these scholarships to give us the scholarships that are critical to the National Development Plan or Vision 2040. I wish the Minister for Foreign Affairs was here to tell us whether we are creating a diplomatic incident or something like that but it is very important that we articulate laws for the country. Thank you, Madam Chair.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ogwal and then the Attorney-General.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not know how we can amend it but I am of the view that this is an area where we should negotiate the terms of these loans in such a way that we protect the values - our cultural traditional values - because I know and the Minister of Education is aware that Victoria University recently had to withdraw because of the hostility against homosexuality by Ugandans and that is a fact. So,  it is important that we should put somewhere here that while we are negotiating these loans, we should be mindful of our cultural and traditional values. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: I am afraid, Madam Chairperson, that what is being emphasised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and some other contributors is not in respect of the transitional provisions. That is a good provision but  we should maybe add another provision of the Bill because what we are talking about now are areas where scholarships have already been secured. We are talking about transitional provisions. Scholarships have already been secured, agreements have already been concluded, and terms have already been agreed. Unless you put in a provision for renegotiation by Government, but this is a transitional measure and it would depend because the country – my own worry is the word ‘shall’ in sub clause 2 - it would depend, the country may say, okay you have come out with a new framework, we accept that you give these scholarships according to your own development plan. Forget our own conditions. In other words, we would only change the word “shall” to “may” to read: “Bilateral scholarships may be awarded subject to conditions of the donor country…” depending on what the donor country or your negotiation with them may be. But otherwise conditions are already set, agreements are already concluded and you cannot actually alter that arrangement by this legislation. It will be very offensive. 

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, after the guidance of the Attorney-General and your own concerns and those of members, I propose that sub clause 2 read: ”Notwithstanding sub section 1 of this section, bilateral scholarships may be awarded subject to conditions as agreed with the donor country.”

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to propose that in subsection 1, we delete “including bilateral scholarships” and have “all scholarships currently offered by the government of Uganda existing before the commencement of this Act shall vest in the board.” (2) Bilateral scholarships … so that we have a statement for those scholarships standing on its own so that we do not mingle 1 and 2. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform members why we brought this provision. We have been having speculation on students scholarships. You are asking yourself where are these ones coming from? Who benefitted? Where are the ones from Kalungu and all this but if they are under the board, it means that it is the board that is responsible to cater for all areas and nobody will complain that it is Kalungu or this region of Uganda. For example if you are to ask about all those students who are in Cuba, we do not know them and we have had a very strong problem in the Committee on Education knowing how they were selected and how they went there. I think that was the reason. So, hon. Ssempijja, when you want to exclude the bilateral scholarships, then you are making a mistake.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I can understand and appreciate the concerns of all the members. The reasons we are giving are very good but as the Attorney-General has guided and that was my fear that this is a transitional provision, we are not providing for the future bilateral scholarships. We legislating about what already exists and that is why I was wondering whether  it is necessary to legislate for bilateral scholarships. Well, whether you use the word “may”, it won’t change – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting we delete No. 2?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I am not suggesting now that we delete. It seems that is what members wanted but I want to accommodate the interests of other members that if it is so important as it sounds now, then probably we could go back and put these specific bilateral scholarships under a standalone section for the future bilateral scholarships to be tagged and subjected to the national development goals and interests of this country so that the subsequent scholarships would take care of the concerns of this country. They would be more relevant but what we have right now on transitional, you are securing what is there and we say you go backwards. Retrospective legislation is a dangerous reverse gear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are proposing that that particular part goes to part 4 which is talking about loans and scholarships and bilateral scholarships.

MR OBOTH: Yes, and then we could attach some conditions that bilateral scholarships referred to here shall be in accordance with the national development goals or the national plan.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a problem with that? It is okay. 

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Chairperson, he was talking about subsection 1 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it was 2.

MS NAGGAYI: Hon. Ssempijja had intimated on removing these bilateral scholarships from 1 which in my view should stay because that is just management of the currency and I wanted us to be clear that it would stay the way it is and we move to (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, one is dealing with the existing and there are also government and bilateral ones which are also existing but for the future, we could move No. 2 to part 4. Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, under the particular provision still on part 4 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us finish with part 8, there is something at the back here; I do not know whether you are still following it up [MS SSINABULYA: “Which one?”] transfer of assets and liabilities. Have we done that? You have introduced a new clause 42.

MS SSINABULYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to introduce a new clause 42, “Transfer of assets and liabilities. All movable and immovable property and assets and liabilities of the scheme which immediately before the commencement of this Act vested in the student loan task force of the ministry responsible for education and sports shall vest in the board. 

2. Staff of the students’ loan tax force currently engaging in the formulation of the scheme existing immediately before the commencement of this Act may form part of the secretariat of the board based on their evaluated performance.”

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, on clause 42(2), which says that the staff of the students loan task force – if these staffs are staff of the Ministry of Education; unless they are specifically recruited for this and are on contract, but otherwise, if they are like the other staff of the ministry, once the scheme is set up, they are free to apply for the jobs. I do not see why we need to put specific provisions for them; they are just a task force; they are not employed; they are like an ad hock committee when set up here in Parliament. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about a unique undertaking, which undertaking required continuity so that whoever comes thereafter, will be inducted into the management of the higher education financing scheme. The committee was mindful of all these concerns; that is why we used the term, “May” and added, “Based on evaluated performance”. You cannot just have people putting in place a system and they all go away, it will collapse that very day. We have to be mindful of that. 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chairperson, the members of the students’ loan taskforce are not staff of Ministry of Education and Sports. They were specifically recruited to put in place a foundation for the establishment of this scheme. They were also identified at that time by the ministry based on their qualifications. For instance, one of them is a lawyer; the other is a financial expert. So they were recruited based on their qualifications in line with handling the students’ loan scheme. But we are not saying it is compulsory that is why we state, “May”, after the board has evaluated them. That means, if they are to continue working in line with what we are proposing in this law, they will also be evaluated like any other fresh person who will come and compete for the jobs. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also want to help my colleague hon. Kabajo, that sub clause 42(1) is already indicating that there are some properties, assets and liabilities they are having as a taskforce. So if we just send away people, there are those issues that will remain hanging and you need people you can ask where things are and who is having what. So if we just create a vacuum, we will be headed for more trouble. So, I agree with the position of the committee that as long as those people are competent and they qualify, we should carry on with them. 

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There must be a structure to start with. But I feel that those who wish to work for the board may apply and be evaluated. But if we leave it as it is, it is as if this is going to tie those people to the board. So they may apply and be evaluated.

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, this is a transitional clause. But I want to remind the House that for the last two or so financial years, we have been appropriating money to the students’ loan taskforce and a lot of work has been done and is still ongoing. For example, last financial year, we appropriated money for the ICT system. So if we just terminate things and the body recruits afresh, we may lose out on the human resource that we have already invested in. 

The committee had a lengthy debate on this, and we thought that between passing this law and having a new board in place, if we go on with the process of recruitment, it may not do well for the new scheme. If they are evaluated and seen fit, then they can continue doing the work of the new loan scheme.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am a member of the committee and it does not add value to specifically say, “They may apply”. If it is not obvious that they should apply, even if we do not put in this clause, they can come like everybody else. The people who are recruiting will know the people who set up the scheme and have some experience. But if you put it in the law, it is like their places are secured for them. 

When we leave it open, whoever is interviewing will know that these people have the experience – they will have that at the back of their mind.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When an idea is conceived, there are those who put it into a plan and in the process they are gaining experience. There is another problem; there is what they call rewards and punishments: If someone does very well, they should be rewarded according to the experience and expertise gained. And those who are doing badly can go away when we begin the recruitment exercise. 

Some of these people have acquired a lot of experience; not all of us have the same level of understanding. So for me, the recommendation of the committee is proper in order to tap into the experience already gained. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, If they have gained experience, they can shine in the interview. Let them go and compete with the others and shine there; their expertise will come out in the interview. Yesterday we were talking about the young children who want to compete for jobs but they do not advertise – 

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 42(1) be introduced into the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42 as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MS NAMABIDDE: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we amend sub clause 6 by inserting the words, “including that”, immediately after the word, “Document” appearing at the beginning of the provision. The justification is for clarity and precision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that schedule 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2 as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR OGUTTU: On Schedule 3, on quorum – (2) says quorum is four here. First, it is very difficult to manage a quorum which is an even number because if there is a stalemate then they cannot pass a decision. But I also think that we should enlarge this board so that the quorum is higher than this; we can enlarge this board to almost 11 people so that the quorum can be about seven. Madam Chair, you know how many more members to be included on this board. (Interjection)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they nine?

MR OGUTTU: If they are nine, therefore the quorum should be five.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not passed that; we will have to look at it again. (Interjection) We are going back there.We stand over that until we have completed clause 3 on the composition. Okay, let us move to Schedule 4.

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose that we delete Schedule 4 and the justification is that this is already captured in clause 18, where we proposed that critical fields of study will be guided by the National Development Plan. So there is no need to have Schedule 4.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Schedule 4 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 5, agreed to.

Schedule 6

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, we propose that we write 1 percent to appear in words as “one percent” instead of using a figure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS AMODING: Madam Chair, I remember that in the initial Bill that we had there was a form schedule which was indicating an “application form”; I do not know what happened and whether we still need to have it because it is a very important documents because it gives us a catchment area – to know the type of people who would be applying in terms of geography, gender and others. So Madam Chair, we needed to see the type of application form.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the Minister will speak about it.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chair, I appreciate the concern about the form the member is talking about. But when we were consulting with the education committee, we agreed that the forms’ contents will keep changing depending on the circumstances. So we agreed with the committee that if we put that form in this law, it would vary from the future forms that the learners would use for applying for the loans. So against that background, we decided to drop that form from the law.

Madam Chair, I can see hon. Oguttu is nodding his head; it seems I am speaking very well. (Laughter)

But on yesterday’s clause which we stood over – clause 3(1)(b) regarding the representation from the National Council for Higher Education, the amendment we have come back with from the Ministry is that: “The executive director should be a person of high moral character with proven integrity and has a minimum of five years’ experience in financial management and public administration.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have moved to clause 6; I thought we had stood over clause 3?

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Clause 3(1)(b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please start with clause 3 and then we shall go the others.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Chair, the clause I have here is clause 3.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, I had asked you to present amendments on clause 3 but I have not seen any. We should go with the committee’s proposal. So hon. Members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the committee chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, yesterday I presented the proposed amendments by the committee; clause 6 is about vacating of office of a member of the board. So I still stand by the proposals as moved by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the committee chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, clause 1: Interpretation, the committee proposes that we define employment as “a contract of service between the employer and the employee and includes a person on self-employment.” Justification is to provide for a specific meaning of employment under this Act.

Madam Chair, we also propose that we define “fund” to mean the Higher Education Students’ Financing Fund established under section 28. And the justification is to improve on the definition.

We also propose to improve on the definition of the word “scheme”. The “scheme” means the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme established under section 2 of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the committee chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MRS SSINABULYA: Madam Chair, I propose that bilateral scholarships be moved to clause 18 of the Bill, which is on students’ scholarships. And this will become clause 18(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed by the committee chair. And we ask the drafts-people to re-formulate the language so that it is clear. 
On Schedule 3, there was the issue of numbers but now what would be the quorum? Five? Okay hon. Members I put the question that schedule 111 be amended to include five rather than four members.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.48
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE


6.49
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

6.49
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I wanted to move a recommital because I struggled to do work on clause 16(1) about-

THE SPEAKER: But you did not give us notice.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I struggled and I thought this would be an opportune moment to –

THE SPEAKER: No, but you should have given us notice.

MR MUWUMA: There is a technical word that is needed here after for consistence- to let it flow- clauses 16 and 17. There is just a technical word to allow it to flow. It may not affect – but for consistence I thought I wanted to- 

Perhaps, Madam Speaker, I should just go on record to put it right if at all it is not taken. What I was saying was that for the student scholarships, under clause 18 we put a proviso for “may” which was carried by the House and when it comes to the student loan scheme, it is the same way. 
We should have captured “may” because we debated and we all agreed that resources may not be available like it is here in (2).But now if we say “shall” it implies that resources will be available to ensure that all students get these loans. That is what-

THE SPEAKER: Read the sentence.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, on clause 16(1) we are saying, “A loan shall cover the following…” Then in clause 18 we said, “A student’s loan may,” we amended and put “may” . I thought that for consistence we would also put “may” to make it flow with scholarships and the loans.

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with two different subjects: one is a loan and the other is a scholarship. 

MR MUWUMA: Then the other one is to do with (c). We amended the one of exigencies research fees under scholarships and then here it has remained expenses. So I thought we needed to marry the two. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We can ask the drafts people to substitute “expenses” wherever the word “fees” occur for research. It is only in one area for consistence.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE HIGHER EDUCATION AND STUDENTS FINANCING BILL, 2013

6.52
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013” be read for the Third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I put the question that the Bill be read for the Third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Now it is the money. Minister now we are on you.

6.52
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very sincerely for presiding over this session since yesterday and encouraging us also the Members of Parliament to be patient and emulate you example to sit with you until the logical conclusion when we have finally passed this very important law. 
I would like to promise Members of Parliament that the resources that we already have in the ministry to expedite the process of implementation will be expeditiously channelled using the right procedure and at the right time, and the Ministry will ensure that the beneficiaries of the scheme are generated from across the country and no occasions of discrimination will occur. All the children of Uganda will benefit from this scheme, including those from Bugisu, especially Mbale. 

But Madam Speaker, most importantly, I would like to thank Members of Parliament for their patience and their input on this Bill. Thank you very much.

6.53
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, in such circumstances when a Bill like this is going to be a law, putting all officers in place might take a long time. There must always be a transitional method of doing this. For us who have been in organisations where there are transitions, there is a mechanism, like now your ministry should put some mechanism in place immediately; your PS could even be the acting Chairperson, you could be the Executive Director so that loans are quickly disbursed for the children of Uganda to access them. It happens in the –(Interjections)– this is a serious matter by the way because by the time you recruit the Executive Director it will be another six months. To recruit all those people you are looking for, it might take quite some time and we would run into the next financial year and yet we have the money for the students. Madam Speaker, I would propose that Parliament authorises the Minister to put in place an interim plan to be able to disburse money for these students for this financial year. 

Having said that, in the same vain, talking about discrimination, you are right: discrimination should not exist but the Bugisu you are talking about –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Leader of the Opposition, and my friend, whether it is procedurally correct to propose amendments to a Bill that has been passed. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not amending anything. I was talking about some transitional measures. Even in the Constitution of Uganda, if you read it very carefully, there is a chapter which talks about transition.

THE SPEAKER: It has been-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I have answered the Attorney-General. He knows. What I was telling the Minister is that of course we do not want discrimination. But also we want to say that this should not be the only source of funding to students. We must find another mechanism. And one of the mechanisms is to go back and think about cooperative unions-

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Leader of the Opposition now you are smuggling- (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Like if BCU was working, I would not really be fighting-

THE SPEAKER: You would not be here? Okay, hon. Members, I want to thank you very much, notwithstanding the speed at which we have moved I know that many people wanted to contribute but they did not but I think we have done a good job. 
This Bill is very important for the young people of this country. Let us ask the Clerk to do the proof reading very quickly so that the copy is sent for assent as quickly as possible before Christmas. So you work over night, do the proof reading so that they are sent and the country knows what to do.

Now we were supposed to go to items six and seven but we need energy to listen to a very lengthy report and so we shall adjourn to Tuesday for items six and seven. The House is adjourned to Tuesday.

(The House rose at 6.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 December 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)



