Friday, 21 December 2012  
  
Parliament met at 12.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. I want to start by expressing my deep gratitude on the way we were able to handle the last sitting and come to some conclusions. I could sense from the Chair that the debate could have gone any way, but I thank you for holding the spirit of this House and handling very difficult matters with some restraint. I thank you very much for that and I do not take that for granted. 

I wish to welcome you to this special sitting. You will recall that last Tuesday, 18 December 2012, Parliament could not conclude the motion to pay tribute to our dear fallen colleague. Honourable members, since we last met, a lot of things have happened and so many conspiracy theories have been formulated both in the print media and electronic on what could have been the possible cause of hon. Nebanda’s death. These theories worsen an already bad and sad situation. I continue to call on you, Members, to exercise restraint as we continue to engage in this discussion to honour our colleague. 

In order to conduct this sitting in a smooth and effective manner, I wish to draw your attention to our Rules of Procedure which regulate the way we do business. The rules regulate when a Member desires to speak, what the Member should do. They regulate the content of the speech, that it must be relevant to the subject matter before the House. They regulate the issues on how you interrupt a Member who is holding the Floor in the course of the debate - how you stand up to raise a point of order, point of clarification or procedural point. They deal with the general behaviour of ourselves and our use of language. I think you recall that at one point, I had to draw this to the attention of a very senior member of this country, that the use of language in the House is somehow restricted. Honourable members, these are our own rules which we formulated to enable us have orderly conduct of business, and to enable the Chair preside over a dialogue with the members respecting each other and moving on even when matters are difficult. 

As I have stated before, this is a very sad time for Parliament and indeed the entire nation. It is unprecedented that in the Parliament of Uganda a motion for tribute has been considered in two sittings; this is the first one. I think you know that because it is important, that is why we are having a second special sitting to handle this matter. 

Members, emotions are generally charged because of the sadness and the turn of events since the demise of hon. Nebanda. However, I wish to urge all of you to exercise restraint and to control your emotions; avoid inciting the feelings of colleagues and respect each other generally. Above all, we should remember that this is the august House; we should endeavour to conduct ourselves with the dignity, respect and honour expected in this House. 

We should also remember that the family of the late hon. Nebanda is with us and are already grieved and mourning, as all of us are. We should, therefore, avoid deepening the wounds in their hearts. The citizens throughout the country are also listening and watching us since there are live broadcasts. We should not let their expectations down and the respect they hold for this revered and sacrosanct institution. The continued respect for it really rests in our hands in what we do today and continue to do as our usual business. 

Honourable members, I thank you for listening to me and I would like to repeat that I thank you for the way you were able to handle this matter when it came here for the first time on 18th. You were able to listen to the Speaker; it was not easy from here. It might have been easier from the corner there, but it was not easy from my side. So, I beseech you to exercise the same restraint so that we can give honour to our fallen colleague. Thank you.

(Entry of the late Cerinah Nebanda Arioru)

National Anthem (Three stanzas)

Anthem of East African Legislative Assembly

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. NEBANDA CERINAH ARIORU, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, BUTALEJA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall, as I stated in my earlier communication, that this motion was moved but could not be completed on the day it was moved. So, we adjourned it to today. 

The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Nebanda Cerinah Arioru, Woman Representative, Butaleja District. In the course of the discussions, speeches from the mover and the seconders of the motion, some issues were raised that necessitated an adjournment to allow other processes to take place before we could conclude this motion, but that is the motion. 

When we concluded, I had asked that certain processes should take place. I asked that the teams that were involved should do further consultation and come back and suggest for us the way forward on how we should handle this matter - what the possibilities were and what the impossibilities were - so that we could know. I am advised that the team of doctors from Parliament have prepared a statement. I am also advised that the minister has a short comment to make on what is going on with those issues. We should be mindful of the motion. This is our only opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague and we should be able to conclude this motion so that the process of burial and so on can go uninterrupted. 

At this moment, I am going to ask for a brief from the team of doctors from Parliament who are involved in this process. I will then ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to give a comment. 
 
12.35
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report by the medical doctors, who are Members of Parliament, who participated in the post-mortem examination of our dear late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. It is signed by three colleagues: Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Dr Medard Bitekyerezo and me, Dr Sam Lyomoki.

Mr Speaker, on the evening of Friday, 14 December 2012, hon. Cerinah Nebanda was pronounced dead. This led to a series of events that were communicated in the sitting of Tuesday, 18 December 2012. Among other things, Parliament and the family of the late Cerinah Nebanda agreed with the Police to jointly undertake the post-mortem exercise. The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament nominated three Members of Parliament, who are also senior medical doctors, namely, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Dr Medard Bitekyerezo, and myself, Dr Sam Lyomoki, for this purpose. Parliament further nominated Dr Sylvester Onzivua, a Mulago Hospital consultant pathologist, to join the Police surgeon and other pathologists in carrying out the post-mortem examination. I lay before this House a letter from Parliament nominating Dr Sylvester Onzivua to assist Parliament in that process. 

As earlier reported, the post-mortem examination yielded significant findings but these were not conclusive as far as the exact cause of death is concerned. A macroscopic examination of the body and internal body organs revealed features of acute pancreatitis, bilateral consolidation of the lungs, mild gastritis and the gastric contents had a strong pungent and offensive smell. Given the circumstances surrounding how she died, these findings pointed to a likely presence of toxic substances in the body that required confirmation through further analysis. 

The team is of the view that the possible substances in this particular case were non-corrosive but could be absorbed in the system and had the capacity to singly, or in combination, cause a malfunction in the pancreas and lungs on a magnitude that could rapidly lead to death within few hours. Accordingly, it was decided that the samples be taken for further histopathological and toxicological analysis. Samples were divided into two sets: one delivered to the Government Analytical Laboratory (GAL) and another to Dr Sylvester Onzivua for independent analysis. 

As honourable members are aware, the processing of these samples created a situation culminating into the events of Tuesday, 18 December 2012. On that day, after a heated debate while considering the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda, Parliament directed as follows:

1. 	That the burial of hon. Cerinah Nebanda be postponed indefinitely. 

2. 	That all the members that were involved in the investigation to find out the cause of death get together and advise on how to resolve the impasse and ensure a credible outcome of the investigation.

3. 	That Dr Sylvester Onzivua, who was in police custody, be released immediately and unconditionally.

4. 	That the body of hon. Cerinah Nebanda be kept in the anatomy building in Makerere College of Health Sciences and be brought back to Parliament on Friday, 21 December 2012 at 10.00 a.m.

The parliamentary team met the following day to agree on the way forward. The team comprised of honourables Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Dr Sam Lyomoki, Dr Medard Bitekyerezo, hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. David Bahati. We were informed by hon. David Bahati that a meeting had been organised at 10.00a.m. on that day in State House and would be chaired by His Excellency the President. In attendance would be His Excellency the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General, among others. This meeting was envisaged to kick-start the process of bringing the stakeholders together as directed by Parliament. However, the said meeting could not take place because of three developments that occurred:

1. 	Dr Sylvester Onzivua, the pathologist nominated by Parliament and cleared by the Ministry of Health to travel to South Africa, was not released and was to be charged with abuse of office under the Anti-Corruption Act. We have attached a letter of clearance from the Ministry of Health signed by Dr Achieng Jane Ruth, which gave permission to Dr Onzivua to take the samples to South Africa. I lay the letter on the Table.

It was our opinion that the continued incarceration of Dr Onzivua was in utter contempt of Parliament and against the spirit behind the adjournment of the House. This created an urgent need for us to pursue the rights of the said pathologist because he had been held for over 48 hours, but has since then been released on police bond.

2. 	The police team had, without our knowledge and that of the family, flown out of the country with samples. This was contrary to what Parliament directed, particularly that all parties meet and chart a way forward. 

The Police told the country that their team had travelled to London with a member of the family but hours later, the family distanced itself from this arrangement. It later occurred that the said family member was abandoned in Nairobi and had decided to come back to Uganda. He is now in Uganda and not in London as the Police spokesperson had wanted the public to believe.

3. 	The other sad development was that the four Members of Parliament on the team were issued with police summons to report to the Police Special Investigations Unit at Kireka where Dr Sylvester Onzivua had been incarcerated. I would like to lay before this House these summons issued against Members of that team. [Hon. Members: “Shame!”] 

Given the behaviour exhibited by the Police in this investigation, the team understood that this was aimed at frustrating our work including the presentation of this report to the House. After consultations, the team ignored the summons and opted to concentrate on the assignment given to them by the House. The team further decided to remain within the precincts of Parliament during both day and night to avoid what was clearly seen as manoeuvres aimed at denying members their presence in the House during the time of this plenary sitting. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, in analysing the question on whether it is still possible to get credible results, we decided to carry out literature reviews and consultations with various experts. In these consultations, the team addressed itself to four key questions: The first question was whether another post-mortem on the body was still necessary and relevant. Two, whether it was feasible and possible to procure a new set of samples from the body and whether such samples could yield reliable results. The third question was whether the chain of custody of the samples was properly followed; and the fourth was about whether any law or procedure had been breached.

On the question of whether a new post-mortem examination on the body was actually still necessary and relevant, the team noted that it was possible for another post-mortem to be done except that it would be of very limited value and scope. It was also noted that it would be difficult to draw samples of blood at this stage, besides some of the important samples like bile and the gastric contents were exhausted during the first post-mortem exercise. In any case, the first post-mortem exercise fulfilled its purpose. The only snag now is the further processing of the samples. The team, therefore, does not recommend that a post-mortem examination be repeated because it adds no value.

Question No. 2 was whether it would be easy to procure a new set of samples from the body for toxicology and histopathology and if such samples could yield reliable results. In view of the fact that the body had been embalmed using formalin, and knowing that formalin makes extraction of poisons from the body extremely difficult, it is unlikely that useful results could be got from new samples from an already embalmed body. Formaldehyde also changes the concentration of any chemical in the body. Therefore, we would be likely to get false results. 

In rare cases of poising using radioactive substances such as polonium, an investigation into the nature of poison is still possible even after the body has been treated with formalin as this does not affect radioactivity. However, given the fact that this case has caused serious controversy and difficulties, it would be unreasonable to continue adding trauma and anxiety just because one wants to exclude a small spectrum of poison, which even requires sophisticated and expensive facilities for detection.

On the third question, whether the chain of custody of the samples was properly followed, I would like to say that the shorter the chain, the more credible and reliable the process of investigation. In the case of the samples that were destined for South Africa, they were in the possession of the person who was supposed to deliver them directly to the laboratory and they were kept under standard conditions. 

In case of any variations between these samples, that would have provided an opportunity to cross examine the two sets. In toxicology examinations, we do not use all the samples; some of them are always left out. Additionally, both sets of samples were kept under similar conditions but in different laboratories, one in Mulago and the other at Wandegeya, and  these are all credible and recognised laboratories.

In the particular case of the laboratory at Mulago, where the samples for the independent analysis were kept, I would like to state that this laboratory has always been used for storing toxicological samples. This is the same laboratory that is storing Government samples for nodding disease that are destined for testing in the USA in January 2013. On top of that, Dr Sylvester Onzivua is a consultant pathologist of unquestionable integrity and has been working for Government for a long time using this same laboratory. He has handled high profile cases for Government, the private sector as well as cases outside this country. 

Toxicological samples are usually kept at sub zero temperatures but on the day of analysis they are removed from the refrigerator and allowed to thaw at room temperature before the poison can be extracted. The samples for the independent investigations were handled and transported under recognised and acceptable professional standards and requirements. They were being transported in bio-hazard bags at the time they were intercepted. Dr Sylvester Onzivua has handled several cases for Government using the same laboratory,  handling and transporting samples in a similar way and employing the same procedures. The question now is: What could have made this case different? The team was convinced that there is something not being told, more so because of the fact that the team had to struggle with the Police on who handles and transports the samples and which samples to use. 

It is important to recall that during an earlier meeting between the honourable members on the team, police officers and pathologists held at Mulago Hospital, the Police initially insisted that either Dr Onzivua hands over the samples to the Government Analytical Laboratory, which would after some unspecified time be handed back to him, or that Dr Onzivua be only allowed to carry samples that were already with the Government Analytical Laboratory. After strongly questioning the intention behind this strange demand that clearly undermined the required independence, the Police eventually abandoned their demand and agreed to have Dr Onzivua travel to South Africa, only to arrest him and confiscate the samples a few hours later.

On the last question, whether there were laws or procedures breached, Mr Speaker, the position of the team is that there is no law or procedure that has been breached. The Inquest Act, for example, empowers a doctor to determine the cause of death in whatever manner he or she sees fit without seeking permission from any person or body in line with his or her powers and mandate. This is a professional law and technical matter that should never be politicised or vulgarised. The law does not prohibit a family member or an interested party from finding out the cause of death of a dear one nor is police approval a requirement. All other procedures and standards were met. (Applause) The independent sample was subjected to the same standards and procedures as the other sample.

Mr Speaker, let me now get to the conclusion and recommendations. After assessing the way this matter has been handled, it is our view that the Police have not been interested in the option of an independent analysis of samples that Parliament and the family wanted. It was strange that in this particular instance, the government machinery appeared more vigilant in curtailing the independent assessment and professional assistance as opposed to pursuing and apprehending the culprits.[Hon. Members: “Yes”] 

It is even surprising that the Police seem to have abandoned the pursuit of the suspected culprits and are concentrating on harassing those who wanted the truth to come out. This makes the whole issue suspicious. Under the circumstances, a breakthrough in establishing a credible cause of death is less likely. Accordingly, as a team mandated by Parliament and the family, we hereby formally withdraw from the investigations. (Applause)

We also recommend that:
1. 	No further post-mortem examination or extraction of further samples should be done on the body;

2. 	Parliament should pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda and pass the motion;

3. 	Burial arrangements should continue;

4. 	Harassment of Members of Parliament and the consultant pathologist should stop. That scheme should be abandoned; 

5. 	Government should respect and promote professionalism in this country.

Mr Speaker, I do not know at what stage we shall pay tribute. The late was a member of my committee and I do not know whether this will be the appropriate time for me to say something.
I lay the report that I have just read on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had said after that statement the minister would respond.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the report from the team which this Parliament sanctioned is making recommendations that determine how we proceed today. One of the proposals is that Parliament should pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda and pass a motion. The procedural point I am raising is whether Parliament will not need to take a decision first on this before we listen to any other statements and debates. This is a proposal from the team and it requires immediate decision for us to be able to continue.

12.54
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hilary Onek): Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the report which Dr Lyomoki read was representative of the Members Parliament here present. It is important that before the minister comes up, Members of Parliament should pronounce themselves in line with that report. In terms of procedure, is it proper for the minister to hijack the scene in open ignorance of the significance of Members of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what happened is that I referred this matter so that there is consultation with the whole team. It looks like that consultation did not take place. So, the three members, who are Members of Parliament, sat together - the three of them – and compiled the report. There is a possibility that the other side, which did not seat together with this one, also compiled a report. There is a Government side, obviously. 

Honourable members, my instructions were clear. I said that let all the people who are involved in these processes go and harmonise. From the report of the team of the three Members of Parliament, they say that there was a meeting called but they did not attend. So, what was in that meeting? That is what I referred to. We had agreed that we would handle this thing with dignity.

DR BAYIGGA: It has always been the procedure of this House that there is a debate after reports are given. This House, under your guidance, pronounced itself on the modus operandi of production of this report and it has been presented and Parliament would want to express themselves about the same. It may even be amended by Members of Parliament if need be. 

The guidance I am seeking from you is: don’t you think that it would be procedurally right, and as always according to parliamentary processes and procedure, to allow this report to be disposed of and we vote on it after a thorough debate, as has always been the practice, before we get another point of view from the minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whoever is coming to make this statement must have also honoured the directive from the Speaker except that they did not meet together. The members stated why they did not go for the other meeting, so it is not therefore fair for us not to listen to what they have.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I just really would like to appeal to colleagues in this House and to your sense of fairness – (Interjections) - fairness to those who are directly affected by what is going on now. I want to tell hon. Tinkasiimire that I am not only a member of this House but also I am a very old member of this House. For hon. Tinkasiimire to speak as if I am not a member of this House, I want to inform him that I am a member of this House and I am not party to that report. I want to inform you that that report does not represent this House.

Mr Speaker, when you made a decision last time, we tried to have a meeting and as the hon. Dr Lyomoki has said, that meeting did not take place because they did not come – (Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, you did give a directive and the directive was targeting the members holding a meeting. These members have been clearly mentioned in this report; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is not among those who were in the pathological room and so is Hilary Onek. The Prime Minister has now disowned the report that was made under your directive. Is he, therefore, in order to allege that this report is not a report of this House and should he be allowed to continue on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clearly, this report is not yet a report of this House until we pronounce ourselves on it. This report is not yet a report of the House because the House has not yet adopted it. Now, we are in the process of assessing the adaptability of the report. Isn’t that what we are doing?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance and really in a very sober way. A report has been presented by the team of doctors and in your communication you had given us the procedure to follow. The other sitting, which did not conclude the motion, received a presentation also from this team of doctors. Now the report that has been presented directly alludes to some facts that concern the roles of Government, specifically the Police - (Interjections) - No, let me seek my guidance. Why are some members very uncomfortable trying to disrupt an attempt to hear the position of the minister? I seek your guidance whether it is not important that you guide us on the need to hear the other side. How do we consider a report that is accusing some people and they are ready to answer those accusations?

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are mourning our beloved sister and daughter who is lying before us here. In the culture of Africans, we believe that if a person dies and you are quarrelling and fighting, the spirit will never be in peace. I would like really, for the sake of our daughter, to appeal to you that let us listen to each other. 

This report has been presented and it is true Government has been mentioned. This has become like opposition and the ruling party - (Interjections) - Sorry, by saying opposition I am not saying you, the Opposition. Government has been mentioned in this report so it is very important for Government to put across its position and then we debate the two reports. That is what I believe in. Otherwise, now if we continue shouting like that, how long shall we torment our beloved spirit? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are all aware of the practice of Parliament. This Parliament nominated a committee to do the business it has presented this morning -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It did not.

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, I stand to be guided and reminded but to the best of my remembrance, we said that the committee that earlier on -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not the committee. There was no committee, please.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I was in the House and it was your own pronouncement directing the members on the team that had been investigating this case, and that they would even co-opt, on behalf of the Parliament to produce this report. So, Parliament owns this team and it must debate this report and own it! (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, for the record, honourable member for Entebbe, there was no committee. What I said was that since there are issues, let the people who participated in these processes sit together and then co-opt, if they like, other consultants and find a solution on how we can move forward. That is what I said.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Mr Speaker, to us in Butaleja, the trauma we have been subjected to because of our dear daughter is painful and almost unbearable. A number of family members have been treated for hypertension and other related issues resulting from the trauma caused. The committee you instituted or the directive you gave have come up with recommendations and the recommendations are extremely clear.
 
I once said here that the manner in which the investigation has been set or has been conducted leaves a lot to be desired; we cannot conclude those things here. There are so many questions that must asked and also answered. I asked a question about my rights and the rights of my family if tomorrow I die and they want to find out what has caused my death. So far, the precedent being set by Government is showing that my family has no right unless the Police say so. Actually, I have consulted a few lawyers whether it is not possible now to have a constitutional petition so that the Constitutional Court can determine and make a ruling on this, so that in future when somebody of this profile or even a peasant dies, that the family or the next of kin have a right to find out what has happened. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, the constitutional issues - who did what and who did not do it - cannot be resolved now. They can never. There is a lot. If I attempted to talk, I would fail because my heart will break down. May I, therefore, request the honourable members that we stick to the recommendations of the committee which have been read here namely: One, that no further post-mortem examination or extraction of further samples should be done on the body. 

Even the members of the family objected to the body going to Mulago and they decided to go with the body home. So, even the directive by the Speaker was not complied with because the family, for reasons that they know, objected to that directive. They felt more comfortable to stay with their dead one because nobody here can stay with this body apart from them.

The second one is that Parliament should pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda and pass a motion. I know that hon. Cerinah Nebanda has had her own challenges in life and controversies in debate, but these should not follow her even at the time of death. Mr Speaker, let the House be given an opportunity and they tell the public the good side of hon. Nebanda. There are so many people who are ready to say the wrong side even when it does not exist but the only people who can say the right things about hon. Cerinah Nebanda are these ones who have been with her. So, honourable members, let us pay tribute according to recommendation No.2.

Three says, “Burial arrangements should continue.” Mr Speaker, I am the chairperson of the burial arrangements committee with a number of Members of Parliament. We are ready and we want this House to resolve to kick in motion the processes. One, we are entering a festive season and secondly, the family is also in pain. None of you has ever had an experience of losing a dear one and then you have to stay with the body for this long. It may be traumatising! So, once the House adopts this report, we are ready to go ahead with the burial process and do exactly that. 

The fourth one is, “Harassment of Members of Parliament and the consultant pathologist should stop.” One thing I have noted here is that this, in itself, generates its own controversy. First of all, in the statement which was laid before this House, the spokesperson of Police threatened charges because the pathologist had been arrested allegedly smuggling body parts out of the country. I thought that the charges would have been preferred according to that statement. Unfortunately, up to yesterday and until he was released on bond, the people who incarcerated him failed to prefer charges maybe because they are trying to consult the law. So, to give hon. Cerinah Nebanda the decent burial that she deserves, it would be a strong recommendation that we are all human beings and subject to error. 

If in the process of finding out what could have caused her death, which may never be found, each party erred on his or her part, let those who take responsibility, at an appropriate time, answer, so that a formal inquest - Actually, we could move that a formal inquest into the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda be constituted by Government, headed by a judge or by somebody like that, so that we go the extra mile to find out what process was bungled and so that in future we can set the record straight.

Finally, “that Government should respect and promote professionalism in this country.” It could be that it is because of this that the minister wanted to tell us how they respect or disrespect professionalism, in which case I would not mind listening to him so that we can have a formal debate. However, for us the people of Butaleja, we want to give her a decent burial and pay tribute to our fallen dear daughter so that the responsibility of finding out who killed her lies with those who should have protected her in the first instance.

Mr Speaker, I pray that we go with the recommendations of the committee so that we can conclude this.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, I have carefully studied this report – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, after the elaborate presentation of the views of this House by hon. Dombo, I expected you to have responded in terms of advice as the Speaker of this honourable House so that you direct and guide us and we move accordingly. Otherwise, by allowing scores of ministers to come in, they will cause more interruptions and therefore digress from the core of what the issue is. We humbly demand, Mr Speaker, that you direct us.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I have been in this Parliament since 1986 -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Order! 

GEN. TUMWINE: I know the Rules of Procedure. I know the respect that we give to each other. I have observed what shame we have brought to ourselves as Parliament, and the people that elected us are demanding –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us listen to each other. Order!

GEN. TUMWINE: The people that elected us -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Members, order!

GEN. TUMWINE: The people are demanding that we listen to each other for solutions. Our Rules of Procedure allow all Members of this Parliament the right to speak. Is it in order that some members insist that one group of Members of Parliament are not heard? Is it in order that hon. Lukyamuzi insists that the Government side is not heard, so that we have a fair hearing of this case?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unless Lwemiyaga wants to rule on the point of order, I would then allow him to. 

Honourable members, the member raised a point of order on the question of listening to other colleagues. The hon. Lukyamuzi rose on a procedural point and as usual I was supposed to guide on it, but the Attorney-General stood up. No, he stood up and I allowed him. Sometimes I do this so that by the time I rule, I rule on both so that I take care of all situations. It is only me with that discretion and I exercise it judiciously, so please allow me to exercise it. Please, Attorney-General, say what you wanted to say and I rule.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I have carefully listened to the report that has been presented here by Dr Lyomoki and the recommendations. –(Interjections) -  I have always known that wisdom does not abide with noise. As long as there is noise, wisdom will flee.

Mr Speaker, I have listened to this report and recommendations that have been made. A member of the House has recommended that we adopt these recommendations. Having listened to this report, there are definitely clear falsehoods in the report - (Interjections) - and unless the Minister of Internal Affairs is allowed to read his statement, this House will not be able to tell who is telling the truth. (Interruption)

MS KABAALE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This report which was tabled before this august House was tabled by people we entrusted to go and make more research about the cause of the death of our dear sister. They have made recommendations, among which, is that the honourable member who is lying here should be buried. Is it, therefore, in order for the respectable Attorney-General of this country to state that the whole report is full of falsehoods?  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report has a body and recommendations. The body contains facts; the recommendations are recommendations as you have heard them. The way we can handle this is to deal with the recommendations and then we go back to the issue of the motion and we conclude this matter. So, I will propose on the recommendations of the committee, if we can adopt them.  Recommendation No.1 is: “No further postmortem examination or extraction of further samples should be done on the body.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two, “Parliament should pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda and pass the motion.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three, “Burial arrangements should continue.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Four, “Harassment of Members of Parliament and the consultant pathologist should stop.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five, “Government should respect and promote professionalism in this country.” I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Debate is open on the motion. (Members rose_) No please; let us not go round in circles. Honourable members, when this debate could not proceed, I had received a request from Members of Parliament from that area and they said they wanted to make their contributions first and then go and arrange for the burial at home. Should we give ourselves a timeframe or we debate at large? 

HON. MEMBERS: Three minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes.

1.26
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I particularly want to thank the august House for passing the motion of paying tribute to our colleague, who is now lying before us.
 
We are at great pains to have lost our gallant foot soldier in the name of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. We all know that hon. Cerinah Nebanda loved to speak her mind; she loved the truth; she hated corruption; she spoke against corruption with all her energy; and contributed towards her oversight role with all her energy.
 
We as Members from the Bukedi Region, where hon. Cerinah Nebanda served as our secretary to the caucus in the region, we stand here to remember her. We have been struggling to come to terms and to believe that indeed, she has left us. Somebody asked me this morning, “How are you?” and I told him, “I do not know how I am.”  It has been extremely difficult for us to come to terms, particularly, with the situations that preceded hon. Nebanda’s death and those after her death.
 
I am extremely happy today that we have passed a resolution for the motion before the House to pay tribute to her. All we want is to have our dear friend and colleague to be given a decent burial. I agree with all those who have spoken before that we cannot right away resolve the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda neither can we even have the answers in the near future. Because for sure, I know a number of people have died in this country, many questions have been asked before and they have not been resolved; they have not been answered. I am not very sure whether the ones on hon. Cerinah Nebanda will be answered tomorrow or the other day. I know in the African tradition, people ask these questions but in many cases, even in the African tradition where there was no science and technology, people would put the pieces together and come up with a conclusion that so and so died of this.  

That helps to heal the emotions of the bereaved family. We may not get there, but all that we pray and I prayed this prayer when I heard of the death of our honourable colleague; “God, assemble your angels to quickly come and receive your gallant fallen foot soldier and take her to a place of peace and let her rest in eternal peace.”  May the Almighty Lord, rest the soul of our fallen honourable colleague, hon. Cerinah Nebanda, in eternity. I thank you.
 
1.31
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members and the entire country. We, the people of Butaleja, are hurt. We have been given three minutes, but I may not be able to use all of them.
 
We have been acting like sister and brother with the late hon. Nebanda. We occupied the same office. Hon. Nebanda, you have gone. I think God was not on my side. All the people of Kalege’s side pray that honourable members pray for us so that we do not go through the hardships and the trauma hon. Nebanda went through. Try to give us courage; be kind; we are going through this situation, and these upheavals as people of Butaleja.
 
As people of Bunyole, we are peaceful. It is good that hon. Nebanda said her mind openly like most people will talk about her.  The reports are clear and her records are clear. Bye, hon. Nebanda. We shall be following you where you are going in a few days.  May your soul rest in eternal peace. The people of Butaleja welcome you all.   

1.32
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Mr Speaker, I want to join the rest of the Members this morning to pay tribute to our late sister, hon. Cerinah Nebanda. I would like to join the whole country in mourning and also to encourage the people of Butaleja, which is the heart of the original Bukedi. As a member of Bukedi, I know we have lost our own sister. Cerinah - I used to call her my grand-daughter - has a lot of roots; as the Banyole are, they call Samias their grandfathers. Whenever we would meet it was only, “grandpa, grandpa.” And this morning as we stand here we are mourning our own. 

Right now, we are paying tribute to our sister here, but the fact remains that Butaleja is not at peace. Yesterday, I was in Butaleja from the previous night when we had a postponement of the motion here. I decided to drive home - because I speak the language - to put a few issues at hand in order. But the question became very complicated, especially when we realised that we were not getting full support from Government. The question became, “Who killed Cerinah?” The question also remains, “Who is next?” and whether that person will really be protected? And that is the same question that the whole House wants to establish. 

Hon. Nebanda spoke for her people. Whatever she spoke, whatever you came across, all the writings, she spoke for her people. She spoke for the country. I believe she never spoke anything for herself. She put the interests of the community, the poor, at the forefront before she could speak for anything and that was her. We have lost her. We lost a person within a very short time of only 18 months as a Member of Parliament. She has done more than what all the old Members of Parliament have had in the Eastern region. This is the lady lying here right now. We do not know exactly what we shall have for Butaleja, but we know at one time, God will provide us with somebody else. Someone good will come up.

The first time I met hon. Nebanda she told me how she got the inspiration to stand. Her contesting for the Member of Parliament was generated from Ecclesiastes 4:1-14. She was only reading that verse and she claimed that she was standing because of the suffering of her people. (Member timed out_)

1.35
MR SALEH KAMBA (NRM, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I stand here in this sad moment to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Cerinah Nebanda. I was not just a colleague to hon. Nebanda, but I must inform this august House that one, I am the Chairperson of Bukedi Parliamentary Group. Hon. Cerinah Nebanda has been my secretary. Not only that, I was part of the effort which brought hon. Nebanda to this House. It was a deliberate move and it was timely; it was at a time when Bukedi was searching for a fresh political force to match other regions of this country. (Applause)
 
As you are aware, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, Bukedi is one of the oldest regions in this country, but it is so surprising that currently, it is one of the most disadvantaged regions in this country. Therefore, hon. Nebanda was not in this Parliament just for the sake of filling the position of Woman MP of Butaleja. She has been in this Parliament as part of the political foot soldiers from Bukedi region that has been fighting to see that we match the political challenges of this country.

Hon. Nebanda was brought to this Parliament after thorough consideration. I knew hon. Nebanda in 2009, when she was still a student at Makerere University, and I was the chairman of the Bukedi Parliamentary Group. Colleagues and friends consulted me, and approached me and requested for my support and assistance towards hon. Nebanda’s coming to Parliament. As a professional information gatherer, I took it upon myself and went to the ground, carried out my independent research about hon. Nebanda,  and she passed all the tests of being elected a Member of Parliament, and that is why we all came out and supported hon. Nebanda to come to this Parliament. (Member timed out_)

1.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Ms Nekesa Oundo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I rise to support the motion in paying tribute to my sister, allow me to extend my heartfelt condolences to the family and the country at large. For those who ever found me with hon. Nebanda, either in the corridors or elsewhere, never for one day did she ever call me Barbara, and I never called her Cerinah. It was always “my sister.” Those who knew both of us very well - or those who still know me, since I am still living - the circumstances surrounding Cerinah’s coming to Parliament and the circumstances under which I came to Parliament, are not different at all. We were all supported by our mothers. Our people appreciated and supported us because of our mothers. Our mothers were, therefore, very instrumental in seeing to it that we come to Parliament. At the time when our mothers decided that we come to Parliament, we were all still at the university. All that made us sisters. 

Mr Speaker, my sister lying here today is one person who gave me an insight into what it means when someone says, “So and so is full of life.” Hon. Nebanda was full of life; but on a sad note, just by a snapshot, she was gone. Her sudden death rendered this whole House, all Members of this Ninth Parliament, powerless. We did not get a chance to offer solutions to the doctors. No one got a chance to advise them on how best to save her. Suddenly, we missed her. 

Everyone here will agree with me that Cerinah was a lady of peculiar courage; very extraordinary. She served her people diligently. She is a true definition of the Rotary motto, “Service Above Self”. I have no better words to explain what Cerinah was. Let me call her Cerinah now because she is the topic; she is why everyone is sad today. The best you can do for me, sister, fare thee well. May you rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (MRS SARAH OPENDI): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, this is a very difficult moment for us as a Parliament, for the people of Butaleja and most especially, the family. I did not know the late before 2010, until when we had the NRM primaries in 2012 – you know Butaleja was part of Tororo. So, what happens in Butaleja is like it is happening in Tororo. Because of the chaotic primaries they had in Butaleja, the local radios kept on reporting about Cerinah Nebanda. Because of what was happening, I had to look for hon. Cerinah Nebanda to know her more. In one of the NRM meetings after the primaries were over and she had been declared winner, I met her and she told me, “I am done. Do you need help?” I told her, “But we are going into general elections.” She said, “I am done. I am going to win with a landslide. But if you need help, I can come to Tororo and help you.” I told her, “I will invite you when necessary.” However, I did not invite her. 

We met after the elections after the swearing-in, and of course, we interacted. She was one of the few MPs whom I talked to after the swearing-in ceremony. I found hon. Cerinah Nebanda quite principled. Sometimes, she made statements and I would tell her, “My sister, that was too bold,” and she would say, “I came to speak for the people of Butaleja. That is why they elected me.” And, she really spoke, she was principled, she was courageous and once she had made up her mind, she would not retract. I found that, that is what a politician should be. 

However, the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda has made me a different person now. I want to tell Members of Parliament that her death has raised a lot of controversies, of course, as you all know, and questions. Many of my voters have called me telling me to be careful. I said, “What is the problem?” They believe -(Interjections)- No, it is not the government that killed her; the government is too big. Government cannot kill a person, but they believe hon. Cerinah Nebanda was poisoned -(Interjections)- and of course, what I want to tell honourable Members is that we shall all die but how we die matters. There is death by Satan, there is death which God has planned for all of us. This death, I want to believe, was by Satan. 

I also want to remind Members that life is a gift from God. If life is a gift from God, let us guard our lives jealously by not trusting anybody -(Interjections)- yes, by not trusting anybody. We need to guard our lives jealously and wait for the death that God has planned for us. 

Be careful with the kind of people you associate with; be careful with the kind of people you move around with. Ladies and gentlemen, she is gone. We shall not replace her. I only want to say that hon. Cerinah Nebanda, rest in peace and may the Lord grant the family members strength to overcome this grief. We shall be back in Butaleja and I hope we find a perfect replacement for my sister, hon. Cerinah Nebanda.

Thank you very much. 

1.47
MR SANJAY TANNAH (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. As Bakedi, we have lost a colleague; we have lost a comrade. Hardly 24 hours before I saw my sweetheart lying on a stretcher – we called each other sweetheart like she said they call each other sister – we were so close and on the steps of Parliament after His Excellency’s address, I cautioned her and told her, “My sister, why don’t you slow down a bit?” And she said, “I will leave a mark before I die.” And surely, she has left a mark. I have tried surfing the Internet and no person has been brought in this House twice to be paid tribute to. This is the first in the history of this Parliament. She has definitely left a mark.

I knew hon. Cerinah Nebanda well before the elections. Her third name which some colleagues might not know was Alioru. Many people think she is a Munyole, but during the pre-election period, when we were in the campaigns, a campaign slogan that was used against her was that she was a foreigner from Northern Uganda; Bunyole is for Banyole. I remember going for a function and thanking the Banyole because a big portion of my voters in Tororo are Banyole and thanking the Banyole of Tororo for not being segregative and voting for me despite my colour and religion. They stood above that and Banyole in Butaleja did exactly the same by electing her.

Our bond was that of pursuit of change for the lives of our people - the people we represent. Every time she stood up on the Floor of this Parliament or on any other fora that she got, was to speak about the bad road network in Butaleja, the medical service delivery, improvement of household income in her communities; it is  what she stood for; change within her community.

I am in great pain. I cannot speak; honourable colleagues have already spoken. I would like to take this opportunity to urge Members responsible, my colleague the Woman MP of Tororo has just said, “The perception among the wanainchi – if you scroll through my Facebook page, if you scroll on Twitter, if you go and talk to the wanainchi where I have been, everybody tells you, “Be extremely careful.” 

1.51
MR GODFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to extend my message of condolence to the bereaved family.

What lesson do we learn from the demise of our dear sister? As you stated Mr Speaker, no Member of Parliament has ever been brought in this House twice. Nobody! Not even a minister, a Prime Minister or a President. This is the first case of its kind and, therefore, for scholars, we have to learn lessons for the future.

As we pay tribute, I want us to look at our Constitution; let us look at our Rules of Procedure. What power does Parliament of Uganda possess to exercise and implement decisions that we want in our interest. Has our power been violated or not? 

Mr Speaker, if you look at Article 90 of the Constitution, and Rule 144 of our Rules of Procedure, Parliament has power to discharge its functions and it can co-opt anybody to assist. In this regard, using your wisdom, Mr Speaker, you constituted a team, and I want to thank you that while you were approving the motion - you said a committee –(Interjections)- thank you very much for that correction. 

Rule 144 and the Constitution are very clear; anybody who acts in violation or disrespect of the Rules of Procedure or this Constitution commits contempt. I was once a chairperson of a committee; and anybody who acts in contempt of Parliament, we have quasi-judicial powers to order their arrest. 

In this case, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the IGP acted in contempt of Parliament by arresting the doctor whom we had co-opted to assist us to investigate the death of our sister. Mr Speaker, it is just prudent that this Parliament exercises its power under the Constitution and as provided for in the Rules and order for the arrest of the minister and the Inspector General of Police. 

Mr Speaker, if we cannot do it today, because this is the special day for paying tribute, we should have a special sitting –(Member timed out.)

1.54
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are here on a special sitting to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Cerinah Nebanda; we shall miss her so much. 

We the Members of Parliament are the voice of the people and Parliament is supposed to be democratic. “Parle” means speech or speak. Therefore, hon. Nebanda will be remembered for being outspoken and she was using the Constitution of Uganda to do that because Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda states that power belongs to the people. She was exercising that very article and that applies to all of us. 

When you look at hon. Nebanda lying there, she is not hon. Nebanda; you should remember all of you Members of Parliament that it might have been you. It is very sad that it happened to her. I know everybody will die, but how you die matters. 

Hon. Nebanda was a very jolly lady and she would not mince her words. She represented the thoughts of the people of Butaleja. Being in Bukedi region, we shall miss her very much. The people of Bukedi, Butaleja, Parliament, Uganda and the world at large shall miss her services.  

I want to take this opportunity to thank the team which has worked tirelessly; the doctors and all the other people who joined them to examine the way our colleague departed. Various voices, as one Member said, everybody says –(Member timed out.)

1.57
MS MOLLY LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. We are mourning a star which had also put Maracha District on the world map. Much has been said; hon. Nebanda represented Butaleja. I thank God because children are born of two people; the mother and father. Hon. Nebanda’s father came from Maracha. I always told hon. Nebanda that I knew her before she was born because I met her father and mother when they were still very young. Her mother who is here entered the Civil Service while I was watching. Both of them worked in the Ministry of Health and Finance. 

Hon. Nebanda picked this courage from the father who was called Peter Waiga, and he died in October, 1994. As a nurse and a woman in Maracha, working in the Ministry of Health, I was also an icon for them. When he was in a terrible situation, I was called. So, I witnessed Waiga breathing his last breath; we arranged for the body to be taken to Maracha. 

When I heard of hon. Nebanda’s death, I was totally weakened and helpless because it reminded me of how her father died. Waiga was also a very brave man. He was well known in the Ministry of Health and well known in Entebbe. He was a man of the people. No wonder, a fig tree has fallen under the fig itself. Hon. Nebanda’s father was also very courageous like her. Each time hon. Nebanda talked here, I would wink my eyes, telling her, “No; not at that speed.” She would always tell me, “By the way, keep on calling me Alioru because I belong to Maracha”. I told my people in Butaleja that I am from Maracha and I am a Lugbara. Therefore, I am representing the venerable group. She was for the venerable group and she served them with all diligence. 

I want to thank hon. Nebanda’s mother for having brought up these two children. Waiga left behind two children. Florence is around – Florence are you there? (Laughter) Florence is the first one and Cerinah is the younger one. (Member timed out.)

2.01
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me, on behalf of the people of Nwoya County, to convey our deepest condolences first, to the family; two, to the NRM political party to which hon. Nebanda belonged; and three, to the Government of the Republic of Uganda and to Parliament of Uganda. 

We come from different villages of Uganda to this National Assembly to interact with one another. I did not know my comrade, hon. Nebanda, until I came to this House. 

I started interacting with hon. Nebanda closely when Urban TV invited us to appear for programmes; hon. Nebanda, hon. Kyamadidi and myself. I remember whenever she came for the discussions, she always found her space and she would tell us that she is the only lady amongst men, so we should allow her to talk and talk; and that our role was just to sit and listen. She was very assertive. And that is when I picked further interest in her. 

When we went to bury comrade hon. Oromait - there are two friends I have in this House that are very close to me; that was hon. Nebanda and hon. Panadol. There were two buses in the Parliament parking. I knew that if the two were in one bus, then the bus would blow up in laughter. Hon. Nebanda, hon. Panadol and I agreed that hon. Panadol should go on a different bus and hon. Nebanda in another bus so as to entertain Members of Parliament as we went for the burial.

For those of you who were in that bus where I was with my sister Cerinah, the journey to hon. Oromait’s home was very short. By the time we reached hon. Oromait’s place for burial, we wanted hon. Nebanda to continue speaking. She spoke the whole day to Amuria. On our way back, she was the only person speaking and the whole bus was full of fun. We really enjoyed that time. We deeply miss her.

Death is a very painful and emotional thing. In my culture, when we have a body lying before us, of course, many things can be said about the dead, but we pray that we sober up; we put on our –(Member timed out.)

2.04
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. On behalf of the people of West Nile and on my own behalf, I wish to take this opportunity to send our heartfelt condolences upon the demise of our daughter. 

I got to know hon. Nebanda in this House through the name that I saw in the directory and as it was being called, until I wrote to her a chit asking how she got our name. She wrote back to me saying, “But I am one of you.” Not long ago, I met the late hon. Cerinah Alioru with her mother in the parking yard and I greeted her in Lugbara. She answered me. Weak as her vernacular was, her mother came forward and said, “This is one of you and this is your daughter.” From the moment that she identified herself as one of us - she made mention of the name of her late father, whom I knew very well; and from that point, nowhere did I ever get hon. Nebanda in the corridors of this Parliament and greeted her in English. I would always call her, “Ngonia - How are you?”; “My daughter, can you come here”; and she was very happy to associate with her roots. 

The star has gone. It takes courage for a servant to come and tell the king he is naked, and that was hon. Nebanda; who would stand up without any blinking of the eyes and say, “yes, this is my party; yes, this is my Government but my party, you are wrong on this. If I were you, I would have done it in this way and that.” 

How many of us are able to do that? The stand that hon. Nebanda took is a lesson for the young generation in this country. This country is being prepared for you the young generation. And I would appeal to those of you who are in hon. Nebanda’s age bracket not to allow her death to go in vain. You should be able to pick a leaf from what she stood for so that through that, you are able to appreciate the contributions she made. 

Mr Speaker, since the other day, Parliament has been playing her voice on our CCTV and it keeps lingering in my mind that she is not dead, but alive. 

I remember that Friday; I was in Koboko. At around 11.00 p.m., I received a telephone call from my son saying, “Daddy, how are you? Are you still in Koboko? Have you heard the sad news that your colleague, Cerinah is dead?” I could not believe it. The whole of Saturday, the people in Arua were asking questions left and right. Are the remains going to be brought to Kijomoro Sub-County in Maracha to be buried where the father was laid to rest? I said, “I am still here.” (Member timed out.)

2.08		
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Rubaga South. I could not generate a poem this time, as I usually do, because I got overwhelmed with grief. 

In addition to the good report –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look around, I can see that the number of Members in the House is reducing. Considering that Members would like to express their sympathies with the late, I would request that you give us more time; instead of three minutes, at least five minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the list I have is already too long, and I am adding to it. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In addition to the elaborate report that has been presented, on behalf of the honourable members, I would like to thank the family of the deceased for giving this House trust. Because all along, the members of the family of the deceased have expressed trust in Parliament and we are grateful for the trust you have given us. 

As if that was not enough, I would propose that the government should stop harassing the family. You have heard a lot in regard to harassment; there is no cause for harassing those people. In a similar manner, they should stop scandalising the name of the dead. Let her rest in eternal peace. (Applause) 

Many Members have spoken about the late hon. Nebanda, but there is another side which deserves mentioning. Hon. Nebanda was one of the greatest young freedom fighters Uganda has ever had. Because of that rare spectacle, I propose that Parliament in its own right considers constructing a monument in front of Parliament to remember hon. Nebanda. (Applause)

She was an intellectual and her intellectual prowess enabled her to raise mountainous questions which became national issues. And it is because of those issues that one could even think that she has been forced to die unceremoniously. 

Mr Speaker, in a scenario of this kind, it would be unfair if I did not mention the feelings of William Shakespeare about a dilemma of this kind. In a collection of William Shakespeare’s quotations, he stated thus, and I want to read it verbatim: “If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we not revenge?” That was William Shakespeare. The interpretation is yours. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, one of the major reasons I became very close to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda was because of the connection points regarding my concerns over petroleum. The Members of Parliament who attended a special meeting at Speke Resort Munyonyo where I raised issues regarding petroleum in a minority report, will recall how the late jumped up to appraise the words I articulated about oil.

I would like to summarise those concerns in two phases. One, was that the word “petroleum” in our Constitution should be re-defined to look less ambiguous because building a law on petroleum, important as it is, should necessitate a concrete law. The second point I made was that petroleum being an important matter, should seriously consider putting –(Member timed out.)

2.13
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Members of the bereaved family, the Parliament of Uganda and the country, I salute all of you. The late hon. Cerinah Nebanda is my sister. My West Nile connections with her have been mentioned. 

I would like to thank the family for its contribution that made the late develop the character that enabled her to shine in this House. I would like to thank the people of Butaleja District for the trust you put in my sister. This death is very important and in my view, very inevitable. The situations in which we live today, just like in other situations where revolutions have occurred, will bring about the type of leaders like the late Cerinah.

I can assure you that even with her gone and the issues she was known for still remaining with us, more leaders of her type will emerge. From the blood of this fallen hero more fighters will emerge. The question is: Who killed her? How did the person kill her? Won’t that person kill more? And who is willing to be sacrificed in that manner? I believe many will. Let us not lose sight. If we do not address this situation, the people of Uganda will continue to be tormented by this death. But I believe, there are many people willing to sacrifice.

I would like to thank the team of doctors who were able to withstand all the harassment, intimidation and even the enticement to be bought off for them not to give us this report. Thank you very much. (Applause)

As people of West Nile, the passing on of our sister reminds us of our brother, the late Rt hon. Francis Ayume, given the way he died. The questions asked then are not different from those being asked today; but the answers have not been provided.

The passing on of the late also reminds us of the death of the late Brigadier Toko. The question is; will this situation continue and for how long? Therefore –(Interjections)– let me tell you, my brothers and sisters, if we do not stand up to be counted, more and more people will die in a similar manner. Members of Parliament should take care of their lives though this does not mean they should withdraw from the fight. The killers are very smart –(Member timed out.)

2.18
MR JOSEPH MUTEBI BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like my other colleagues, I stand to support the motion. Our beloved sister, the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda, who is lying in state today – I got to know her in 2010 when I was invited to her graduation party as chief guest.

At that time, there were a number of students from Makerere University who were chanting her name, left, right and centre. This made me to tell her that I had joined Parliament towards the end after completing my university education. In that regard, I advised her that she would make a successful Member of Parliament though she had just completed university.

I believe in generation politics and I stand for the politics of the youth in the years to come. I really support the youth to come and serve in respective portfolios as leaders. The late had made it to Parliament. She has been in Parliament for the last 18 months and has had her name written in rock as a clear-cut legislator. She is a heroine of sorts.

I got a text about her death while I was in Nairobi. The text said, “Your very good friend has passed on.” At first, I thought it was a rumour and so, I did not pass over that message to anybody else. I also told the hon. Muhammad Nsereko that it was still a rumour and that he should not tell anybody. I advised him to call the late’s numbers. When he called her numbers, we all sat in silence.

To collaborate what we had got as a rumour, we walked to our immediate right. There, we found a gentleman called Dick Nvule who said that hon. Cerinah Nebanda was missing, if not dead. He further told us that she had died in an accident. That was the time I told hon. Muhammad Nsereko that hon. Cerinah Nebanda was actually dead.

I also whispered to hon. Winfred Kiiza that the hon. Cerinah Nebanda must have passed on. She has passed on with a qualitative character at the age of 24. 

From the airport, we drove to her mother’s home, which is within the confines of Busiro South where I have been Member of Parliament in the Seventh, Eighth and now in the Ninth Parliament. She is my supporter. When she saw us, wailed and said, “Honourable Member of Parliament, my flower is now dry.”

Our dear mother, I would like to inform you that the late was not a flower to you alone. She was a flower for the people of Butaleja; a flower for the people of Uganda. And when everybody got to know that we had lost a Member of Parliament in the name of Cerinah Nebanda, the party came to a standstill in Nairobi.

My beloved sister would call me at midnight and say, “we should have electricity in Bulenga because I want to invest there. We should have clear roads for our people; call me to your constituency – we shall help the young; we shall help the disabled.” That is how she was defined.

She has left a lesson as a young leader. Let us copy from that. (Member timed out.)

2.22
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of my constituency, on  my own behalf and the entire region of Bunyoro, I want to convey our condolences to you, Mr Speaker, honourable members and the family, for losing such a young legislator and above all, clearly very vibrant.

Hon. Nebanda will be remembered for her courage, charisma and for being a legislator who was fearless. At any point, whichever power you yielded, whatever money you had, she was ready to take you on as long it was for the defence of her people.

She greatly respected representative democracy. Whenever she would speak, be it on the Floor and also in the committee, she would recall the people who voted for her and say, “I am speaking for my people of Butaleja.” This was a rare person who could stand particularly in a challenging environment where we have highly compromising politics. 

Hon. Nebanda served on the Committee on Presidential Affairs for six months. For sure, she left a mark and we are going to dearly miss her contributions. She made an outstanding attendance of committee meetings of 36 times, which even myself as the chairperson have never done.

She was always present whenever a committee meeting was called; even in field trips, she was always there. I was terribly disturbed when I read in the press that hon. Nebanda had been killed by drugs. Where did they get this information? What were they trying to put in the minds of Ugandans? What were they trying to cure? After realising that it could not sell because we can testify, we interacted with her in those moments, we never saw her with drugs. We never saw her take alcohol. Where did they get this information? 

For sure those who peddled those lies should apologise to us who knew the dignity of Nebanda. (Member timed out.)

2.26
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you Mr Speaker, Members must know that God decided that I change the way I used to speak and that is my standard now. We are here to mourn the death of hon. Nebanda; when we were still new, I told Members of Parliament that we come to this House, and when that exercise is over; we begin to move out for different reasons. Hon. Nebanda’s last journey is today; let us behave well. Since I cannot sustain a long speech, I want to pass a message of condolence from Makindye West and the people of Uganda I find on the streets of Kampala.

Allow me to warn Members of Parliament about the situation we are in. There are 9 stages through which a Government can be judged. One, is threat by word of mouth; two, suppression of opponents; three, creation of torture chambers known as safe houses; four, arbitrary arrests; five, killings opponents but sometimes strangely killing colleagues. The sixth stage is the one we are entering next after death. People are going to begin to run into exile and I promise you it is not going to take long.

Lastly, there will be an eruption of confusion. We must not joke when we come to discuss these affairs. I am sorry I am not going to complete this speech because I am weak, but my heart is with everybody. Be careful with food; be careful with small snacks; be careful with everything. We are at stage number seven. It is terrible. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.29
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to hon. Cerinah Nebanda, a young lady I met while I was an undergraduate. In our errands around the university, looking for change agents having known that our country seriously required a new direction, we went out of our way to various universities to look for young people who could help this country fundamentally.

We met Cerinah with a couple of our friends. Surprisingly, she was one of a few of the kind we met and ticked all the boxes of the characters we were looking for. We wanted people who had the five senses; the sense of duty, the sense commitment, and Cerinah had a deep sense of commitment; a sense of sacrifice, not the kind of sacrifice she has paid for at the age of 24.
 
She had her worries; she hated politics; she bought into the stereotype that politics in Africa is a dirty game; that it can be brutal and nasty; unfortunately, she has paid the ultimate sacrifice.

We looked for people who had a sense of patriotism; who loved their country - politics above self; who would really speak for the voiceless, the needy and for those who do not have the capacity and ability to pick the microphone and speak. Hon. Nebanda did so excellently. Above all, we looked for young people who would have a sense of courage, their roots of arrival were not a concern to us; they could be NRM, FDC or DP, but once they arrived at stage X, they had a duty to live according to the ideals.

Our motto was, “The struggle has been our life.” Cerinah, the struggle for this country to speak for the poor; to speak for the voiceless; to speak for the needy; and to speak for those who are not in the mainstream of speaking for themselves; Cerinah, you have done so. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

2.32
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to send my deepest condolences from the people of Oyam and Ugandan women for the loss of a great woman. I have been in this House since the Seventh Parliament and I have been here with women in this Parliament. I have also been seeing, wondering and experiencing how difficult it is for a female politician to operate; to demystify the assertion that when we come in this Parliament as women, we only add to the numbers; we are decorations. 

Many people say women are there because of affirmative action; they are not making any contribution. We have these challenges and we have to always keep telling Ugandans that women are in that Parliament not only to add to the numbers. Cerinah was one of those women who are not only adding to the numbers. She did not shy away from the controversial issues. In the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments, there are times when Members would run; even men would run away because a controversial vote is coming on the Floor. We have seen it many times even in this Parliament when people have run away because there is a vote coming. But Cerinah would not shy away from the difficult subjects that were coming on the Floor. Cerinah would not run away and not vote. 

Therefore, today we are mourning a great leader; a woman who has left a legacy for women in leadership; a woman who has demystified the assertion that when women enter politics, they only add to the numbers. She added substance to the debate; she proved that women can tackle the difficult questions of democracy, of corruption, of justice and the tough issue of term limits. She was at the forefront of talking about restoration of term limits. She was at the forefront of talking about those tough issues of where we are going. 

It is so unjust that she dies and controversy surrounds her death. What this Parliament needs to do is that we should not - because out there, people are now saying this is to send a signal to the Ninth Parliament. Be careful! (Member timed out.)

2.36
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like on behalf of the people of Bugweri County to extend our condolences to the bereaved family, to the people of both Butaleja and West Nile, and indeed to the entire country on the loss of the hon. Cerinah Nebanda.

I have been wondering if these circumstances were to happen to me and I was the one who died, the hon. Cerinah Nebanda would be talking loudest; she would be asking the hardest questions and would be requiring Government to come and explain the circumstances and the cause of my death. The only tribute we can give to Cerinah is to exactly do that, and I am very proud to be part of those people who are asking those hard questions. 

There lies patriotism in that coffin; there lies intelligence; there lies courage; there lies beauty; and what an evil person has done is to blow that candle; and what are we getting for an explanation?. 

Hon. Onek, the hon. Peter Nyombi, this country is watching and death comes to us all, and it will come to even those evil people. It will come! Death will come! There are some people even if they died, I would have difficulties standing here. What will I talk about them? What? They have killed a very innocent young patriotic Ugandan.
 
Cerinah, Mr Speaker, if you represent the same constituency like the hon. Dombo who has been in this Parliament from the Sixth Parliament and you know the stature of the hon. Dombo, you would live in his shadow. You would certainly live in his shadow. Here is Cerinah who tried to match hon. Dombo within two years in Parliament. Hon. Dombo, you must be congratulated as you leave the constituency; you had got somebody who actually matches your stature. There are Members in this Parliament whom I do not know. Just ask anybody in this Parliament, who does not know Cerinah?

2.40
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do bring condolence messages from the people of Iganga District right to the family of my sister Cerinah, to this august House and to Uganda at large. I am among those who travelled on the bus to Soroti with Cerinah and what the minister mentioned is what happened in the bus. It is very unfortunate and as a literature person, I would ask people even if you do not like to read, but at least try during this Christmas holiday to read three books, Darkness at Noon, Petals of Blood and Hard Times. Cerinah here reminds me of Petals of Blood. If we expect a petal to have good flowers, people have caused the petal to dry. We are very sorry. 

This is a lesson, but when we are here in Parliament people should be tolerant to other peoples’ views. People should be accommodative and they should forgive. Possibly, sometimes Cerinah who is silent and we are speaking on her behalf might have gone an extra mile. That was not reason to make her lie here. It is really unfortunate. It is a discouragement to the youth who would be wishing to come to Parliament. It is a discouragement to the parents and the voters, and since we are still speaking, let us emulate her and at least warn the people who led to hon. Nebanda’s untimely death because we did not hear that hon. Nebanda was sick in hospital, but in one hour while we were at Namirembe, we heard that hon. Nebanda developed complications and in one hour she was dead.

It is so unfortunate that whenever a person dies under unclear circumstances, everyone would need to know the cause, but I think the cause has been tampered with. It is very bad and as Members of Parliament, as our friend lies there in silence, let us be careful, but still we shall watch those who watch us. Hon. Cerinah, may your soul rest in eternal peace.

2.43
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. I knew hon. Cerinah when I came to Parliament. She was full of life, courageous and she liked children. I say this because there was a time when we had a prayer breakfast for children and she sat on our table. She really made the children laugh; she was tickling them. When I asked the children, what do you think about this MP? They said, “She is very beautiful.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when you see us fighting here over what killed hon. Cerinah, it is because we loved her. Both divides of the House loved hon. Cerinah and that is why you see this heated argument here. To the parents of hon. Cerinah, you are grieving and psychologists tell us that there are five stages of grieving; one is denial. At first when somebody dies, you say, I cannot believe this. I remember hon. Betty Amongi sent an email saying, I cannot believe it; it is not true until I see her body.

Number two is anger. When somebody dies, the grieving process goes from denial to anger. We might be very angry and we start blaming. That is a normal grieving process. Then there is bargaining, depression and finally acceptance.

I want to say this to the relatives of hon. Cerinah especially. You are going to go through this process and as you go through this process, it is normal. Look up to Jesus, look up to God because I saw you in church and I know your faith is strong.

There is a song that goes, “On Christ the solid rock I stand, all other ground is sinking sand.” Stand on that solid rock because the grieving process will make you depressed and it will make you angry. (Member timed out.)

2.46
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The family of hon. Nebanda and honourable colleagues, on behalf of all the young people of Northern Uganda, particularly, the young people of West Nile where hon. Cerinah’s late father and Cerinah herself come from, we want to convey our sincere condolences.

Mama Cerinah, I come from Northern Uganda and I represent - particularly, I come from West Nile. As I stand here, I am even shaking because I only remember the voice of the late hon. Cerinah right behind me here because this is where she used to sit. When you said a point or disagreed with her, she would either want to pull you down or she would immediately scream at you. As I am speaking, I am just imagining if she did not agree with me, what she would be doing right now or if she agreed with me.

Mama Cerinah, I am really grieving because I can just imagine - I know the pain you went through carrying hon. Cerinah in your womb. You can see the state I am in - I know what it means. I had not known but now I know what it means to carry a baby in your stomach. It is not an easy task.

Honourable members, it is very painful; it is a very long journey and for you to lose your dear one after 24 years is so painful. But I want to tell you something. When I look at that beautiful face of hon. Cerinah smiling at us, through that smile, I remember to the words that Jesus Christ said when He was on the cross. He said, “Do not cry for me, but cry for yourself and your children.” Let us not cry for her because she has gone and she is resting. The onus is on us to know how to walk the journey, to be strong, to always remember her for the good that she did.

Hon. Cerinah, we will dearly miss you. I feel so sad. May you rest in eternal peace.

2.49
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to send my condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Butaleja, this Parliament and the country at large.

I speak with a lot of pain and I would also like to send specific condolences to the young people of this country who are greatly bereaved by the sudden demise of our sister; my younger sister who, in many ways, I admired.

To the young people of this country, this lady that is lying here was the true image of a young person who was after the heart of her country. She inspired many young people. She mentored many because she belonged to a movement that we call the Young Women in Leadership Network, a network that I happen to belong to. In many ways, she mentored and coached many young people.

Mr Speaker, I have very few words to say to remember this young woman. I think that many young people will remember her as a young person of exceptional character and of exceptional courage. That is undebatable and I have heard many Members saying the same thing. She was a woman of exceptional commitment and resilience because at times when there were very difficult issues on this Floor, she never shied away. She spoke and we respected her, not because she was talking things that we did not agree with but we respected her because she spoke at all times and stood with honesty.

Mr Speaker, I am a person who respects people with honesty, character and resilience, and at such a time, the late hon. Nebanda has left us a legacy that many of us will truly honour. 

The Bible says, it is appointed for man or woman to live once and thereafter face death and judgment. I know that my young sister here is before her creator, but she has left very tragic circumstances surrounding her death. Every person who is mortal knows that one day he or she will lie down like hon. Cerinah here. And so, whoever was behind the death of this young innocent person, you should also know that one day you will pay. For us the young people who are in this Parliament, of course we are terribly scared and worried and wondering what the future of this Parliament is like. Because when you come here and speak your mind they tell you, “You are going to be the next. Please, take care of yourself; things are not easy.” But we leave everything to God because God is the God of all flesh and is the God of both the mortals and the dead. And one day, all the flesh will face Him. 

Fare thee well hon. Nebanda, and for us who are still alive, God is in charge of our lives and God is in charge of this country, and whatever mistakes we have made as mortals He is the one to make the final judgment. I would like to say that you have built a true legacy and we shall remember you for that. 

I would like to thank the members of her family that have stood very well with her and the people of Butaleja and the Members of Parliament, we have stood firm and mourned on this very tragic death. And I would like to ask God to continue giving us courage to be in this Parliament. 

2.53
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Margaret Thatcher once said, “The good Samaritans remembered today wouldn’t have been remembered if only they put their good ideas together but also money.” Hon. Nebanda, when you had a problem for money whether you were on a trip and you were stranded, she would say, “I am rich; I am rich physically and at heart.” 

On behalf of the people of Ngora District, and on my own behalf - hon. Cerinah Nebanda on 6 January 2013 was supposed to be in Ngora to officiate as a guest of honour in the Jacqueline Amongin Cup finals. She had already confirmed that. 

I met hon. Nebanda when we were all young people in Makerere. We had formed a committee of Youth for Leadership; that was in 2009, and it didn’t matter which party you subscribed to. The first time we met hon. Nebanda was not there. She was a student but was very charming. When she came and approached me, she said, “Jackie, you stood for Youth MP, I want to contest for Parliament. I think it is high time you advised me.” I told her, “Join our team.” And she joined our team. Seven of us are in this House in different shades; two are in EALA and five are in this House. 

When hon. Nebanda came and joined us, she said, “I have made up my mind; I know when I go and represent the people of Butaleja in the House. Even the Youths of Uganda will be represented.” 

When we campaigned, we went through hell. Hon. Nebanda and I had a lot of time to call each other and the late would tell me, “Jackie, if you have to stand don’t stand like a woman, stand like a man to demystify anything, and if your vision is to become a Member of Parliament, stand for it. You will get there. See you when we get to Parliament.”   

At 6 O’clock, I was the first Member of Parliament to be declared in Teso. And when I called hon. Nebanda to tell her that I had already won and asked her how she was fairing, she said, “It is done. I don’t even need to listen to the results.” 

When we came here, we always had time to sit together; hon. Nekesa can confirm that. We would sit with her and when she would go astray we would say, “Hon. Nebanda, no; that is too much.” (Member timed out.) 

2.58
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to a fallen comrade and also support the motion. 

For the last few days, I have been very disturbed by the loss of a comrade. I have known hon. Nebanda for quite some time as a young democrat at Makerere and then later in this Parliament as an MP. 

The loss today is too much and I would like to say that I knew hon. Nebanda as an idealist with no illusion. She stood for what was right. She was one person who stood to speak her mind regardless of the situation. She believed in a society that is fair; a society that empowered everyone regardless of their background. She believed in a society that would tolerate everyone regardless of what kind of opinion they had and we have lost her because of that. 

I would like to call upon my colleagues that we must stand for those principles and values that our colleague, hon. Nebanda has died for. It is going to be hard for us to make a fairer society if we do not bring the killers to book. It is our duty as Ugandans to fight those who killed and stand for what is right. 

Mr Speaker, I want to be part of those honourable members who believe that the family should know what their child died of and all Ugandans too. 

I am a young woman who represents the people of Luweero and these young people have been inspired by the fallen comrade here today. Now she is gone. But we even don’t know what she died of. It is very important that we bring the killers to book and this will deter so many young people that we have – my colleagues here have talked about it. We have so many young people who are willing to join the leadership stream, but if we do not do away with such measures of deterring young people who speak their minds, we will not be able to realise good leadership in this country. 

Mr Speaker, in this country, when someone rises up to do something, they are stopped. If someone comes out to do something right, you are detained. We have seen a doctor being detained under unclear circumstances. We have seen MPs being threatened. We should stand and fight this as Ugandans if we are to advance the struggle; if we want to better this country and give opportunity to each and every Ugandan for a fairer society. 

I bid farewell to this fallen comrade and I want to say that this loss is not going to deter us. But we are going to stand firm and struggle much more to see that our country is better. Thank you. 

3.01
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Mr Speaker, I must admit that the manner in which you have steered this House today needs to be appreciated. Despite the turbulences, you have stood your ground and you have stood in line of giving our colleague a decent burial. I would like to thank you for that. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Cerinah Nebanda. When I joined Parliament, I was appointed on the Public Accounts Committee. Whereas some senior colleagues were telling me to go slow if I wanted to return to Parliament; because, they said, the corrupt can mobilise money in one sitting and prevent you from returning to Parliament, and that they can even kill you. So, they said, “You need to go slow young man; you are not the first one to be in this Parliament.” 

When I met Cerinah, she told me she was in this House to make a contribution. She did not mind even not coming back to Parliament. She told me that actually you are better off being in Parliament for one term and you leave a mark than being a professional Member of Parliament and leave no mark. (Applause) She told me that being in Parliament was not about drawing a salary, but it was about representing your people. I got inspiration from her and when I learnt of her death I was saddened. 

On this note, I would like to convey my condolences to the family. To the family, I want to assure you that the values for which Cerinah stood are not dead. We are here to carry on fighting for the values. Cerinah has just been an icon of the struggle, and this is a people’s struggle. It is not our struggle. So, the issues still exist. That is why you realise, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, that when you move in town the people tell you that, “Now we know that Cerinah is dead. We know what killed her. And for us we know in our own way who killed her.” 

In law, Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that conduct of the accused person is very important - the subsequent conduct. (Applause) And in this matter, the conduct of Government cannot be over emphasised. As we made resolutions to respect and not scandalise the death of our colleague, Government was still fidgeting with statements. They have come again with another statement which they have sneaked into this House - to us true or false. As if that is not enough, no signature has been appended to it because they do not want to own it. 

Cerinah, you are dead today; tomorrow we may follow. I will take heed of your advice and I am in this Parliament to make a contribution irrespective of whether I come back to Parliament or not. I appreciate that. (Member timed out.)

3.04
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. I was not able to be here on Tuesday; I am not feeling well. I want to urge colleagues that during this period, like all of us are being told, we should be very careful because these are very turbulent times. We know that you go to hospital, like I went, and I have no Malaria, but they told me to take bed rest. 

So, I think we need - hon. Speaker, we thank you that through the Parliamentary Commission we got health insurance - but we really need to take care of our health because all is not well with most Members of Parliament. And we do not know whether we have the right doctors. It may be sudden, it may be slow. But we need to take care of our health because, as we speak, I have another colleague who is also not here. We found each other at IHK. And the results were also to take bed rest. Behind the scenes, as colleagues, we should not take this lightly. We may see the sudden death of hon. Cerinah – sudden - maybe that would bring attention to her, but for others it may be a slow painful process. So, we need to take care and know that these are not good times in our country.

I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to bring my wreath because I may not be able to travel to Butaleja. Mummy Cerinah, please take heart. We are with you and the whole family and her life has not been in vain, and I think the killers are on the run. They are not sitting; they are fidgeting; and I know, they know they are being watched. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.07
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I rise up as well in support of the motion on the Floor to pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. It is true that the Constitution of Uganda in Chapter 4 under Article 22 clearly states that, “No person shall be deprived of life intentionally except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competent jurisdiction in respect of a criminal offence.” 

As I turn back to Cerinah, we have been called all names. We have been called loud speakers; we have been called rebels. All sorts of names have been labelled against us. Today, you are gone, but we can only say that no one shall deter our effort. No person shall derail us from seeking peace, justice and transparency that we stood for. 

Today, as we mourn your unfair departure that was carried out by these cowards, and the cowards that are known to many; and we can always say that the way people are conducting themselves is clear and explicit. 

One time she was chatting when we were in Kyankwanzi and she said, how can a thief teach you which type of padlock to put on your door? (Laughter) Now, some people are pretending to want to carry out investigations to an extent of even threatening Members of Parliament who participated in the post-mortem. Whatsoever threats you will issue, they shall never deter the committed in pursuance of justice, because justice does not come in one day. Whether we are dead or alive, justice shall turn on to you. The perpetrators of this heinous act, of this cowardly act, of terminating the life of an innocent person like Cerinah Nebanda, shall not stop at that. We know that you are plotting against us, but God is also plotting against you. We can only tell you that the people hate you; the people no longer like you; and your days are numbered; and the time to go is coming. 

Of course we have a saying in Luganda; it is like a story. There was a simple story of a one who ate the young daughter called Nsangi and everyone they would ask would say, “Sebbutto butto.” (Laughter) When they brought all the gorillas together and asked them, “Tell us who has eaten Nsangi,” each gorilla would say, “Sebbutto butto” behind is responsible for the demise of Nsangi.” Nsangi you have gone, but we know Sebbutto butto must have eaten Nsangi. (Laughter) And Sebbutto butto one time, one day, wherever you are, you will be brought to justice. But we want to assure you that no one shall show you kindness because the brutality you have used to swallow Nsangi will be the same brutality that will be used. Look at her smile -(Member timed out.)   

3.11
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a few remarks in support of the motion. A lot has been said about the late hon. Nebanda and I do not want to be repetitive. Nebanda has created a lot of arguments here in Parliament and elsewhere, but hon. Nebanda has been able to prove one argument, and that argument is that the time you spend in power does not matter much, but it is what you do while in power that matters most. At 24 years and for only less than two years in Parliament, Nebanda has had a very big impact. 

I knew hon. Nebanda slightly before I entered this House. It was through her personal assistant. Her personal assistant happened to be my constituent. He resided in Masanafu. He actually died in similar circumstances. He got sick for only one day and on 11th May, last year, he was buried somewhere in Mityana. Up to now, no investigations have been carried out by Police.

Hon. Cerinah Nebanda’s death proves one thing; in Uganda as we speak today, we have killers who kill people, and killers who kill investigations and reports. Some time back in 1997, there was an inferno in Kanungu. To date, the report has been killed. In Kasubi, there were killings; in my very constituency. It is said the report was written; but some people killed it, just like the people were killed. In 1987, Dr Andrew Kayiira was killed and Scotland Yard Police was hired. A report was written; somebody has killed the report. (Member timed out.)

3.15
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Serere, myself and the FDC, let me convey our condolences to the family and to the people of Butaleja upon the loss of our dear sister. 

Cerinah Nebanda, brilliant, brave, energetic and a very dedicated legislator has gone too soon in a murder which I think, I will borrow the words of Shakespeare, “...most foul, unnatural and strange”. 

In my view, Cerinah Nebanda’s murder epitomises intolerance in this country. I think we are not asking what killed Cerinah Nebanda anymore; we would not even be asking who killed Cerinah Nebanda anymore. It is already in the court of public opinion because we attempted to provide a process which would have left no doubts - now we have left it - the judgement, the verdict is in the court of public opinion. 

I would like to stand here in the authority of a believer tonight and I would like to decree in the words of the Bible that there is no peace for the wicked. I would also like to decree in this House that those who decided that hon. Cerinah Nebanda will die; those who executed the murder and those who have covered up the murderers; will never find peace in the name of the Lord Most High -(Applause)- whom I serve. 

When they murdered Naboth in the Bible, 1 Kings 21; Jezebel attempted to cover it up, but the verdict of God stood firm. Ahab, Jezebel and everybody involved in that process faced the wrath of God. The Bible says where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, they would lick and indeed they licked the blood of both Ahab and Jezebel. I am speaking tonight that where the blood of that young lady flowed, the blood of her murderers will also flow.

Let me tell the Government of Uganda; what you are doing with the pathologist is what Amin used to do with professionals in this country. What is the difference between you now and the Amin of 1971 whom you accused of killing everybody? You are doing the same thing. You are harassing Onzivua; you want to intimidate doctors; what are you up to?

Mr Speaker, I am about to sit down, but I also want to say -(Member timed out.)

3.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bulamogi County and on my behalf, I extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late Cerinah Nebanda.

The first murder that is recorded is in the Bible, where one brother murdered his sibling; Cain murdering Abel. But when you read that text, you get what the Lord God was saying. He asked the murderer, “Where is your brother?” And he said, “Am I the keeper for you to ask me?” But then the Lord continued and said, “The blood of your brother is crying to me seeking revenge.” The Bible continues to tell us that because the sentence of doing evil is not executed speedily, children of men have set their hearts to committing evil and crime. It means there is a sentence for doing evil for everyone. It may not come this afternoon; it may not come tomorrow; it will not come this year; but it will certainly come and whoever committed the murder, the sentence is there for you. The Bible tells us that it is God who revenges.

I got an opportunity to travel with the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda to Brussels. We were in a group of five and she was the only lady amongst us. I remember vividly how she decided when we were in Brussels that we shall not eat in the restaurants of the white people but she was going to prepare the food for us in her apartment. So, we would sit; four men, sitting, waiting for the colleague to prepare food for us. Oh, how touching it is to see her lying motionless, breathless, in a container called a casket before us. It is such a saddening event.
 
The Bible tells us that the two greatest personalities ever and forever they will be; both of these people died at a very early age almost close to the age of Cerinah Nebanda. Incidentally, both of them were murdered by ruthless people. These people were John the Baptist and the Lord Jesus Christ, but one thing we know is that the mission they had set continues. The Gospel continues being preached and what Cerinah Nebanda was standing for will certainly continue as it has already been talked about.

Finally, the lesson which we draw from this; as a Christian, I must state that there is nothing in this world to be proud of –(Member timed out.)

3.21
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My deepest condolences to the family from the people of Kawempe North Constituency. As we mourn the death of our dear colleague, what we should remember is that when God created us, certainly, He knew that at the end of the day, we must die. The issue is not the age at which the late Cerinah died because we know that is God’s predestination. We have buried one-year olds; we have buried 90 year-olds; and even 20 year-olds. The issue is the circumstances under which she died. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Cerinah Nebanda was a great legislator and indeed, she was a person who wanted to contribute, and in all the contributions she made, Uganda came first. The interests of the country were always the first in all her contributions. I remember when we went with the late Cerinah to Sweden to celebrate with Ugandans in Sweden who organised celebrations of “Uganda at 50”. I remember the contributions she made prove that indeed she was a true Ugandan. 

I know that the family, especially our mum, I know the pain you are feeling. But I must thank very much the mother of the late Cerinah for being very firm amidst all the pressures and intimidation. You have been very firm. We have lost Cerinah in the circumstances under which she died. But I pray that in your family – I know that the family is big; and I know the mother is still courageous. Behind every successful daughter, there is a strong mother. I request Mama Cerinah to contest in the next elections so that we can have you here in Parliament so that we can continue with the struggle. (Applause) We are ready to support you because of the courage you have shown amidst all the intimidation. I request that you come here so that we see you in the other sit there as Cerinah’s mother. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, we know that as Members of Parliament, we are under intimidation; we are under threat. And we have seen many of these cases. Many people have died without any report from the Government. You remember how the son of Prof. Gilbert Bukenya died; it was under unclear circumstances. You know how Kafumbe Mukasa the late Minister of Finance died. Up to now, there is no report. You remember Afande Mayombo. 

The other time, President Museveni told us that the family is aware of the way Mayombo died. But the following day, the family disowned the claim. They said, “We have never received any report.” That is the country –(Member timed out.)

3.26
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to pay tribute to my sister Cerinah. On behalf of the people of Kumi County and on my own behalf, I would like to convey our condolences to the family, the people of Butaleja and to this nation upon the demise of a gallant soldier in the struggle to liberate this country. 

Mr Speaker, when the late Nebanda arrived in this House, together with a number of vibrant new MPs, during the time we had the opportunity to interact at our induction, I thought she was just one of those noise-makers who would soon stop making noise. Subsequently, in her contributions, she proved me wrong. The late Nebanda, it has already been said, stood up as a strong and brave legislator. She was a champion of the speechless and the least privileged, and she was certainly a competent representative of her people. 

Looking at the circumstances under which my late colleague died, I think there are more questions than answers. I want to inform Government and this House, I was upcountry when the late Nebanda died. People concluded that it was due to poison. Then the question about who was responsible came up. I want to say to Government, you are being accused by the population as having killed Nebanda. Everywhere you go; this is the song being sung across this nation. And I think it is your responsibility as Government to exonerate yourselves. 

When I see monkey tricks being played, I think Government is not being serious. The arrest of Dr Onzivua, a competent doctor - I went to university with him - a competent consultant certainly speaks volumes. So, if you think you no longer have responsibility to give credible explanations about the death of hon. Nebanda, then you are highly mistaken as Government. My dear friends -(Member timed out.)

3.30
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me also join the rest in conveying my deep condolences to the bereaved family of the late hon. Nabanda and to Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, the terminator has hit this Parliament in the most painful spot by taking away Nebanda who has been one of the most important legislators that we have had in the history of this Parliament, yet she was young. That is why we must convey very deep condolences to the family. I want to join hon. Latif Ssebagala in requesting them to avail us with one of them so that we can have Nebanda back in Parliament. 

Nebanda believed in truth and justice; she believed in equal opportunity for socio-economic advancement and thought about the development of her people; that was always at the forefront of her speeches. She believed in human rights and the rights of women, and she believed that everyone should have health care. She contributed her own money to ensure that women can have safe deliveries in her constituency. 

Mr Speaker, that is the responsibly of Government, but because of what she believed in, she had to sacrifice her own money to do the same. Nebanda believed in an honest Government which is free of corruption, but she was pushing an elephant uphill when she fought corruption under this Government, the card of which she held in Parliament. 

She believed in freedom of speech and if at all you wanted to silence her, you had to kill her. That is why the terminator had to use the biggest weapon to silence her and she is now here lying speechless. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament would be naïve to think that there is anybody who is safe under these circumstances. We would all be naïve to think that even in Government, people are safe. We can only use this opportunity to ensure that this Parliament passes a resolution for Government to have an inquest to investigate this death because posterity must guard the rest of us who are remaining. 

Mr Speaker, there is no doubt about the death of Nebanda, about whether it was a murder or not. This was a murder; reports have said the cause was not natural. If at all they point fingers to Government because of its behaviour, do not deny. You look at a way of having an inquest and ensure that the lives of - (Member timed out_)

3.34
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kigulu South Constituency Iganga, I convey our heartfelt condolences to the people of Butaleja, the family and the House at large. 

Honourable members, on the fateful day, we were leaving Namirembe Cathedral driving to Muyenga when we got a call from hon. Wangolo Jacob telling us that he had got an urgent call saying Cerinah Nebanda is sick or dead. I asked him what was happening. He said he was also not aware but he was weak. He told me that she is in Nsambya Hospital but that he could not go there alone. He asked me to join him to go to Nsambya. 

We drove recklessly hoping we would get her alive and save her. We reached Nsambya Catholic Hospital and asked where the MP was. They told us they were not aware of any information to that effect, that maybe we could try Mukwaya General Clinic or general hospital. On reaching there, we got hon. Ssekikubo crying. The mother was also there crying. We asked hon. Ssekikubo where the honourable was. He said, “She is there”. The body was inside but people were not accessing the room. So, hon. Iddi Isabirye and I opened the door to the room and we found the dead body on a hospital trolley, covered with a small cloth. I felt bad. We were traumatised. We asked them whether they had made any attempts, they said no. 

I called the commandment of Parliamentary Police and the IGP, not asking for anything but I said, “Can you get us a police ambulance to relocate hon. Cerinah Nebanda from here to Mulago Hospital?” We wanted a better place where she could be taken. I want to appreciate Members for the love they showed. Since I joined this Parliament, this is the 11th MP we are burying or seeing off. The love you have showed towards Cerinah is far different from what you showed the other Members we have seen off. (Applause) I should salute you in a special way. May God reward you abundantly.

Mr Speaker, the last appearance that Cerinah made in this House was when the President was addressing us on oil and related issues. She was seated right behind me on that side where hon. Namayanja is. She kept interrupting the President’s speech because of her people. When the President said there are drugs in all hospitals, she said, “No; in Butaleja there are no drugs.” That is when the President said, “I will move with this daughter of mine to Butaleja and see whether there are no drugs.” That shows the love she had for her people. We should always fight for the local person.

Mr Speaker, when she appeared in our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, she kept saying that the police station of Butaleja is like a poultry house. She insisted that they wanted a police station. Luckily, some work had started. So, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the police leadership to complete this. There are some police stations they started on but are not yet complete. For her to rest in peace, and since she kept pushing for a police station for Butaleja people, I want to appeal and pray that they complete the facility they have started on so that her sweat is seen. 

Finally, during the NRM primaries, we had a lot of confusion. I remember in Namboole when hon. Namayanja Rose stood as deputy secretary-general for our party, this was the first time we met Cerinah Nebanda. She said, “You people, I am fighting on the ground; you push from the top as I push from the bottom until we see those who are not pro-people eliminated.”

When she came here, she asked, “You people, how did she escape; I managed to handle from the other side but how come she made it from this side?” (Laughter) This is some of the jargon she used to use. We shall miss her fun. We shall miss her passion and the contributions she made in this House. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members going to make contributions next are 22. I think we need to revise the time now because we have been here for a while now. Let us revise the time to two minutes. 

3.40
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we pay tribute to our fallen sister, hon. Cerinah Nebanda, allow me to thank this Parliament for the love they have shown to hon. Nebanda. Since we lost her under unclear circumstances, Parliament has always demanded that accountability be made and transparency be exhibited in the investigations therein. So, I thank Parliament very much for that.

Secondly, as we pay tribute to hon. Cerinah Nebanda, I want to request those who accused hon. Nebanda of drunkenness and drug abuse to apologise publicly. Mr Speaker, I have been a member of the social services committee where hon. Cerinah Nebanda has been and I have been a member of the budget committee where hon. Cerinah Nebanda has been. In terms of committee work, for all the two years I have been with hon. Cerinah Nebanda and had fieldwork and so forth together with her, I had never seen hon. Cerinah Nebanda drinking. Circumstances would occur when we would go for fieldwork for three or four days; a drunkard would be seen. 

Lastly, hon. Nebanda called while we were in Nairobi playing netball for this country; she called to wish us the best of luck on Wednesday as we were playing in the finals. She called in the morning and said, “my sister, covey my wishes of best of luck to the team.” It was our first time to participate in this tournament and I believe it was the wish of hon. Cerinah - I think she was in a way just telling us because it was on Wednesday but she died on Friday when all the members could not see her - (Member timed out).

3.42
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of time, I have to say that I associate myself with the contributions made by the various honourable colleagues in regard to the motion on paying tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. 

However, I want to use the few seconds I have to point out things that I noticed this afternoon as members made their contributions. Many of them, including ministers, have revealed that they had cautioned the late about the fact that she has been outspoken and that they were cautioning her to go slow. So, the question I want to pose is: who were they cautioning her against?

Mr Speaker, it is high time we stopped talking about murderers in parables. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo has this afternoon made a very important statement here, that we have reached a stage where people are going to be killed and others will go to exile. It is, therefore, my humble prayer that this Parliament finds a day, which should be so soon, and dedicates this day to talking about the fact that politicians, especially those in opposition to Government, are under threat. There are murderers in Uganda who are eliminating people. The late has not just passed away because of natural causes. The report given to us by our honourable colleagues, in paragraph two, clearly states that it was just a matter of confirming, but the late was poisoned. So, who is this person?

I would like to repeat that we should stop talking about murderers in parables because one day, and maybe very soon, another person will lie in state here like the late Cerinah Nebanda. We will then sit here, mourn and talk many good things about that person – (Member timed out_)

3.44
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale, who include a number from Butaleja and Bunyole in general, to convey our sincere condolences to the family, Parliament and the people of Uganda for the great loss.

Death can be accepted when it comes naturally, but the circumstances in which the late died pose a lot of questions. If I were Government, definitely I should have not stopped that professional doctor who was taking the parts to South Africa because this could have helped Government to ask, “Look, you took samples but where are the results?” For you to intervene and intercept the parts, points a finger at Government. What a great loss for a young lady.

The late hon. Cerinah Nebanda stood in the Ninth Parliament to be counted. She was a great debater who could not be pushed left and right. She could not be given ideas from some circles; she was not a bootlicker. She spoke for the people of Butaleja. She sat on the social services committee and wanted services delivered to the people of Uganda; for example, she wanted the salaries of teachers, doctors and the Police, who have stopped that investigation – she wanted Ugandans to be treated equally.

The late debated so well during the oil debate that Ugandans should benefit equally, that development in this country should be equal. (Member timed out)

3.46
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA NAMABIDDE: (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana) Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join you and the House to mourn our colleague, the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda. In the few months she stayed in this House, the late lived the words of a French philosopher, Jean Jacques Rousseau, who wrote a book entitled “The Social Contract”. In that book, the philosopher says that when we are elected, we sign a social contract with the people who vote us. The late has clearly talked about the interests of her people throughout the 18 months she has been a Member of Parliament. She strongly stood her ground even if it meant going against the position of her party. She now leaves a challenge to us all that when you are elected, you are supposed to represent the ideals, aspirations and problems of the people who elect you into power.

The late strongly stood for causes that were closest to her heart. She talked about the corruption and poverty, which is biting our people. She stood and talked strongly about these issues. That is why I say, she leaves us with a task to continue on the road she had taken, which unfortunately she has not been able to complete.

The late – I can talk about her as the Ninth Parliament’s rose. The late was Butaleja’s rose and I say of the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda, goodbye, the Ninth Parliament’s rose. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, unfortunately some of us will not find those two minutes enough for the preamble. I will start by singing a song: “Fight the good fight with all your might…” That is a song for the soldiers of the cross. The late hon. Cerinah Nebanda fought the good fight. She was a soldier for the youth and the people of Uganda.

My second point is a quotation from one of the great philosophers who said, “For evil to triumph is for good men to keep quiet about bad things.” For those who buy their positions expensively by toeing lines, which are deceptive, which are brought upon them because they want to be maintained in their positions, beware, Ugandans are watching you.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I want to re-echo what my brother, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, said here. In the words of Chinua Achebe, there are head hunters hovering around us. Be careful, and especially those of you who may think it was only about the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda and not you. Today, it is the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda; tomorrow, it will be anybody. In Lango we say that you should never laugh at the stick that was used for beating your co-wife because tomorrow it could be used to beat you.

I interacted with the late for a short time, but I can assure you that within three days of my sitting in this House, I had noticed that there sits on the other side so and so. Today, like many people have said, there are so many people I would not recognise in this Parliament –(Member timed out).

3.50
MR JOSEPH GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I just want to state that the one who killed the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda was born a fool; he has been living as a fool and will die as a fool. That is there and it is unfortunate. 
 
Mr Speaker, in 1966, Daudi Ocheing left Parliament after making his statement and died the following day under similar circumstances like Cerinah. For some of us who were born in political families, who have seen parents dying, this is not new to us.

Secondly, I want to inform fellow members, and I want to thank you for preventing the Minister of Internal Affairs from reading his speech. That was very nice and it is on record that we have implemented our resolutions. 

If hon. Lyomoki was around he would tell you what happened. We have many committees in Parliament and some of us who are new in Parliament did not know that there were many committees. We only knew about PAC and a few others. But when we were appointed on the social services committee with hon. Cerinah Nebanda, we put up a war. When the committee was divided into health and education, I went to Cerinah Nebanda and asked why she had left me in education alone.

There is no teacher I know in Uganda as I know hon. Cerinah Nebanda; but you people, why? When we are struggling for people’s rights we are also fighting for you. If we were not taught by teachers we would not be here. The war hon. Cerinah Nebanda was fighting was for a national cause. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, because of time, the maker of this coffin, the one who buys it for the dead and the one takes it for the dead will never love it. If you ask the one who made it whether you can put him in what he made, he will run away from what he has made. (Member timed out)

3.54
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to our colleague. I have mourned hon. Cerinah Nebanda since Friday last week. Those who saw me in Nairobi, I am a very courageous woman but I broke down. Why? Look at the life taken.

Since I have been in the Parliament, people are cautioning me, “You young girl, go slow, do not say this” and I have been taking it as a joke. That day I was announced dead as well. People called my phone in Nairobi and they could not speak anything and I was wondering what was wrong, until hon. Mujungu told me that she had called because somebody had told her that I had died.

Two months ago, a young lady went and put posters around the constituency and people were asking her, “Why are you too fast?” She said, “That hon. Nalubega will not last this year in Parliament.” These are things we are seeing now. I thank God for the life I still live because I do not know when I am to go or if I am going slowly. Mr Speaker, we are young people; the only way we can express our minds, interests and ourselves is by speaking what we feel is right. 

I want to thank hon. Cerinah Nebanda for standing by her conscience, her best friend. She is now lying there with much respect. She was a courageous girl and I thank her for. If we cannot stand by our best friend, which is our conscience, then we live for nothing. 

Hon. Cerinah Nebanda has lived her life for a purpose. She has fought a good great battle. We will always remember her as part of the strong fighters for freedom and justice in this country. She will always remain part of me. (Member timed out)

3.56
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first time I interacted with Cerinah was when we were in the budget committee. Last year when you gave us the assignment as the budget committee, we sat down looking for teacher’s salary to be increased. Good enough, hon. Nantaba, who is now the current Minister of State for Lands, pointed something out after discovering that there was some loophole in the ministerial policy statement regarding the allocation of funds that they were requesting. I remember very well that Cerinah Nebanda was cross with the chairperson of the budget committee who did not want us to identify more issues as regards that. 

Hon. Cerinah Nebanda was a strong lady. She was fearless, determined and outspoken. Many words can be said about her. Here we are now seeing her and we are going to escort her to rest in peace. I want to say a word to the family members. Mama, our sister is now gone. God gave her to us through you; many things have happened, you have witnessed many wrong things, but we want to thank you so much for being tolerant. One time Jesus said that for the one who betrayed the Son of Man, it is good for that person to be hanged and be dipped in water. Our ancestors are looking around for whoever has done a wrong to hon. Cerinah Nebanda. 

To the Parliamentarians, let us not sweep the dust and hide it under the carpet. If we do not do the right thing and stand for justice, many things that we fear can happen to us. (Member timed out)

3.58
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to convey my condolences to the people of Butaleja and Uganda at large. Allow me to thank God for this afternoon, for giving you the wisdom to steer the House the way you have done. 

There is one thing that people have not mentioned that I know about hon. Cerinah Nebanda. There was this day when I was stranded at Imperial Royale and she saw me and called, “My sister, you come”. I was waiting for my driver and I entered her car and she started conversing. What I saw in her is that she was a very responsible young lady, caring and concerned.

One thing that we discussed was about parenting. She was not yet a mother but she taught me, a mother of four, very serious parental skills of how to make children perform well. Because of time, I will not go into details about that but I would like to tell the members here that hon. Cerinah Nebanda was very responsible, very concerned and a very caring honourable Member of Parliament. She used to call me “my sister”. 

I was disturbed by the way the Police handled the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. This is a member from the NRM side and if she could be handled that way, what about some us from the Opposition. Can the Police tell us whether there is a yardstick or whether some members can be treated differently and others can be treated in another way when someone passes on? (Member timed out)

4.02
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Finally, you have remembered that Dokolo has been in the House. I just want to salute the House, Parliament, the people of Butaleja and the family for standing so firm and for demonstrating their faith in Christ. One lady collapsed in my hands and I escorted her to Kampala International Hospital and I saw the faith; as the doctors were working on her, we were also praying and she came out walking. I was very proud of the strength of their spirit, and that is how it should be.

I just want to say this; for the women to have a woman so young, so courageous, so bold, so clear minded is a very rare species. What I can only ask the family to do is to make sure that that kind of breed does not die in the family. I can only ask the people of Butaleja not to send us somebody who is the opposite of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. 

Through you, Rt. Hon. Speaker, this a time for Parliament to defend its image. This Parliament has been described as one for drug abusers, drunkards, and at one time the Speaker was described as a woman moving from one night club to another.  Tomorrow, we do not know what will be said about us. 

I am very happy about the stubbornness of Cerinah Nebanda. She refused to be buried last week because if we did, we would have buried her as a drug abuser. (Applause) So, I thank her for having been stubborn. Today, we are going to bury her as a courageous woman and as a heroine. She was a strong woman and we are all proud of having delayed her burial because we are all going to be proud to see this woman get a decent burial and we will not be associated with burying a drug abuser.

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for steering the House with that kind of integrity and strength. I know you might have even been intimidated because we have been told that whoever talks about Cerinah’s death will be dealt with. So, you are one of them, but thank God they have not threatened me. (Laughter) May God bless you.


4.03
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to convey my deep condolences to Arioru’s family and support the motion to pay tribute to the late Arioru. 

Late Arioru has died so suddenly. In African tradition, Ms Arioru died when she had not left any biological candle and therefore, whatever we are saying, after a few hours will all be lost. As Africans, we do not read a book; we would only remember this young girl if she had a biological candle which we would be looking at to enable us remember late Arioru. But she did not and it was not her intention; it was some people who forced it on her. I know she was in the process of having that biological candle that would continue to light on and we would continue to look at.

In African tradition, if you want to tell any lies and if you want to be defeated in a war, kill a woman. Therefore, those who have killed this woman are already defeated. In African tradition, we are not supposed to kill a woman. When people are in a war, the woman is supposed to prepare food and take it to the men who are fighting. That is our tradition, and our traditions are still very strong. Therefore, I pity and sympathise with those who have killed her. They are already doomed. (Member timed out­)

4.05
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, on my own behalf and on behalf of the young people of Eastern Uganda whom I represent, it is very difficult to speak when such a legislator who has been carrying the courage of the young people is before us here.
 
One time I went to the late and I told her that I had visited one health centre in her constituency called Nawanjofu Health Centre IV. I told her about the pathetic situation of that health centre IV. She only asked me, “Can we move together to see how that health centre can be improved to the standards of our people?” I want to ask the people of Butaleja and the district council of Butaleja; hon. Cerinah Nebanda has died, what is going to remain in Butaleja as a symbol of hon. Cerinah Nebanda? 

I want to request the district - Cerinah spoke for the people and on issues affecting the people, for instance on issues of health. I want to request the minister here, my sister hon. Opendi, to please try to look for that health centre and put there what is required of a health centre IV. 

The committee which we sat on, the Committee on the Presidency, travelled to Karamoja with hon. Cerinah Nebanda. On our way to Karamoja - we were visiting PRDP projects - I remember my sister told us openly, “I have gone to a pit latrine constructed by the PRDP funds but I myself, Cerinah, cannot fit in; can those pit latrines be demolished!” The CAO of Kotido can bare us witness. 

My sister spoke for the truth and I want to tell those who killed her that we have just began speaking for truth; you will finish all of us if you are to continue to kill us. I want to be very clear because even Ogwang, who is before you, whenever I speak, I speak my mind and I tell it to the people that this is my mind. I do not mince my words, and that is how God produced me. I want to stand here and say that when issues were brought up in our committee, for instance the recent saga of visiting wetlands in Kampala, I remember very well it was hon. Kasolo, hon. Mpuuga, the late and I, when we visited Nakawa -(Member timed out)

4.08
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Aswa and on behalf of my colleagues, the Acholi Parliamentary Group, we sincerely convey our condolences to the family and our sympathies. 

The last time I spoke to my sister was when she asked me for some piece of land in Gulu to build a petrol station and she told me we would work over it in the next year. Looking at the tension, reading the newspapers, the circumstances leading to the murder of our sister, and when it comes to this House people are saying that there are two sides and we must listen to the other side, I really wonder; in death, how many sides are there? There are two sides - the side of the family and the side where Cerinah worked, which is Parliament. If the two sides agreed, who are you, therefore, to continuously think and imagine that you have your other side? 

I, therefore, want to appeal. You know, this thing is very common. For some of us who have some basic training, we know. I already know it. They have tried me and I have escaped a number of things - ambushes, poison, framing and so many others. This is what intelligence does, for those who understand that. This is exactly what intelligence agents do. Quietly, they can do anything to you. They can even penetrate you up to your family, up to your husband or your wife and stop you from there and you will not see a hand. So, reading the circumstances, reading the language in the media, this is the perfect work of the intelligence. They did it. Whether somebody is being blamed or not, this is the perfect work of intelligence and that is how the mafia do their work.(Member timed out)

4.11
MR JACK SABITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for remembering me. May I convey condolences to the bereaved family on behalf of Rukiga and the people of Kabale generally.

I think the leadership of this country should know that when you are a youth, there are certain things that you must do and one of those things is you want to speak the truth and you want things to be in order in the family. So, when we are handling youth, we should be careful. I am, therefore, requesting the government to take heart and look at this young generation and whatever they say seriously. 

The death of this lady is certainly attributed, from what we have heard, to her truth and straightforwardness. Unless the Government comes up and exonerates itself, I do not know.  We know for sure that in the Seventh Parliament, as you remember, we nearly died in this Parliament. I, personally, was a near victim. We reported to CID and to the Minister of Internal Affairs and my friend is in front here but investigations have never been concluded to date. Poisoning! 

So, please, this insatiable love for power should stop. If you rule for 10, 20, 25 or 30 years and you feel you want to continue leading, there are other people who can also lead this country - (Member timed out)

4.13
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion and to bring the condolences of the people of Mitooma to you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to the family, the people of Butaleja and the people of Uganda. 

I served with hon. Nebanda on the Budget Committee the whole of last year and I can truly say that in hon. Nebanda, Uganda has lost a vibrant, bold and courageous no-nonsense and articulate youthful legislator who was, at the same time, very warm and very friendly. She inspired the young people and the women of this nation and she was truly the voice of the voiceless. 

To the family, I would say that there is so much that God saves us from on a daily basis that we do not know. God has allowed this to happen. Submit to Him and let His grace carry you through. He alone had plans for hon. Nebanda. He alone has plans for you and He will sustain you.

We call upon the government to expeditiously conclude investigations to establish the cause of hon. Nebanda’s death and to bring the culprits to book. We will miss hon. Nebanda; we will miss her loud and cheerful contributions. We will miss her warm and ready smile. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.

4.15
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. A lot has been said and it is very hard to stand at this moment when we are mourning hon. Nebanda. 

Hon. Nebanda will always be remembered for being a strong woman. I extend my condolences to the family and thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your patience. You have given us this opportunity to say what we must say. The death of hon. Nebanda has hit headlines. We want Government to come out with a story that will lead when you announce the person who killed hon. Nebanda. We shall then appreciate that indeed Government has cleared the air on the suspicion. We are waiting for that.

The people of Bukoto East are equally concerned about this. Wherever we pass, we have been receiving phone calls and everybody is sympathising with us as Members of Parliament - (Member timed out).

4.17
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am told that finally you have recognised that Bukooli is present.

Mr Speaker, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Bukooli County North, I rise up to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the deceased, to the Parliament of Uganda and to the entire country upon the demise of a gallant daughter of this country. Mr Speaker, this Parliament has been favourably rated and the works of our friend and colleague who is lying here are part of the contributions that have made Uganda rate this Parliament highly. 

I first got to know hon. Nebanda towards the general elections of 2011 when I had gone to Butaleja with the former Woman MP to do some political work. I saw people running with a lady at a certain football pitch. There was a football match and when I asked what was happening, they told me that that was the lady who was going to contest against hon. Hyuha. From that time, I picked interest in knowing how she would perform. Eventually when she came here, I got to know her and she has never let me down.

Mr Speaker, hon. Nebanda inspired millions in Uganda. Millions of young ladies and millions of the youth in this country have been inspired by her courage, her fearlessness, her vibrancy and the life in her inspired very many Ugandans. This country needs fresh blood. This country needs people who are going to move it to the next stage and if you look at the young parliamentarians in this House, they are the ones who can be able to change this country. Hon. Nebanda has been in that category, a category of special parliamentarians who have been very vibrant in this House- (Member timed out).

4.20
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to pay tribute to my friend and allow me to bring my condolences from Masabaland and from the Umukhukha inzu ya Masaba. Mr Speaker, hon. Nebanda was a friend to the people of Masabaland. When we had our cultural day, hon. Nebanda came and we celebrated the inauguration of Imbalu, that is circumcision, in Mutotoland.

I am so sad that today very many good things are being spoken about hon. Nebanda and yet when hon. Nebanda was alive, she was branded a rebel Member of Parliament for NRM. Today she is a courageous woman; today she is a fearless woman; today she is a woman who speaks for her people. I wish we recognised that when hon. Nebanda was alive.

Hon. Nebanda was all those good things that have been spoken about her, and as her friend I knew I had a friend who had an extraordinary character. No amount or number of caucuses would change hon. Nebanda’s mind. She would go to Entebbe or to the Parliamentary Conference Hall and when she came out of there, she would speak her mind. That made her a rebel MP.

I am so sad that today even those who branded her a rebel MP are saying she spoke for the people. Why do we wait when people die and we speak good things or the opposite and yet when they are living, we brand them as bad Members of Parliament? (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a condolence message from the Forum for Democratic Change signed by Maj. Gen. Gregory Mugisha Muntu Oyera, Forum for Democratic Change President. We also have a condolence message from the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, Office of the President. It is signed by Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo, MP and Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity. We shall be passing these messages to the family as you prepare to do the send off. 

Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the hon. Cerinah Nebanda Arioru, District Woman Representative, Butaleja District; One, that this Parliament resolves that it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Butaleja District, Government of Uganda, Members of the National Resistance Movement party and all the people of Uganda upon the demise of a young and vibrant legislator. Two, it takes cognisance of the  distinguished service rendered by the late Cerinah Nebanda Arioru to the Ninth Parliament of Uganda, the people of Butaleja District, the National Resistance Movement party and to the people of Uganda.  I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

The East African Community Anthem (One Verse)

The National Anthem (Three Verses)

(Exit of the late Cerinah Nebanda)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I cannot thank you enough for the endurance, commitment and depth of speeches you have delivered in memory of our fallen colleague. I am sure wherever she is, she knows that this Parliament loved her and she knows that her family loved her. We all continue to pray for the family that they can get the strength to live with the loss. I thank you very much for the time you have taken. Two special sittings; surely this has been a big thing to do by this House in recognition of her service. I thank you very much. Special sitting of the House is adjourned.  

(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until 5 February, 2013 
at 2.00 p.m.) 
