Thursday, 18 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga presiding.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Honourable members, I want to appeal to you to put in one extra day of work. According to our calendar, we are due to close today for the long recess. But if you look at the Order Paper there are a number of items which we thought we would complete or at least reduce on the list. So, I am appealing to members to come back tomorrow and we see how far we can go with this list.

Secondly, tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the morning - honourable members today we have some “Chamucation”. So we should try and work quickly so that we are able to go for our Christmas party this evening, in the front of the Parliament and all of you are welcome. And tomorrow the staff will also have their Christmas party at this facility. So, let us just try to work expeditiously; we shall use less speaking time so that we can do the work which is on the Order Paper.

We shall be giving the Prime Minister either today or tomorrow an opportunity to give a Christmas message as the Leader of Government Business. So, you should prepare yourself - maybe tomorrow.  

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

2.47
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I made a statement in this House, I have been following what has been going on, on the ground and work is going on; verifying the landless, trying to locate some land, identifying which area should be de-gazetted - although we have already generally approved the de-gazettement as Cabinet but that cannot be complete until this House passes a resolution to the de-gazettement. 

And before de-gazettement is presented as a resolution here, impact assessment by Wildlife Authority must be under taken. All these arrangements are going on, on the ground. And as I informed this House, the resettlement committee which is chaired by the Commissioner Office of the Prime Minister is composed of the three chairpersons of the three districts, the three RDCs and the regional Police commander. 

I have advised the people who have ideas on arriving at a solution to get this committee on the ground in Kapchorwa; it is a committee which is serviced by the technical people, so that we get as comprehensive and exhaustive as we can possibly be. 

I have interacted with the Members of Parliament and I have been advised that the opportunity to improve on the performance of the verification and resettlement committees is to be on the ground. Please give us much information and participate as much as possible in Kapchorwa and leave Parliament to come up with a resolution and information that work has been done. I so submit.

2.50  
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for providing this opportunity for the Minister to come and explain the progress of the resettlement of the people of Benet in Sebei sub region. However, I hasten to say that all that the Minister has said is not on the ground.

 I want to lay before Parliament a letter which was written to me by the Chairman LC V of Kween District who together with his councillors appeared before the Committee on Government Assurance Implementation on Tuesday, dissociating themselves from whatever is being said. 

Madam Speaker, allow me read what the chairman has said in paragraph three; “May I inform the Parliament through you that the leaders of LCV chairpersons were side-lined resulting to no transparency; it is the RDCs’ offices they depended on which has caused a lot of doubt, especially in Kween District. 

The GISOS were using it to smuggle in people who were not in Kapkwata that is from Rwanda in Kisangani, Yatui, Kisito, Cheperen and really affected people were left out”. 

This is a letter duly signed by the LCV Chairperson and who presented it to us in the committee on Tuesday this week. 

And furthermore, they appeal to Government that they do not want Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere to be involved at all. They even go further to say that he was just dictating to them and very arrogant in the manner he worked, to the extent that it has forced the leaders to write to Prime Minister asking him to have this uncoordinated exercise halted and have another committee set up to correct the situation. This is a complaint from the ground. So, let us not under play the suffering of these people. 

Madam Speaker, the Benet that we are talking about were successful resettled in 1983 and this information is known to the Rt. Hon. Minister. The Minister knows for a fact - (Interruption) 
	
PROF. KABWEGYERE: Is the honourable member in order to say that the Benet people were successful resettled in 1983 when in fact the very letter he seems to be reading is saying there is still a problem. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Can you complete the letter; read that part about the resettlement.

MR WADRI: The fourth letter which I have here is addressed to me, Madam Speaker. I want to lay this letter on Table. This is a letter dated 12 December 2014, addressed to the chairperson of the Government Assurance and Validation Committee. It is written by the Chairman LCV Kween Local Government, Mr Paul K Machinjach. I beg to lay. 
 
Madam Speaker, as I was advancing, there is even a letter here written by Mutabingwa and Co. Advocates addressed to Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere. In this letter, a clear genesis to this problem is explained, that actually the Benet were re-settled in 1983 and  at that time Government had given them 6,000 hectares of land. But, when they went to survey this land, they discovered that actually it was 8,500 hectares on which people were settled. But, at the end Government discovered as I said that there was a difference of 2,500 hectares and the people were allowed to stay there untouched. 

Thereafter, Uganda Land Alliance together with ACORD on behalf of the people of Benet took Government of Uganda and UWA to court and a consent judgement was entered and people were told to stay where they are undisturbed and Government was urged to go ahead and de-gazette the 2,500 hectares of land so that, that problem is solved. And, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s office has got a copy of this consent judgment which was even attached to the letter corresponded to by the same law firm addressed to Hon. Tarsis Kabwyegyere. 
So, Madam Speaker, it is clearly an act of negligence for Government that the terms and condition of the judgment that they entered into willingly are now causing these problems. 

Furthermore, the chairman has come out very clearly to say that people are suffering; can Government come in the shortest possible time to assist these people with relief items? All this is contained in this letter that I have laid on Table.

Let us as a Parliament, the people’s representatives take this matter very seriously; people are suffering. Even maps which were clearly demarcated to show that people must co-exist with trees and animals and development projects had already taken roots; but they are no longer being respected; people are suffering. 

Madam Speaker, my plea and request is that let Government give this people an environment where they can live a normal life. From 1983, of course the population on this land has increased.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable Chair, but the minister was saying that he has started the process of de-gazettment; he is waiting for the resolution and come to this House. That is what I thought he was saying.

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, the point I am making is that even the leaders who should be working hand-in-hand with the minister in addressing this problem are ignored; they are not part and parcel of the process. There is a problem on the ground; if you cannot work with the local leaders like the LCVs and LC111s, who then are you working with? Professor cannot come from Bushenyi and he claim to know everything on the ground there.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chekwel - you know we have debated this issue so many times, let us get some solutions; yes, Hon. Chekwel -

MS LYDIA CHEKWEL: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I first want to give information on what Hon. Wadri is telling us. The land that the professor is talking about for resettling the people is the same that Hon. Wadri is talking about, and there is already a consent judgement to that effect. The land was actually allocated to these people. These people have even certificates of permanent settlement. The issue of resettling them on that area is already a court issue. There is a consent judgement and as he was saying, there is already an intention for the lawyers to go back to court; and I hear they want to apply for something they called a “Mandamus”; I do not know, it, but I think the lawyers know what  Mandamus is. 

So, our issue is that the leadership has actually been left out. In his submission, he said he has had several meetings with the leadership together with us Members of Parliament. I want to bring to the notice of this House that in all those meetings we had in OPM’s office and those ones we had at the district level, we at all times rejected the idea of going back to this land that was given  to us 31 years ago.

It has been done and there is that court issue now. Ours was that we go as the directive of the President. The President actually wrote a directive after so many consultations. He was aware of all these issues that Hon. Kabwegyere is bringing here, that there were anomalies in giving out the land. And, of course, when the President wrote, there was this consent judgment already in place. And, because of that, the President after consultation with the leadership together with UWA accepted us to resettle these people on this area called the London Area. It is unfortunate that Hon. Kabwegyere has not reached this area. The London Area is an intrusion into where the people are living. If you would follow the demarcation from this side of Bugisu up to Kapchorwa District, and you cross over in a straight line, then you would see that the intrusion we are talking about is inside the land.

So, that is why the President plus the leadership of that time decided that we resettle this people in the London Area. So, our plea as district leaders and as the people of the region to Government and this House -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to find a solution. We cannot continue with this debate; we have debated this many times. What do you want us to do? That is what we want to hear.

MS CHEKWEL: Madam Speaker, our plea to this House and the Government is that we resettle these people in the London Area. We will be causing more problems by evicting people who were settled by the Government in that place in 1983. So, when you look at the resolution that the honourable minister has given us here, he requests the House to approve recovery of this land – 502 hectares, plus 300 on the Bukwo side. But our plea is, if we go in for that resolution then we shall be putting more problems in this area, because it will be like we are evicting more people and causing more problem than we are supposed to solve. That is the major challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Hon. Tete, two minutes; Hon. Sabila two minutes.

3.02
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have information that can help this House. Last time when I came here, I laid some papers on Table. Can you allow me to come there so that I am able to lay it again? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, come.

MS TETE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson for the Committee on Government Assurance for the information he has given us, and my dear sister, Lydia. They have elaborated on the Benet. 

Madam Speaker, allow me also to talk about the Bukwo part. In Bukwo, we have three categories of IDPs. We have the first category called the Kapsegek at Amanang, that is the land which the Professor is saying that he is demarcating and allocating to people. This land, as I talk now is occupied by people, we took it upon ourselves under the directive of the former minister - it took us three to four months from 2008 when these people were evicted from a forest in Bukwo in 2007. And the President directed hon. Mukwaya and Rugundu, the minister by then to go and settle this problem. 

Madam Speaker, Rugundu and Mukwaya made attempts on several times to come to Sebbei. They came and found that the solution was to work with the people. He was able to institute a committee where I happened to be the vice chairperson. We did the work successfully. We had everybody on board; we had the offices of the RDC, LCV, UWA and the Army. We were able to verify the people and we have a verification committee report to that effect, the people, the marks and everything. 

This was the verification committee report, it is called hon. Toskin. It is unfortunate Madam Speaker - (Interjections)- I laid it the other time, but I can lay it again. I have enough copies - (Laughter). In that document, there is a lot of information. We verified 49 families; there are 173 people. We allocated them 12 acres of land because these 49 had bigger families. We gave to small families 6 acres - 3 up to 2 people. That is the land that the professor is talking about. 

Madam Speaker, I have made attempts to give professor information so that he can speak from an informed point of view –[Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere: “Am I the problem?”]- No, you are not the problem. (Laughter)
 
Madam Speaker, he always says that. I have evidence. I have tried to talk to him and he has communicated to me officially. This is the letter- whenever I tried to talk to him-

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, you know we have gone back and forth on this matter. We seemed to be just going round in circles. I wish we were not adjourning, because I wanted to propose that the Committee on Presidential Affairs takes up this matter and call them to a round table meeting because they have got their sides;he has got his side. I do not know how we are going to move. 

Hon. Col Mujenyi, this is very urgent; I do not know whether it can be between now and Monday. Can we ask the Committee on Presidential Affairs to take it up, and to treat it as a matter of urgency? There is a lot of heat in Sebbei.

MS TETE: Madam Speaker, these people to whom they are demarcating land, as we talk, are settled already. We have implementation report here; the land was properly - people are suffering. He is demarcating land where people are already settled. So, that is our problem. Even as we talk, the exercise is going on in Bukwo. There is a lot of confusion. Maybe, if this exercise could be stayed until we resolve the matter like the problem of Kapseget and Atwii where the committee went to Bukwo and verified. I asked the commissioner - how she came up with one person and she said this person has no father; he was fathered by somebody and he was thrown out so they were considering him. I asked if that was what they went to do there and how many people are fatherless - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us send it to this committee and they handle it as a matter of urgency. Can we appeal to the minister to halt the exercise because apparently these people are not satisfied? 

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the complexity of this problem keeps unravelling to all members. On your proposal, Madam Speaker, that a committee of this House gets involved, I want to propose as follows -(Interjections)– Please the modus operandi is, we already have a committee on the ground -(Interrupted)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, it is evident and clear to the House that the committee which the minister is referring to is failing. The committee is putting us in a more disastrous situation as a country. Having seen what happened in Kasese, which is likely to reoccur in the position that he presented before us right now, is the minister in order to continue referring to a committee which is failing? The local people are protesting against what the committee is doing and the Speaker has directed. 

Is the minister in order to go against the directives of the Speaker, and secondly to continue referring to a committee which seemed to have failed in its work, and to come up with his own proposal, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are so many sides of this issue. That is why I wanted the committee to listen to all of them and give us a report because I do not know who to believe right now. The minister has his position, the members have their position, and the chairperson has his position.

3.11
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happened to be a member of the Committee on Government Assurances as well as a Member of Parliament representing the area affected. Between the times that the committee went to the ground and to date - of course there are issues which have transpired. On that regard, I want to thank the government through the minister for trying to do something. 

However, there are some gaps that we have identified since that time. If these gaps had been addressed, I do not think these issues would be in this House today. The gaps which were identified, Madam Speaker, are as follows:  The issue of the exact number of people to be displaced. When we talk about the Benet, we have sub-groups depending on these people. What my colleague was talking about are the people in the other extreme side of Kongasis that is Bukwo. So, when you talk about Benet, Atwii, Kapseget and Atariat, there is one community that has never been addressed. So we raised it in the meeting and we agreed that that community should be brought on board. 

When the committee was brought on board, it was very unfortunate  that they mentioned one issues. But historically, we have issues that point to the existence of such a committee and the documents were availed to the committee and every committee that goes there has those documents. One of the documents has just been mentioned by my sister. It is unfortunate that those documents are not read and when people go to the ground, we instead rely on what technocrats say which is not practical on the ground. 

The second issue was disorganisation of people who are already settled. They resettled people in 2008. These people were given 12 acres of land. Again, when these people went, they re-demarcated the land, giving people 2 acres and  reducing it   from 12 acres. What hope are we giving to these people? So it means that the issues we are trying to raise were raised seven years ago -(Interrupted)

MR ODOO TAYEBWA: Thank you. Madam speaker, you have ruled over this matter that this issue is very important. The way we can see, there are divergent points, right from the minister up to the concerned people. You have already ruled that we have the Committee on Presidential Affairs to handle this matter. Now if this one is giving his point, he should come as a witness. So is it procedurally right for the honourable member to take us behind?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we all agree that this matter is important, but let our committee handle it very quickly. Even if we listen to all of it, it will be very difficult to take a decision. There are so many sides to this matter. So, honourable Mwesigye, you should not have Christmas recess. I think you should take up this matter as quickly as possible and report to me very urgently.

STATEMENT ON THE RECRUITMENT, MANAGEMENT AND 
SUPERVISION OF THE KCCA LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANT

3.14
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the following is a statement on the recruitment, management and supervision of the KCCA law enforcement assistant.

Madam Speaker, the current establishment of this category of people stands at 334. They are under the direct supervision of the manager in charge of security and enforcement. These assistants give support to the authority in the implementation of all laws relevant to the authority in the execution of its mandate. 

They are there to maintain law and order in the city in line with all the applicable laws and in so doing they look for the following results:

Enforcing national laws and KCCA by-laws, Detecting, Arresting and Preparing charge sheets, Protecting life and property of the residents of the authority, Sensitising the public about their role in combating crime and Providing support to the personnel of KCCA in revenue, Tax collection, Public health monitoring and Development control. 

Madam Speaker, these people are recruited in a way similar to what goes on in all job categories of the authority. They have job roles and specifications and in this case the minimum qualification that is required is the senior six advanced level certificate. 

They are recruited on temporary basis on a four month renewable contract. The recruitment is conducted by the Directorate of Administration and Human Resource in liaison with the user directorate; that is Directorate of Legal Affairs. The process of recruitment is very simple. Applications are received and those who posses the minimum qualifications are considered. 

The candidates are assessed first for their physical fitness and then they are given oral interviews. Those who succeed in the physical fitness exercise are considered for oral interview. Then during the recruitment the candidates carry their original documents as it is a requirement elsewhere. Only those candidates who score above the pass mark are considered for appointment depending on the number required. 

Normally the Directorate of Administration and Human Resource conducts back ground checks on these candidates mainly from the areas of residence. These people after recruitment are subjected to training. They are required first of all to attend an orientation programme that provides the basic information about their job. They are also given tips on key issues in their areas of jurisdiction. This orientation is conducted in liaison with the police force especially the police training section. 

In November 2013, 51 law enforcement assistants benefited again from one and half month specialised training which was conducted at the Hungary Military Training Centre. This is part of the training regimen that we subject all these law enforcement assistants to.

I am glad to say that the pioneers of this training have been attached to the commandant of the various units so that they can share this information with the other people who have been trained. 

Client Care by Law Enforcement Assistants 

The law enforcement assistants regularly get training on community placing. This training is conducted by the community liaison officer of Kampala Metropolitan Police. Arrangements are made to ensure that the enforcement assistants get an opportunity to attend in-house client care training programmes. The latest was in August this year where the majority of staff during the training decried the harsh environment under which they work. 

They face a lot of brutality from the public even where it is not necessary for them to be subjected to that brutality. Thus notwithstanding, these assistants are sometimes compelled to apply some reasonable force in certain circumstances in the face of brutality.

Every morning, these assistants attend morning parade which is an avenue where issues of discipline are emphasised, tactical orders are given and the registration of attendance is also done. They are also reminded of the desired behaviour and the reporting structures in case of a given situation particularly if the situation is threatening to get out of hand. 

I have in the opening remarks hinted on the duties and tasks of the law enforcement officers but mainly it is maintenance of law and order. That maintenance involves a number of issues depending on the situation. They could arrest -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use just one minute to conclude and I had asked you to use five minutes, honourable minister.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Thank you very much. I am much obliged Madam Speaker. They arrest, assist and give back-up to some of the other departments so that they execute their mandate.

Madam Speaker, these people also assist people who are involved in enforcing public health tasks and ordinances. In the control for instance of solid waste, livestock and companion animal’s control, noise pollution, revenue collection and even gender issues.

Discipline is seriously enforced. To date as we speak, over 40 law enforcement assistants have had their services terminated in a period of one year. This is mostly for failing to adhere to the co-values of the institution. 

There has been an overhaul in the command and control of this department so that the law enforcement officers really behave to the desired standard. 

In conclusion, I would like to say brutality notwithstanding, the authority is indeed very grateful to the House and all these other people who are concerned and who have over time given constructive advice to KCCA and the law enforcement department. This advice has actually been very instrumental and helpful in making sure that the department performs its duties to the expectation of the public.

We are still open for more constructive advice. We are not impervious to any good practical advice which will make sure that this department becomes better and discharges its mandate to the satisfaction of the city residents. Thank you very much Madam Speaker.

3.24
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you Madam Speaker, the beauty of this House is that you have people from different backgrounds and we benefit from their knowledge.

Madam Speaker, before I joined this honourable House, I was a Law Enforcement Officer in Mukono, but listening to the Minister telling us the process through which they take the Law Enforcement Assistants in Kampala, you would properly realise that Kampala is not recruiting Law Enforcement Officers, but it is in a way putting up a militia force. 

Madam Speaker, Law Enforcement Officers are supposed to be a Para-police force for the city and they have specific regulations they are supposed to enforce. In Uganda we have the 1964 urban authority rules and regulations  and it is high time we thought about updating that law. I heard last time that the Law Reform Commission was looking at it. These people are supposed to enforce specific laws and they must go in the field together with a particular department on that particular day where they would wish to see order. For example, if it is about taxes, they are supposed to go with officers from the tax department, these officers are the ones who are supposed to collect taxes and they are the ones who are supposed to identify defaulters. If they are going for health missions they go with the public health officers; if they are going to enforce planning regulations, they go with the planning department. 

In law enforcement for example, the Law Enforcement Officer of any city or town is supposed to be a prosecutor, properly allowed to be a prosecutor by the DPPs Office and once you arrest or summon a person, you are supposed to take that person directly to court, that is why law enforcement departments do not work on weekends or public holidays. I think all of us remember that those defaulters will always go to default on the public or urban authority rules during weekends because they know  that the law enforcement department of any city or urban authority is not supposed to have detention centres or cells, because we do not arrest to keep people but you summon someone and take them directly to the town court. 

So I do not know how that is related to the training in a military training school;I do not know why our enforcement officers go there. I have seen the KCCA enforcement officers, they even carry AK47s.  This is wrong, we have given Kampala Capital City Authority another enforcement arm in the law, they are supposed to work with the Metropolitan Police, and it is within the KCCA Act. In instances where they think that these Para-Military Police their officers cannot afford to go into a certain area, they are supposed to go back to the Police and get reinforcement. So, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

3.28
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you in a special way, on behalf of the population of Kampala for enabling the Members of Parliament representing Kampala to say something about the chaos in Kampala. I do not even know whether the government of Uganda is in-charge of government in Kampala -(Laughter) – it looks as if Kampala is an ivory tower, with no specific government. Tell us where we fit if we are not part of the infrastructure of government -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order -(Laughter)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker. All of us leave in Kampala and we have been witnessing a lot of improvement regarding the order in the city, traders leaving the road side, pick pocketing plus many other bad things that were quite synonymous in this city - we have witnessed how the city has turned out to be a very clean one and everybody appreciates the improvement taking place in this city. 

Is it really in order for the honourable Member of Parliament, Ken “the Man” to start insinuating that there is no government in Kampala; that there is no work taking place in Kampala Capital City and that the people are very unruly. Is he really in order -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, there is a government in Kampala and there is somebody in-charge, so you are out of order. Concentrate on law enforcement.

MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank very much Madam Speaker. I thought the honourable Member had a point to make - (Laughter). Madam Speaker, under Article 1 sub-article (3) of the Constitution, it says that “All power and authority of government including its organs is derive from this constitution, which in turn derives  its authority from the  people who consent to be governed in accordance with the constitution.”. In regard to what is happening in Kampala, I thank the Minister for having come out to tell us the source of chaos in Kampala -(Interruption)- I am well informed – 

THE SPEAKER: Information

MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am not interested in his information. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I am also very happy that the Minister has told us that a number of 333 people can be roughly trained for four months and get empowered to take charge of security in Kampala; he was talking about the ability of that group to contain noise pollution. Today in Kampala, at night, the noise emanating from music sources is a bombshell; you even wonder whether there is a government in Kampala; that is the point I was making –(Interjections)- as if that was not enough, we the representatives of the people in Kampala are shedding tears – (Interjections)- that group he is talking about, is subjecting our people to torture and brutality without any source of power in terms of the law; it is unexplainable. 

As we speak now, we do not have an operational authority in Kampala. Where does Jennifer Musisi get the powers to subject our people to torture in the absence of an administration? So, when I make a point of that kind, that honourable member should understand what I am talking about. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you honourable Ken for giving way. Madam Speaker, when I was listening to the Minister, I did not expect that; he is not the one I know. Let me give you an example, Democratic Party at least led Kampala for some time. There is a lady known as Sanula. When you talk about Senior Six qualification - Sanula is a law enforcement officer, having a vehicle and yet she has no qualifications.

Secondly, one time the head teacher of Nakasero Primary School was arrested by these enforcement officers and detained for hours. He is a man holding a Masters degree; a head teacher of a school under that kind of arrangement, that is the information I am giving.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much hon. Ssewungu. The group the Minister has referred to, of 333 -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, you gave away your time.

3.33
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the issue of law enforcement in Kampala is a human rights issue, if Members of Parliament are really in support of protecting our human rights, and if Members of Parliament have taken time to look at the way our enforcement is handling our people; definitely, something must be done.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that Kampala is a Capital City and indeed all of us are stakeholders. But when it comes to those representing the City, I think in terms of responsibility; we should be taking lead in as far as ensuring that what is really affecting our people is talked about.

Madam Speaker, you remember what happened in Kitintale some three years ago, where two people were killed by Agaba - by then I think he was the engineer in charge. He was accompanied by the law enforcement officers; two people were killed. The scenario of Allan Ssemaganda is very fresh in our minds; and that too was under the careless hands of law enforcement officers of KCCA.

Madam Speaker you were elected by the great people of Kamuli, I was elected by the great people of Kawempe North, and also members here were elected and I believe that if there is anything that is really encroaching on the rights of your voters, you should come out and speak about it in the best way possible. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that the way the law enforcement officers are handling our people in Kampala is open brutality. When you look at the various things on Televisions; in Makindye a month ago, there was a lady who had a poultry farm; she had just borrowed money from the bank. When the law enforcement officers came, they did not even listen to the lady. The lady fainted because they just demolished –(Interruption) 

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you Hon. Latif for giving way. The information I want to give Hon. Latif, and honourable members is that we are not against law enforcement, but the modus operandi that is being employed. 

The case scenario I have to give was a woman who was roasting maize and sweet potatoes in Rubaga. The way she was handled; they bounded her, threw her on a pick-up, threw the sigiri on top of her and the hot water and she ended up in hospital. All her thighs were burnt. You remember. I am not going to talk about the child who was killed here in the centre of the City in the court yard of KCCA. We want our people to be handled in a human manner; that is why people are telling us that it is better to have the Army than these people handling us. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, what is greatly missing in the Capital City is public relation. Their public relation is really very poor. For example, the way these people are recruited; if you are recruiting a force of over 300 people, what processes do you take into consideration? Are the stakeholders like the L C 1 – (Interjections) - we know that all of us in our various capacities, should defend our people. This is not political; it is an issue of human rights. 

So, let us ensure that the recruitment of these people goes through a process of screening right from LC1, LCII because there are some law enforcement officers there whom we know cannot be given a job even at village level, but they are the ones manning the security of this City in terms of enforcement.

Madam Speaker, I request the indulgence of this House. When we looked at the brutality around the City; definitely it encroaches on human rights. And this is the reason as to why – (member timed out).

3.39
JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you. Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and really to record appreciation for the Executive Director, Jennifer Musisi for the tremendous work she has done in improving our City.

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that there is need for law enforcement officers and as Hon. Latif has said, we do need them and we appreciate the role that they play. But the way, in which they do their work, the way they manhandle Ugandans must be addressed. Honourable minister, it may be okay to bring just a statement window dressing but we hope that you will take this matter seriously that something needs to be done.

You are telling us that these law enforcement officers are trained; what kind of training do they undergo? You tell the effectiveness of a training programme by seeing the product that comes out. If they come out and brutalise Ugandans; what is the content of the training programme that they undergo? Can we have a training programme that includes human rights? So that these people know that they should handle Ugandans with dignity.

Even if you have found someone selling tomatoes by the roadside, handle them with dignity. Some of them have run into running vehicles and they have died because they are running away from law enforcement officers. What kind of order are you keeping when you have people running away from you and they are dying?

I know that the minister of Internal Affairs is here and I know that he has the community policing programme; this is what we would like to see the law enforcement officers do. Work with the people. We were told that there were to be gazetted areas where the hawkers would sell whatever they hawk. Are these markets there? Have they refused to go there? But even if they have refused, the way they are handled leaves a lot to be desired.

So, I want to agree that this matter is human right issues. That is unacceptable that Ugandan be handled with such brutality and to suggest that the training programme should be improved. We want to see accountability in this area; to whom do these law enforcement officer account? We need to see improvement. Thank you Madam Speaker.

3.42
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to re-echo the same sentiments and thank the minister for the report. But just as the previous speakers have spoken, the law enforcement officers in KCCA should have a human heart. Sometimes they just operate like robots. Like they have been instructed that when you find this person,arrest ; they cannot even think or even make decisions according to the prevailing situations.

I am talking about this because of the example I am going to give you. One day I was moving from upcountry, I walked on the grass because I did not know the laws. A certain woman saved me by clapping; when I went to her she said “You are walking on the grass, they will charge you Shs 50,000”. Now, before we could complete the conversation, a certain girl whom I later on discovered was a Makerere student - just a small girl, told me about her friend. This girl walked on the grass, and these men pounced on her and they got hold of her. She tried to resist because she did not know what was happening; they did not even think that, that is a young girl who cannot fight them. They got hold of her; they bound her and threw her on their pick-up. So are they working like robots?  Can’t they get more training? Can’t they be trained in psychology - because I am a teacher - can something be done to improve- I am very happy with what Jenifer Musisi is doing. There is great improvement but let these law enforcement officers really have a human heart.

3.44
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know you are amongst the very many young ladies in Kampala, who were raised in Nakawa division in Naguru -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I am a Kampala girl. (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: And definitely, everyone of us wishes to see the best of Kampala as a city that would attract tourists and that would be very pleasant for all of us to stay or live in. However, like everyone has re-echoed the human face, today the whole world is grappling with the issue of institutions that act without checks and balances. 
In the US alone, the New York Police Department is grappling with the issue of Eric Gunner. Like our chairperson of the Human Rights committee in Parliament said, to whom are these gentlemen and ladies accountable after theirs excesses? 
Therefore, we all want a very serene and clean city but what are the procedures to be followed as you enforce this? Use precautionary measures first; caution the people, educate them, use civic education and then after that - like hon. Mutonyi stated clearly, how can a man who is trained in law enforcement come and pounce on a woman? The procedure for either causing or having actual arrest is well laid out; woman to woman and man to man. We are grappling with the question of human rights abuse during arrest and you know it very well. 

We are grappling with the question of hon. Nabila Ssempala about the way she was humiliated in Owino market and all women groups came out and said enough is enough. Therefore, any institution whose excesses are not checked may cause anarchy in society -(Member timed out.)

3.47
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join the colleagues in condemning the brutal way in which the law enforcement officers of KCCA are torturing suspects. And it is unfortunate the majority of the people who are selling at the roadside are women. Madam Musisi is a lawyer; there is what we call reasonable force. When conducting an arrest, there is reasonable force that you have to use but to pounce on  a woman or a suspect that you got with all the energy, you throw the person on a pick up and the person is not even resisting and even if they were, the concept of reasonable force is not being used in the case of KCCA.  It is a shame that Madam Musisi is doing a good job but this good job is being tarnished by the image that the security law enforcement officers are exerting on the suspects.

Madam Musisi, this will tarnish your name and it will discredit the achievements that you are doing and I want to appeal to you that please kindly reign in on these people. The city you are developing, you are not developing it for foreigners, it is for Ugandans. There should be a balance between human rights and achieving development. There should be a balance between developing the city for the elite class and developing the city for the urban poor and all of them should coexist. When achieving development, you must ensure that you balance between the elite class and the urban poor and how to treat them. Surely, it is important that -(Member timed out.)

3.49
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I could not speak any better than my colleagues. It is indeed disheartening, disappointing and I will go a little personal because I would call Madam Musisi my sister in the Lord and I would expect to see more compassion than brutality in exercising her duty and the same should go to the people that are under her. I would have expected the Executive Director to bring these people to order by now. It has not happened for the first time, not the second time or third time; including death of different categories of people but you do not see the kind of attention that is drawn to this subject the way we think it requires.

Madam Speaker, I am meant to understand that to be a law enforcement officer in KCCA, you have to be a certificate holder in law. You also have to be a diploma holder to be an officer in KCCA. To oversee the legal department in KCCA, you have  to be graduate of law and all those people should be under such a person. And as a Shadow Minister, I intend to go and do an investigation and look into the recruitment of these people, ask for their personnel files because it is not common that a person who is dully qualified will do what these people are doing. 

In developed countries, the city police are more civil than militaristic. When you find them holding AK47s and shooting down civilians, then it has ceased being a civil police. They are supposed to relate more with people on a cordial basis, on talking terms and not using force, not brutalising Ugandans; they are supposed to talk to them. I would hasten to say this is evidence of lack of political leadership in Kampala Capital City Authority. The law was set up providing for political leadership as well as the technical arm but Government has chosen to overthrow the political leadership that should have been handling these kinds of issues. And I want to charge Government that this gap should be filled as quickly as possible. In fact, the Lord Mayor should be put back in his office. This is also evidence of the fact that there is a lot of impunity in this country -(Member timed out.)

3.53
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point has been made on how the enforcement officers are working. I just wanted to narrate one ordeal; a young man from Kanungu from my constituency came to survive in Kampala and he was hawking toilet paper. Just recently, he was manhandled by these enforcement officers and as they were manhandling him they found he had Shs 400,000 on him. 

So, they struggled to get the money from him and then he told them this money belongs to the wife of my MP and the young man called me. By the time I arrived because he was concerned about his money, he had lost his finger. I had to rush him to the clinic to get treated. So, it is as serious as that. So, the people of Kanungu want the finger of this young man back. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the statement by the minister looks flowery but I do not think the measures are being followed. Some of these enforcement officers seem to be hooligans and I think KCCA must rethink the whole process of recruitment, training and supervision so that we can have better enforcement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this topic is very interesting but we have so many things we have to do today. I just wanted really for the government to note that we are continuously creating people who have no homes and jobs. You know, they started with my former home in Naguru; they chased those people, I do not know where they are. From there they chased my former school, Shimoni; they chased the children of the poor from the city because the children of the police used to walk from Kibuli to come to Shimoni, Nsambya and all these places; then the markets and the railways. 

We are creating a lot of homelessness and you know, the rights of our people to survive -(Applause)- should also be taken into account. We want a clean city but we should also have a human face in the way we are doing these things. 

Honourable minister, do you have any concluding remarks or have you taken our advice? Use one minute.

3.55
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I said earlier on that I came with an open mind, I indeed appreciate some of the good practical advice which has been given. 

Certainly, this is a matter which we have to look into and make sure that we improve all along. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKERR: Thank you. Can we ask our Committee on Presidential Affairs to carry out oversight on the issues brought by the minister. Follow up on what he has said in this statement, in the normal course of their work. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POLICY ON BLOOD TRANSFUSION

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Elioda  Tumwesigye):  Madam Speaker, on the 13th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament held on Tuesday, 2 December, the year of our Lord 2014, hon. Stanley Omwonya, MP Okoro, raised the concern of the way blood transfusion is handled and charged to some patients. Allow me to respond as follows and of course the response is posted on the iPad.

Madam Speaker, saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to fellow mankind and blood transfusion is one of the most important lifesaving measures that we have. Uganda’s policy on blood transfusion is that there should be availability of adequate supplies of safe blood and blood products from voluntary non-remunerated regional blood donors for management of all patients in Uganda.

The mandate of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services is:

1) To collect blood from voluntary non-remunerated donors. 
2) To provide safe blood free of charge to all who need it across the country. 

The Uganda Blood Transfusion Service as a social service provider neither pays for blood from donors nor charges for its use. All health facilities, whether government or private, are given blood free of charge from the Blood Transfusion Service.

However, Madam Speaker, it has come to our notice and indeed it is true that some health facilities charge some fee for dispensing blood to their patients. These fees vary according to particular health facilities. While the Ministry of Health would wish that no fee is charged, some health facilities, especially the private ones, put administrative charges that may include charge for transportation, cold chain maintenance, cross match and blood giving sets. However, that amount charged by these health facilities is never remitted to the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. Such revenues remain at the dispensing health facilities purportedly to meet the paid cost.

It is also worth noting that blood transfusion should only be given in circumstances where it is absolutely necessary to save the life of that person. We recognised that most of the blood is actually given to save lives of mothers and children. Indeed, nearly half of the blood transfusions are given to treat children under five years mostly with severe anemia from malaria.

The Ministry of Health is carrying out measures that will aim at malaria control, if not malaria elimination, and therefore remove that need for blood transfusion which is like a half.

Thirty percent of the blood is given to women before, during and after childbirth. With improvement in antenatal care and other maternity services, this could also be reduced such that most of the transfusion goes for surgeries and also for possibly accident victims.  

My ministry has established seven regional blood banks including building brand new ones at Nakasero, Fortportal, Mbale, Mbarara and Gulu. We also have about six collection centres and more than two mobile blood collection teams.

It is also worth noting that the World Health Organisation recommends or gives an estimate that at least one percent of the population - in otherwards, the amount of units collected per year should be commensurate with about one percent of the population. Given that our population is about 35 million, ideally we could be collecting about 350,000 units of blood. Currently, we are collecting 210,000 units of blood but this has increased from 184,000 about two years ago.

The blood bank is faced with a number of challenges including the established structure, it is limited and needs restructuring; unreliable power supplies that affect the cold  chain maintenance; and also increased cost of generator.

The challenges of funding to the construction of additional regional blood banks as one member of Parliament commented in Soroti, but actually there is urgent need for a blood bank in Moroti and Arua. And currently, part of the funding is coming from the USA Government under spectrum which is going to reduce in 2015 leaving us with an annual funding gap of about $2 million - about Shs5.6 billion.

Going forward, Madam Speaker, I will bring a Bill to Parliament aimed at creating an autonomous organistaion -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: We had given you just five minutes, please conclude.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you. The autonomous institutions shall in a way help us address some of these weaknesses like inadequate infrastructure, motivation of staff, low funding for supplies in which case if we had sets and supplies, we would give the private institutions so that they do not charge.

Also going forward, we are going to increase on blood collection unit by increasing community mobilisation, increase blood distribution through upgrading of blood collection centres, hope to get funds and construct more blood banks at Moroto and Arua and others, and also, we shall increase on capacity to fractionate blood and get more plasmadilised  products that are also important, as much as blood as a whole. I thank you and I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.03
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. I have been involved in collection of blood with the Blood Bank through the Indian Association in Uganda. We have been holding drives and I have certain points that I have been noting; I have tried to raise it with the ministry, with his colleagues but not him in particular.

Madam Speaker, the biggest problem is people fear to give blood in Uganda and as leaders, it is very important that we talk to people and create awareness that it is normal and actually good if we donate blood because the body then makes fresh blood. We are helping our red blood cells to keep active.

Madam Speaker, the biggest hitches we get when we go for these camps is the equipment. I have been part of these camps in other countries as well and I would like to urge that so far under the campaign through the Indian Association, we have been able to mobilise over 5,700 units of blood within the last two and half years but equipment for collecting this blood; manpower, staff, the beds, the vehicles - he is absolutely right that we are stretched.

The storage of the blood in these hospitals, for example, in Tororo, bringing blood from Mbale to Tororro in case of emergency, you need cold storage. You need fuel and you need specialised personnel because it must be a doctor to request from the Blood Bank or a medical facility before that blood is given. So, these are the issues that I would like the honourable minister to line out and present to this House so that we may help him. $2 million or Shs5 billion is very little money compared to the amount of money we spend on other activities. Giving blood is saving a life; I agree with him, and we have been doing that and all of us as leaders must do that with a passion.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I also thank the honourable Minister of Health for the comprehensive statement. I have two issues: the first one still on storage. I do appreciate the effort of the Ministry of Health to ensure that blood is sent to all these health centres. However, I still have the same question just like my honourable colleague; do these health centres have the facilities to store this blood? Many people are dying. As I speak, pregnant mothers are losing their lives because there is no blood. Even people who suffer accidents - the bodaboda riders and so forth, so, we still have this problem. I implore the honourable minister to consider, as you send the blood, to ensure to also check whether they have the facilities to keep this blood. 

I do not know whether in the lifecycle of any new born child, his blood group is indicated. I do not know whether honourable colleagues you know your blood groups. Now, this is also another problem. You have a problem, you go to a hospital, you need blood, they give you blood but the blood is not compatible with your system. We have colleagues who have lost their loved ones in this same state.
So, honourable minister, maybe in our health policy, we need to consider indicating the blood group because it is very important. I am of blood group “O” and I have donated thrice. I know my blood is very important for everyone because everyone will be in need of it.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.07
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for coming up with this statement. I brought this issue the other time when a patient was brought from Zombo and when she came here, she was admitted at Naguru Hospital and before she could be given blood, the hospital staff wanted Shs 250,000. The woman needed five units of blood which means the parents had to run around and get Shs 1. 25 million in order to get the blood. 

So, I got a bit concerned and my worry is, what happens to a poor parent who may not be able to afford the Shs 250,000 per unit? And really must the blood from Naguru or Mulago cost Shs 250,000? These are serious issues which we really must think of. If not, then our patients are really going to die. I appreciate that blood is given on voluntary basis by the donors. But at least we must also get provision to see that the poor must be given blood but not to be charged this amount of money. I thank you.

4.09
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his statement. According to his explanation, I know the Ministry of Health is doing a lot of work and actually it has done a lot of work even in Moroto. In establishing this regional blood bank offices, he says Moroto will be considered but from his explanation, I do not even see where the money will come from and yet Moroto would help to serve seven districts in Karamoja. You know we have seven districts in Karamoja. Now, getting blood from Mbale to take to Karamoja and considering  the state of the roads, it is a very difficult situation. 

In Moroto Referral Hospital which is supposed to serve most of these districts, the situation is so bad and you find that sometimes the patients are referred to a missionary hospital in Matany and the capacity of this hospital is not even able to manage a lot of patients. So, I would have loved the minister to at least give us hope and say maybe in the next financial year, we are going to construct a blood bank in Moroto. And I remember I have stood in this Parliament and asked, when are we having one in Karamoja? When are we having one in Moroto? It is not for my sake because if you look at the population of these seven districts, they are so many. And, if we cannot serve them, if we cannot save their lives,  it is regrettable. 

My issue is, the minister is giving a blank statement. It is not an assuring statement. He is just saying, “hope”. For how long will we hope? Can the minister tell us when he is going to construct one in Moroto that he has mentioned that can serve these seven districts?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you could respond in one minute. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, by and large, I concede and I will take into consideration what members are raising. For individual members of Parliament, we shall be able to respond and give more information. I want to thank you for the submissions.

(IV) MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE UPDATE ON THE EVICTION OF ENCROACHERS FROM THE KYANGWALO-BUKIGA LAND AND THE HUMANITARIAN SUPPORT EXTENDED TO THE EVICTED PEOPLE BY GOVERNMENT

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, after presenting my report on the subject of the people who had encroached on the refugee camp in Kyangwali last week, I was requested to come back here and give an update on those evictees. I beg to present as follows:

On the onset, Parliament should be very conscious of individuals and groups in our country in today, who are abusing the provisions of our Constitution, particularly Article 29(2)(a) and I quote: “Every Ugandan shall have the right to move freely throughout Uganda and to reside and settle in any part of Uganda.” 

This provision, Madam Speaker, is being grossly abused today in our country by some of the groups and individuals who have benefitted even. For example, with the magnanimity of the government, there was to resettle some of them from the many different resettlement schemes that the government had come up with only for these individuals and groups to sell out their land and to move to what I call open areas in the country.

Apart from the tension this mass movement is generating in the different parts of the country, it is threatening to undermine the functioning of a number of government institutions like refugee settlements and even the oil wealth. For example, Bukinda land is part of Kyangwali Refugee Settlement, which is government land. 

Madam Speaker, as mentioned in my statement to Parliament the settlement had been encroached upon. Allowing the process of settling the Congolese in 2013 August, encroachers were compelled to leave the land and some of them camped at Kyangwali sub-county headquarters, claiming they had nowhere to go. The investigation team constituted to investigate the matter, led by Gen. Oketta, recommended that the encroachers camped at Kyangwali be advised to leave. Subsequently, on 22 November 2014, an inter-ministerial team facilitated them to travel to their places of origin and the camp was closed on the same day. 

After the closure of the camp, a group of persons led by the chairperson LCIII of Kyangwali Sub-county, Mr Mazirani and a priest by the names of Reverand Isingoma have been mobilising the affected people to regroup. The priest is said to have hired truck number UDN 429H and has been traversing the entire district of Kibaale looking for these evictees that government must assist them before they leave. 

Madam Speaker, also the chairperson LC3 of Kyangwali Sub-county tried to create another IDP camp in a place called Rakara but the camp was shortly abandoned and the people went to their homes. 
It is important to note that according to the police’s report dated 10th December, a copy that I have attached and it is with you members there, Rev. Isingoma, using the same truck made an attempt to ferry back encroachers on Government land. The priest had claimed that he was taking the people for a convention in the settlement, which was not true.

It should be noted that majority of the persons, and this is extremely critical, originally camped at the sub-county, 55 percent of the 71 families were from Kahunge in Kamwenge District, Rugashare, Mpeku and Kagadi, in Kibaale District. It is critical to note that a majority of these people had benefitted from a government resettlement scheme where land was allocated to them by Government in Kahunge and Kagadi Resettlement Schemes respectively. Unfortunately, the elites exploit them like they have always done. They sold their land to the elites and moved on and now came to encroach on the refugees land. 

It is important, Madam Speaker, to note that in these resettlement schemes, if we went there today – and we would want to interest many Arms of Government to do this - you will find that the elites have bigger land than what was originally given to the allocatees. The elites have now occupied that land. 

During the closure of the camp, a big number of people in this camp at the sub-county requested to be allowed to move to their homes in Waigasara and Karusha parishes where they have their land. They said they had camped at the sub-county to benefit from the government relief. It should be emphasised here that government has done everything possible to assist the people formally camped in Kyangwali Sub-county but some people including the chairperson LCIII and the priest, each for different motives, are frustrating the government’s effort to find a lasting solution to this problem - (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural point because hon. Ecweru made a statement last week on the same issue he is raising and he told this House that a number of these people who were evicted are camped at a church. Parliament resolved that the Committee on Presidential Affairs should examine this issue and study it and report back. 

But the task which was given to the minister was to tell us about the welfare concerns of the people who were camped at the church and headquarters of the sub-county. What is government doing to feed them so that their welfare concerns are addressed? But now he is telling us those evictees were taken back to their homes. So, is it procedurally correct for the honourable minister to deviate from the information he gave this House by now taking us into a different direction? Should he not report on what Parliament had asked him to do, or tell us what the government is doing to address the welfare concerns of those people who were evicted? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, update us on the food.

MR ECWERU: I have indicated to you, Madam Speaker, that these two leaders regrouped some people and put them in the parish. We have sent a team on the ground as we talk, firstly to establish the exact number of people in the parish. Secondly, to give them some humanitarian support as we find a lasting solution, particularly to this new development of bringing people back from Kibaale and all those other areas.

But the emphasis I am making is that there is deliberate efforts by the elites to use these poor people to go and get land purpotedly from Government so that they benefit from resettlement, then they buy it off. I want that to be investigated because it might also touch some honourable members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The question has been answered about food. I think that was the issue. Have they been fed? They have not?

4.19
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. The statement the minister has given has a lot of untruth. These people of Kyangwali have suffered. They were evicted last year in August and they stayed at the sub-county for a full year and we have lost more than 10 of them: children and women. 

The issue is very serious. Government has tried. I do not know why it has failed to solve this problem because as leaders, we were advised to step aside to leave Government to solve this problem but now the problem is long overdue. The people who are at the parish are suffering and up to now they have not received food. We are requesting the minister to give relief to them otherwise we shall continue losing them. 

Madam Speaker, the land which is talked about may belong to the refugee camp but human rights are being violated. These people have no food, water and housing. They are living in the open. So, we request government to come in to rescue their lives. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MR JULIUS JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the information but it is also interesting to be here especially when you are representing the situation you know quite well and what is being given is totally different. 

However, I am very happy that this House referred this very important matter to the committee and I am very sure that once the committee reaches the ground and gets in touch with the petitioners, the truth will be found out and the report will bring out totally different information from what the minister has said. 

Madam Speaker, even just yesterday, my concerns did not rotate mainly on who owns the land, the nitty-gritty concerning ownership and all those issues the minister raised because he had already raised them the other day. My concern which I raised even the day Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was chairing was the welfare. We are talking about over 2,000 people and it defeats my understanding when the honourable minister quotes a Reverand Father that he is mobilising people to come and camp at the church. 

Madam Speaker, when these people were dropped everywhere and they did not find where to go, the only area they found themselves going to was the church. It was not the Reverand Father who was mobilising them. Instead, they ran to the church because that is where their only hope was. Otherwise, they had been sent away from government land in Kyangwali, Government Head-+quarters at the sub-county and they had to run to the church. So, what we are requesting now, honourable minister, is the welfare as we sort out all these because you are aware by the time Government and the committee sort out this matter, it would have taken months. 

So the issue, as a member of Parliament representing those people, is that the ministry should really be kind enough to look into the issue of the people’s survival and provide shelter and food to them and the rest of the other issues will be found out by the committee and the report will be presented to this House where we shall debate extensively because I know that from what the minister has raised here, there are some  areas which are really false and it is a misrepresentation and I cannot blame him totally. I know it is the technical people on the ground writing issues, which are contrary to what the minister is even saying and he is not aware. I must confess that. So, I cannot blame my minister. I know what the commandant technical people in the ministry are doing -(Member timed out.)

4.24
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate government so much in their bid always to receive refugees and even to accommodate and resettle them. Madam Speaker, this is always done at the expense of the locals in the country. We took an initiative as the Committee on Human Rights; we went to the oil fields and visited these people, and if you saw the fate of these people, it is appalling! We found people who were evicted from their own land to settle refugees. They are refugees on their own land. Those who came are settled but the owners have been evicted from their own land and are resettled somewhere in the sub-county headquarters. Their fate is appalling and we do not have to take this for granted.

We have the children there who are not going to school, there is completely no water source.  They have nothing to eat and nowhere to sleep. We went there with the Chairperson of Human Rights Committee and we even took the recordings. We have the pictures of those people. I think this House and even the minister himself should take time to go down to Kyangwali. You do not just get hearsay but you have to go there and see the fate of those people. Those people are refugees in their own land –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, and to the attention of the minister, these people who have been chased from their land are mostly the Alur people, West Nilers and the Bakiga. Therefore, as a matter of fact, the minister must go to the ground and get the real data and information. Otherwise, from the way he sounds, it is as if he has taken sides that we may tell our people that whatever type of food he is taking there, our people should not eat it because it can even hurt them.

4.27
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The issue before us seems to be a very serious matter of human rights violation and evictions of people from their land. I may not be having these issues at the finger tips but I am made to understand that the issue before us is before court. There are some people who have gone to court over the matter that we are talking about here in Parliament - two cases, actually, I am made to understand and I do not know whether the minister is aware of this. 

But also worth remembering is the fact that issues of evictions and issues of people moving around in search of land are not recent occurrences. I still remember in the Eigth Parliament around 2006, this House set up a committee to investigate matters regarding people who are roaming around, others going into government land and others going into people’s private land but this committee has never reported back to this House.

If possibly a report was given back to this House, maybe some of these issues would have been resolved earlier than we are handling some of these matters. I therefore wish to request that if there is a need for a committee to be put in place to further look into the issues of the displaced persons of Kyangwali, a report comes to this House and we debate it so that we come to a conclusion of these matters.

But I also want the minister to interest himself in this matter of the court issues so that we know whether it is still very prudent for us as a House to involve ourselves into matters that are before the courts of law -

THE SPEAKER: But I wish you could tell us what matters are really in the court. When you just say these things are in court I do not know. I hope the food issue is not in court. Can the minister tell us? We want to know about the food. If we meet the other road block, we know what to do. We want to know about the food and the water -

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, we are dispatching food to this parish where the population is camped with the reverend father  as we proceed to help these people return to where they came from. 

I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The other matter will be handled by the committee. The minister for gender, please use only five minutes.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MOBUKU YOUTH INSTITUTE

4.30
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mobuku Centre is one of the four institutions established to provide vocational skills to the youth. It was established in 1967 and the centre was functional for 16 years; that is between 1967 and 1983. Its unofficial closure was as a result of insecurity in Kasese. 

However, between 1996 and 1998, there were efforts to revitalise the centre under the programme for Renovation of Skilled Centres for Women and Youth. Unfortunately, the renovation of the centre was incomplete by the time the project stopped in financial year 2000. Since then, no activity has been carried out. 

The ministry’s plan is to revitalise the centre and complete repairs on the infrastructure in the centre. It is one of the institutions approved by Public Service. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to inform this august House that it is not true that the Uganda Police has taken over or intends to take over the Mubuku Youth Training Centre in Kasese. The ministry plans to undertake major reconstruction and renovation activities for all institutions under the sector. 

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that you are fully in charge?

MS NAKADAMA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Just one comment because she has said it is not true that the police are taking over. That was your worry. Two minutes.

4.32
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): No, Madam Speaker. When I raised this matter, it was not just from the blue. The Minister for Gender should have also been very clear on the steps that they are taking as a ministry. This is because the institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu has already communicated to the Minister for Gender about their plans to actually have it as a university so that then the courses, which were being offered in that institution can be incorporated into this structure. I would have also expected the minister to address this House and the people of Uganda as to how far those arrangements have gone.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that is not what you raised. Your complaint was that the police are taking over that institution. You do not talk about the Obusinga.

MR NZOGHU: No, there were two contradicting issues, Madam Speaker. It is the institution of Obusinga which was taking it over and then the police also applied for it; so, there was that contradiction.

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (MS Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We have had as a committee an incident where the youth centre in Mukono was taken over by an individual on allegation that it was given to her by the President. On that incidence, we did request the ministry to take an inventory of all the properties and assets of the ministry and on that note, Madam Speaker, we do not need to take this matter lightly. I request the minister to give us evidence as to why and to show us that actually this matter is not true, not only saying ‘it is not true’ but giving us evidence showing that this youth centre is not going to the police.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you want her to commit in writing? 

MS KOMUHANGI: Yes, it can be on the Hansard but if it is part of the inventory that you recently carried out, you should also lay it on Table so that we know that actually the police are not encroaching on the property of the youth. 

THE SPEAKER: When are you bringing the inventory, honourable minister?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, because it was not the question that was asked. I did not come with the inventory but a committee was already put in place to go and find out all the institutions and the report will be brought here and we shall lay it on Table.

On the issue of the Obusinga, Madam Speaker, they applied but the ministry turned them down because they were informed that the ministry is fully in charge and it wants to use those institutions, so they cannot be given away to the Obusinga or to the university. 

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable minister, we expect in the third sitting that you bring an inventory here so that we know what belongs to the government. There is so much theft of government property these days. I know you used to work there -(Laughter)- okay, former labour commissioner.

4.36
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Something has come to the attention of this Parliament that the youth training institute in Mukono, for which this Parliament was responsible for appropriation of resources for its construction, has been given to an individual. If that is what really the chairperson is saying -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is what she was talking about.

MR WADRI: Yes, if that is the case, I think this vacuum which we as Parliament created - that we come here, we appropriate resources for national institutions and at the end of the day, one person goes and gives it to an individual! Honestly, where are we going? We spent a lot of resources on constructing that big facility and this was supposed to cater for the youth from the central region. It is a very large centre; how can we do away with such resources and pass it over to an individual?

MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. In 1996, that institution of Mobuku was supposed to be renovated and the ministry got a contractor. The contractor went on site, pulled down the workshop, destroyed the dormitory and abandoned the site. In 1998, I was elected chairman of that district and I followed up the matter with the ministry. We tried to trace the contractor but he was nowhere to be seen, the company was not registered anywhere and the ministry had fully paid that contractor. 

So, I want an assurance from the minister, who has just told us that arrangements are underway to renovate that institution, to give us a concrete answer that on such and such a day, finance is going to be availed to renovate that institution. 

In addition to that, Madam Speaker, she has also misinformed us here that the institution ceased to work because of insecurity in that area. That area has been very secure; the only incident that took place in 1985 is when the rebels of the NRA carried a generator from that institution, the rest of the things remained intact till it was neglected and people started looting the equipment from that institution.

So, Madam Speaker, I want proper assurance from the minister; this is an institution that has been training people in brick laying and concrete practice, in carpentry and joinery, in health and sanitation and for a long a time, it was the only institution of that nature in the Rwenzori Region. So, serious attention should be put on that institution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know whether we budgeted money for that rehabilitation? Did we budget for it because that will help us know whether you are really going to move or not. Did we pass the budget for it?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, it is not yet in the budget because it is under the unfunded priorities -(Interruption)- yes, but if this is a plan, we cannot say that the ministry is not going to give us money but for this year, it is under the unfunded priorities.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now when we are going to do the budget, I think we should prioritise this. We are always talking about the youth but we are not helping them to get skills. So, let us make it a priority in this budget – Yes, that one and the technical schools because we are talking about all these young people with no skills.

4.41
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I owe part of my political success to the service I rendered to the youth. In the year 2000, I was at that centre in Kasese and we were sent away by the rebels; I was with hon. Mbahimba. But before that, we had had a training for all the youth in that region at that centre. 

With the PCY programme funded by GTZ and the Government of Uganda giving counterpart funding of over Shs 1.5 billion every year to that programme, those centres were receiving assistance especially the one of Mukono. They were putting up equipment to assist the youth gain the skills they cannot get from school. I am happy now we have the Youth Livelihood Programme. The purpose of those centres is to give additional skills in leadership, entrepreneurship and if the centres are not functional today, I think Parliament should think about it. 

If it is an unfunded priority, we would require the minister, before we even go for the budgeting, to present before you, Madam Speaker, the comprehensive programme and plan the ministry has got for those centres. We have got the problem of unemployment in Uganda but we cannot move without a comprehensive plan to address the issue to do with skills. Somebody has a degree but we need to train them specifically with some skills. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have other issues on the Order Paper, please. We have already said we want to prioritise the youth institutes around the country and also the technical institutes in this new budget.

4.43
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The youth centre in Mukono being talked about is in my constituency. The land on which that youth centre is located belongs to the Church of Uganda and the Church of Uganda has now given that land to UCU. 

What happened was that the Vice Chancellor of UCU wrote to Government inquiring whether Government was still interested in that land, which houses the youth centre and the NARO centre and Government wrote back through the Attorney-General together with the Minister of Agriculture that they are no longer interested in possessing the lease for that land and that the landlord could now take over the land. This is true and as we talk, Madam Speaker, the land has reverted back to Church of Uganda and the Uganda Christian University is now proposing to put there a housing estate.
 
Madam Speaker, the people of Mukono brought here a petition and I have been waiting for the opportunity to present it. We lost the land onto which the youth centre is housed and also lost the land for NARO together with all the research material on it. Right now NARO has been advised to shift to Kamenyamiggo - I do not know whether that is in Masaka but the youth centre is now redundant.

That is why I want to ask the minister; you have been paying a person called the principal of that college yet the college does not exist. There are empty buildings lying there. Can you tell us who this person you have been paying as principal of the place is, when in fact the institution is not in operation? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, did the land revert to the landlord because the lease had expired or what? That is important to know because if it was a reversion by law, what can we do about it?

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, when the lease was about to expire, Church of Uganda wrote to Government inquiring if they were still interested in it but Government said they were no longer interested in the land. So, the landlord could have repossessed it.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I do not know which committee is handling that petition - let it be expedited so we can listen to it early in the third meeting.

STATEMENT ON THE EXPORTATION OF DOMESTIC EMPLOYEES
4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ELDERLY (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, this is a response in regard to the exportation of domestic employees. Government acknowledges the fact that labour markets abroad have continued to provide employment opportunities for Ugandans in the short run as the country develops its capacity to generate sufficient jobs for its labour force.

The Government under the Ministry of Gender is mandated to promote decent employment opportunities and labour productivity.

The National Employment Policy for Uganda of 2011 provides for the externalisation of labour as a key priority area for Government.

In a bid to manage the unemployment pressure and maximise the gains of labour migration, Government initiated externalisation of the labour programme. This programme is regulated by Statutory Instrument No. 62/2005 on the Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations of 2005.

Under the regulations, private companies are licensed to source and formerly and officially place Ugandans to work abroad. As to date, we have 24 companies that have been licensed.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that in 2007, the Uganda Veterans Development Ltd secured a contract with Alcamat Bureau for services in Iraq to recruit housemaids. The first group left in August 2008 and by the end of 2009, a total of 148 housemaids had been deployed in Iraq.

In May 2009, a group of three women lodged complaints with the ministry ranging from:  1) sending them to Iraq without signing contracts; 2) working for long hours instead of eight hours per day; 3) working without payment; and 4) forced sex and sodomy. The fifth was about being beaten and starved; and sixth being returned back to Uganda without personal property.

The ministry in July 2009 banned the recruitment and deployment of housemaids by all licensed recruitment companies. However, you need to know that there are a number of existing channels – and you may wish to know that Ugandans who have been migrating for employment abroad go through three channels: One is about the licensed recruitment company; two is about individuals sourcing jobs by themselves; and three is about unlicensed companies or individuals.

Available records indicate that 90 Ugandans – 17 males and 73 females – were trafficked to Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, India, South Africa, Bahrain, Malaysia, Hong-Kong, Saud Arabia and China. Of these 74 were trafficked for labour exploitation.

Despite having in place licensed companies, a number of Ugandans have either been going out on their own in search for employment opportunities or fallen victims to individuals and unlicensed agencies here and there.

I wish to inform the public therefore, that those willing to work abroad should contact only licensed companies. In case of any problems the licensed companies are held responsible. Recruitment and employment of domestic employees, a case of Saudi Manpower Solutions Company - this company expressed interest in the recruitment of Ugandan migrant workers to Saudi Arabia among which were housemaids. An assessment of the company was made and the findings indicate that generally this company has put in place measures to address our concerns in this sector.

The ministry is not opening up deployment of housemaids but first experimenting with this company. It has contracted other companies: the Normandy Company Limited and HAM property and Management Services Limited. The progress will be assessed before we fully open up for other countries to start recruitment of housemaids. 

Measures put in place by this company include -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You know I gave you five minutes but you are reading everything.

MR MADADA: You requested for a comprehensive statement, Madam Speaker. Anyway, let me talk about the steps being undertaken to streamline externalisation of labour:

The first is the revision of Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulation, 2005. We have already done this and sent it to the Solicitor General for approval.

There are also bilateral agreements and negotiations with the receiving countries that have been started on. Further, there is the strengthening pre-departure orientation as part of what we can do to handle this issue of maids before we lift the ban on recruitment of maids. 

As I conclude, I want to state that my ministry did not stop Ugandans from going out since there is a readily available market for them, but that should not be done through dubious means. This has exposed many Ugandans to abuse and exploitation. The ministry, therefore, wishes to experiment with Saudi Manpower Solutions Company in order to avoid those that go out without being vetted. 

I beg to submit.

4.53
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully to the statement from the minister responsible for this sector. But as workers’ leaders and organisations who have the mandate to handle issues of workers, we have been raising a lot of issues concerning this matter but to no avail. 

The ministry is, for instance, giving several strategies but those strategies glaringly leave out the issue of them working closely with workers’ organisations in order to sort out this matter. For instance, he has said that they have handed over a regulation, which they want to review, to the Solicitor-General, but workers were not involved in this yet we wrote to them and insisted that we had a lot of issues because we have a lot of expertise. 

We have dealt with these matters; we have done benchmarking; we are in touch with colleagues from outside the country; and we know how most of the countries deal with such matters. 

Anyway, the question I want to ask the honourable minister is: what arrangements are in place to ensure you work closely with the legitimate workers’ organisations that have the competence in trying to assist you to resolve this matter? 

The second question is: why do you continuously exclude workers’ organisations and the labour union in handling these matters? That is important to know because even when they write to you to discuss and guide you, you deliberately, as a ministry, glaringly leave them out until they make noise and until they demand - that is when you call them or when issues of this nature arise - actually, we have the solution; we have interacted with a lot of colleagues; we have interacted with experts on such issues and we know exactly how this matter could be resolved in order for us as a country to save these people’s rights because they have rights to be protected.

We also have the issues related to attitude. We have established the Workers’ Labour and Productive Institute and its main purpose is to handle issues of mindset. 

Like of course you saw the issue of maids - we as social partners - we think we can have a role to play and contribute to this country. The problem is that government looks at us as enemies and troublemakers when we are legitimate and very serious a people with expertise and able to assist you in this area.

4.56
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw your attention to page 2 of the minister’s statement at the bottom. It says that in May 2009, three women lodged complaints with the ministry and he has given us those complaints. What did the ministry do? The ministry, in July that year, banned recruitment and deployment of maids by licenced companies. But in the following paragraph, the honourable minister talks of how Ugandans still go abroad. 

My question is: did you ever lift the ban? That is important to know because you do not seem to talk about it. We end up hearing that you banned the exportation of these maids - did you lift the ban? And if you did, under what conditions? And further to that, honourable minister, why did you simply put a ban and not withdraw the licences of those companies?

Madam Speaker, I am looking at the wider picture. The minister tells us available records at his ministry indicate so many went out and a number are there for labour exploitation. The minister even has a record of Ugandans who have gone out for exploitation. But I wonder why the minister is still sitting with those records comfortably without taking any step to get back our girls and boys. I am really getting concerned. 

With the picture we had of the maid here who tortured a baby, what steps are you taking? Does it mean Ugandan’s best exports are now maids? Are you doing any training? Is this a professional thing? 

Honourable minister, sincerely, what are you telling the nation?  In your record you know, how many are going out? You know where they are going yet there is also a ban. I am really confused about the policy of government in respect to this -(Member timed out.)

4.59
MS JOVAH KAMATEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. At least he has told us that he is in the know that our people are taken out for exploitation. He has been in the know for so long. 

I want to thank the hon. Raphael Magyezi and to associate myself with his contribution. I do not know why, in the strategies, we are not concerned about following these Ugandans who go abroad. If we have licenced companies, we licence them to take them out, why is that we do not require them to account to us? How long are these contracts when they are signed? Do you take out a girl when she is 12 or 14 and then you just let her be because she has gone to be a house girl? 

And like hon. Raphael Magyezi said, I want to ask, when are we going to start sending out people with skills rather than sending out house girls for goodness sake? Is it our children who should be in schools? When is the policy going to change? 

I am shocked that the ministry has been part of the human trafficking machinery for our people for all this time –(Interjections)– yes, because you have known that they are going out and you have done nothing about it. We are all aware, those issues were raised in the petition; we are all aware about the suffering of these people. They are denied food. Even those who go through licenced companies, their papers are taken away on arrival at the airport. They are denied food, beaten; they are raped, sodomised - all kinds of things! Some have died and been thrown away. They have not been able to return -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the hon. Jovah Kamateka for giving way. Through you, Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member is actually in addition to all those sufferings. Our people are meant to sign contracts, which oust the application of the laws of Uganda. They suffer injuries; they do not pay them and eventually when they get back to Uganda, they cannot sue because the law applicable is not the law of Uganda and the courts of Uganda do not have jurisdiction over those contracts. How are they protected?

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. Uganda needs answers as to why you have had this information and you have not acted. With this wide outcry of our people being taken out there and subjected to so much suffering.

5.02
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am even shocked that the minister has come on the Floor of Parliament to happily tell us how they are recruiting housemaids to go and suffer outside. 

This issue has come on this Floor a number of times including the Speaker herself, brought the issue of Ugandan suffering outside there. The situation is so bad. And you are here telling us about companies licenced to export Ugandans to go and suffer in these Arab countries. Now these companies are only interested in making money from these people. This is blood money and you are looking on -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Wamanga Wamai. Just to beef up you argument, Madam Speaker, for the last three months there is a girl who has been suffering in Kuwait. She has been ringing members of Parliament; she has rung me; she has also rung hon. Jack Sabiti saying she has been ringing the Ministry of Gender but people do not want to respond to her calls. I can give you the number of the girl. She is called Sophie. She is in Kuwait. She is raped every now and then and she keeps complaining. She has rung the Ministry of Gender but with no one being bothered about it. The number is +96565948204. She is called Sophie and she is in Kuwait. Every time she calls, she is crying. Sophie says she is being tormented, raped, overworked and no one at the Ministry of Gender has responded to her plight.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, colleague for that information. Madam Speaker, this government is not serious. I want to tell you that the Philippine Government has got more than one million Philippines working abroad but they take interest in the matters of their immigrant workers in those different countries. They negotiate with those countries on issues of workers’ rights. But here our workers go outside there, the passports are taken away from them - there are so many cases overall! You have never said anything.
 
Madam Speaker, I brought an issue of torture of these Ugandans -(Member timed out.) 

5.05
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. This issue was also handled by our committee and it was also heavily debated in this Parliament with very important information that I would have expected the ministry to have taken up, and really tried to help a girl like Sophie who is really suffering so much in Kuwait. It is a big concern to us as members of Parliament especially women because what she is undergoing is not good to hear about. You cannot imagine that a woman can be raped every night and being made to work day and night. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, in his presentation, the minister said there were 24 companies licensed and later they were banned. My concern is: Before these companies were banned, it seems there was nobody monitoring these companies. That is why some of these girls like Sophie ended up where they are. But also the minister told us that there is now a company called Saudi Manpower Solution Company, which is now recruiting and again it has subcontracted some other two to recruit people.

Madam Speaker, I find this as a problem because in a situation where a company is given a responsibility then again it goes on to subcontract - I remember the bicycles issue, which we have not solved as a country up to now, came as a result of a company being given contract to do and it goes again to subcontract. So, I do not know how far the ministry has gone to make sure that this company which has again subcontracted another is doing the best job for this country.

5.07
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope you will give me one extra minute because I have recent information for the minister.
 
Recently, the President was in Abu Dhabi and he met Ugandans there, but the cries and complaints that the President was bombarded with were really terrible. I did not just read the stories in the newspapers but I was there.

Madam Speaker, the operation starts from here. The 24 licensed agencies or companies you have mentioned honourable minister are not followed. Many of them take as much as Shs 10 million from these poor youth. They take about five and they say, “The rest you will pay slowly as you reach there” and then they confiscate the passports. When they reach there things become different and sometimes they decide to even abandon the passports and hide. 

The other thing, honourable minister, is that some of them have decided to organise themselves into associations wherever they are, and indeed you could use the opportunity to persuade them to do so, so that they use those associations to inform you on what is going on between the agencies and - (Member timed out.)

5.09
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we talk about housemaids as being proudly articulated by the minister, Uganda is going to face an exodus of about 300 medical doctors and some neurosurgeons. This was advertised and it is being coordinated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We are struggling to ensure that we retain as many medical doctors as possible in our health facilities. 

I just want to know whether the minister is aware about this exodus of qualified medical doctors to Trinidad and Tobago and what Government of Uganda is going to benefit out of it!

The second question that I want to ask is –

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, you are diverting us from the issue - you are moving to completely something different.

DR BAYIGGA: It is about labour –

THE SPEAKER: No, this was about the trafficking of Ugandans under the guise of employment.

DR BAYIGGA: Even this is trafficking of medical doctors.

THE SPEAKER: No. (Laughter)

5.11 
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I had the opportunity to travel with the Speaker to the IPU meeting through Dubai. When we were there, we interacted with the officials from our embassy. They explicitly told us that it is very impossible for any maid to be comfortable in the Arab world. They are taken as slaves, exploited and sodomised. The condition and environment is just impossible for a black person to work in the Arab countries as a maid.

Madam Speaker, we have made several reports to this House. I do not know why we cannot take the privilege of this moment and pronounce ourselves and ban the exportation of maids to the Arab countries. (Applause) Let us allow and experiment, like he is saying, on other people. Let us experiment with the drivers, security personnel but not the house maids!

Madam Speaker, I am pleading that today this House pronounces itself and bans the exportation of housemaids to the Arab world.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly what I asked the government to do when we came back. I was so traumatized by what I heard from our mission. And when I came back and I told your people – the minister - your colleague was here. Yes, motion.

5.13
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I want to move a motion without notice and I request that you grant it because this is a matter of very urgent importance. In our rules it is provided that the Speaker can allow a motion to be passed if he/she so feels in his/her opinion that it is urgent.

Madam Speaker, it seems we are living in an era where slave trade has been reintroduced, disguised as exportation of maids and other workers to different countries, especially the Arab countries. Modern slave trade has been defined and it has characteristics. Some of the characteristics listed here are: a person so taken is forced to work through mental or physical threats; that person is owned or controlled by an employer usually through mental or physical addict threat; the person is owned or controlled by an employer, usually through mental or physical abuse; the person is kept in a very dehumanising way;  that person is treated as a commodity or bought and sold as a property; and the person is physically constrained or has restriction placed on her or him over his freedom of movement.

Madam Speaker, the information the members have been giving to this House certifies that what is being done in Uganda is modern slave trade. And, it is so hurting that even government has licensed these slave trading companies. 

I, therefore, move, Madam Speaker, with your permission that this House resolves to freeze all issues concerning labour exportation, especially of maid, until the Ministry of Gender comes up with very clear guidelines of how these people are exported. 

Madam Speaker, I am moving this motion while knowing that most of the victims of this bad trade are women and young girls who are tricked into going to these foreign countries having been promised other jobs. Their passports are confiscated. They are owned by the employers because the companies sell them at a fee; this is slave trade, which cannot be allowed in this era! I so move and beg members that you support this motion that will freeze the exportation of our girls, especially to Arab countries. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Honourable members, it is seconded, with amendments? Okay, hon. Chrispus Ayena has seconded the motion - but we have debated this many times. Let us move quickly.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, with amendment that export of human beings be banned. I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable members, earlier on hon. Dr Lulume Bayiga was talking about the formal export of skilled labour; you cannot ban that. Let us concentrate on the domestic workers. 

But also add that we have had about six reports on this matter, in this House. And, we resolved that government should take an interest and also ensure that the necessary agreements are made for it to understand the conditions of where these maids go, the terms under which they go and how they are being paid. But on the question of the domestic workers, we want a total ban. I put the question that this House do adopt that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to get ready. Can I ask hon. Denis Obua to lay the trophies and then the minister will move his Bill. 

5.18
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament is aware that each year the East African Community organises, in partnership with the East African Legislative Assembly, the annual inter-parliamentary games for all the parliaments in the member states of the EAC. 

I am happy to report that for the four consecutive years, Parliament of Uganda lifted the trophy and was declared the champion for this year’s Inter-parliamentary Games held in Arusha, Tanzania under the notion of: Widening, Deepening and Tightening –(Applause)- the EAC Integration Process. 

I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of our team Uganda, to lay on Table the trophy won by Parliament of Uganda for the record of this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

Parliament of Uganda also scooped the Golden Boot Award, and our hon. Nsereko was declared the top scorer in the tournament for this year. I also beg to lay on Table, our Golden Boot for Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, we also participated in other disciplines like athletics where Parliament of Uganda – men and women combined – emerged the overall winner. All our members of Parliament were decorated with medals and nothing else: Gold Medals, not Silver. 

We were unfortunate that the Netball Tournament could not take place because there are some countries that flouted the rules and regulations that were earlier on set, and it was suspended. We are optimistic that next year, our team will be participating. But, overall, we participated and did our best to represent Uganda and we want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for all the support this Parliament rendered to our team. It was only Parliament of Rwanda that did not participate this year, but all other parliaments participated. I want to thank you. 

We defeated Parliament of Kenya at 2-0 and Parliament of Tanzania at 2-1 in finals. We had a draw with Parliament of Burundi. We also defeated the East African Legislative Assembly at 2-0. These are now the properties of Parliament of Uganda, which we have won for the last four consecutive years. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Denis Obua. We congratulate the Parliamentary Sports Team. We also congratulate the winner of the Golden Boot. We congratulate the athletes for their wonderful performance. We congratulate the netball team for participation and look forward to better results. Thank you very, very much.

BILLs
SECOND READING
 
THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

5.22
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” be read for the second time. I beg to move, and I lay on Table, the Certificate of Financial Implications, which we do have.

THE SPEAKER: I thought it came at the first reading? We have it.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We have it and for emphasis, I beg to move again.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of State for Gender, the Minister of State Internal Affairs, hon. Mutabazi, hon. Elly Tumwine, hon. Vincent Ssempijja, hon. Kenneth Lubogo and hon. Jovah Kamateeka. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, the Bill was presented to Parliament and read for the first time on 30 September 2014. The Bill was referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.

The Bill seeks to harmonise and consolidate the law on registration of persons by removing duplication in the registration of persons. 

At present, Madam Speaker, the registration of persons is carried out under various laws. These laws essentially provide for the collection of the same information which results in duplication of efforts thereby causing a strain on the national budget, fatigue on the citizens, wastage of time and money, disintegration in the implementation of government programmes. 

The removal of duplication of the registration of persons will create linkage in the institutions collecting information with the ultimate purpose of doing away with ultimate registration and bring several benefits to this country.

Also due to the passage of time, some aspects of the laws dealing with the registration of persons have become outdated especially in light of the present day policies, international obligations and technological developments. Hence the need to produce a new Bill that harmonises and consolidates the law on the registration of persons in Uganda that puts it on a basis fit for the 21st Century. Madam Speaker -(Interruptions)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules provide that before the Bill is read for the first time, and the minister brings it to be read for the first time, a certificate of financial implication must be there. Madam Speaker, on the 30th September 2014, the first reading was done and today, I am shocked, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are just taking us backwards. It was given first reading in September and it came with the certificate and that is why I was telling him not to lay another certificate.

MR NZOGHU: There was no certificate, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, I could not have sent a Bill to the committee without a certificate.

MR NZOGHU: It was not there, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No! 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I thank you for your guidance. Madam Speaker and my colleagues, in Part One of the Bill, it deals with the application and purpose of the Act and interpretation of words and phrases under this Bill. Since this information is on the iPads, I just mentioned a few of the highlights of what is in Part One. 

This Bill will be harmonising and consolidating the law on registration of persons. It will establish a central registration body for the registration of persons in Uganda. It will establish a National Identification Register of all persons in Uganda and it will provide for access and use of the information contained in the National Identification Register.

Part Two of the Bill is about National Registration and Identification Authority. In Clause 4 of the Bill, it establishes a National Registration and Identification Authority. Among other things that it provides, it will create, manage, maintain and operate national identification register. It will register citizens and non-citizens of Uganda who are lawfully residents in Uganda. It will register births and deaths and it will also verify and authenticate information relating to the registration and identification of persons.

In Part Three of the Bill, it is about the staff of the Authority. In accordance with clause 17, the Authority shall have an Executive Director, who shall be responsible for the day to day operations of the administration of the Authority. Under Clause 20, the board may appoint registration officers and other officers and staff of the Authority as may be necessary for the proper and efficient performance of functions of the Authority.

In Part four of the Bill, it is about finances. The funds of the Authority will include money appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Authority, grants, gifts and donations from the government or other sources made with the approval of the minister and the minister responsible for finance. 

Revenue earned from the activities of the Authority under the Act: Under Clause 22, the Authority must give regards to sound financial principles in its operation. According to clause 28(1), the Authority is required to keep proper books of accounts and all records relating to transactions and the affairs of the Authority.

Part five of the Bill: compulsory registration. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, under clause 29, it is compulsory for all persons in Uganda to register including citizens of Uganda, residents in or outside Uganda and in appropriate cases, alien residents issued with a permit, certificate of pass under the Ugandan Citizenship and Immigration Control Act. 
Under 29(2)(a), it is a duty of a parent or a guardian or other person responsible for supervision or welfare of a person below the age of 18 years, to take steps to cause the person to be registered. According to clause 29(2)(b), it is the duty of a guardian or other person responsible for the supervision or welfare of a person incapacitated by illness, old age, or other reasons for the person to ensure that person is registered.

Clause 30 of the Bill provides for the information required for the registration which is set out in Schedule 3. In Schedule 3, the following observes information required at the point of registration: the name, date of birth, information relating to citizenship and details of such citizenship, information relating to sex, marital status, details of the spouse where applicable, details of parents, education and profession, occupation, address, passport number where applicable, a personal biometric, information including finger print or any other biometric information prescribed by the minister.

Under clause 32, the Authority shall cancel the registration of a person where a person has ceased to be a citizen of Uganda; the registration is based on inaccurate or incomplete information; the registration was obtained by fraud, false presentation, bribery or deceit.

Under clause 6, part six of the Bill, the registration centres are responsibilities of the station officers. According to clause 33, the Authority shall by notice in a gazette, designate registration centres for the purpose of registration, but the Authority may adapt other means that it considers appropriate to access persons to be registered.

Under clause 34, the official premises of Uganda Missions shall serve as registration centres for the purposes of this Act through the board, may designate other locations outside Uganda as registration centres after consultation with the minister responsible for Foreign Affairs.

Under part seven of the Bill on National Identification Register, clause 37 establishes a national identification register. According to 37(2), the register shall be maintained as an electronic data base. Under clause 39, the Authority is required to continuously update the information in the national register. 

According to clause 40, the information in the register may be used for several purposes, including: for issuing national identification cards, and alien identification cards, issuing passports, immigration and passport control, national security purposes, monitoring money laundering, and human trafficking, taxation purposes, law enforcement, public administration, providing social services including social security services, health, education, and welfare benefit and facilitating the provision of information to a person entitled to receive it. 

According to clause 41, a ministry, department, or agency of Government or any other institution providing a public service shall require a person accessing the service to produce a national identification number or national identification card or alien identification number or alien identification card.

Under part Eight of the Bill on National identification cards and related provisions, Clause 44(4), a national identification card is a valid for ten years from the date of issue. 

Part Nine: Offences and penalties 

This part sets out the offences and penalties for contravention of the provisions of this Bill. For instance, under clause 51, “a person who does not register in accordance with this Act, who gives false information, who makes a false statement when providing information for an entry, who fraudulently obtains for use of national identification cards or aleins identification card, who forges an identity document for the purposes of registration or tampers with the register by causing unauthorised modification of information in the register or preventing or delaying the retrieval of relevant information in illegible form from a computer use commits an offence.”

Miscellaneous 

This part deals with miscellaneous matters including protection of members and employees of the Authority from personal liability, review decision of Authority and appeal amendment of schedules, power of the minister to make regulations and repeal un-transitional law provisions.
Madam Speaker, I beg to move the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Person, 2014” to be now read for the second time. I thank you. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank the minster for justifying the motion. Can I now invite the chair of the committee to give us a report?

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Before I present the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Registration of Person’s Bill, 2014, I beg to lay two documents on Table: a copy of the report and minutes of the committee meetings regarding this Bill.

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Registration of Person’s Bill 2014.

Introduction 

The Registration of Person’s Bill, 2014 was read for the first time in Parliament on 30 September 2014 by the Minister of Internal Affairs. It was subsequently referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for scrutiny and consideration in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we gave the background to this Bill, which the minister has already gone through and I beg that I skip that.

Status quo 

Madam Speaker, at present, individual institutions like the National Citizenship and Immigrations Board, National Identification and Technology Authority Uganda, Electoral Commission, Uganda Revenue Authority and Uganda Bureau of Statistics among other government agencies have data bases to use in fulfilment of their different mandate. This has often resulted in duplication of effort, wastage of time, resources and most cases unduly inconveniencing the public and yet none of these data bases can complement each other.

In a bid to cure the above, Cabinet in June 2013 directed the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to chair a multi-sectoral committee composed of the Minister of Internal Affairs, Attorney General, Minister of Local Government, Registrar General, Registration Services Bureau, Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, Electoral Commission, Executive Director of the Uganda Bureau of Statistics to harmonise and coordinate the implementation of the National Identity Card Project and the National Population and Housing Census. This culminated in to the setting up of a coordination committee to this effect. 

Coordination committee 

I am not going to read through that. I request members to read through.

Steering committee 

It was a multi-sectoral technical team drawn from all the participating institutions which assisted them to develop a strategy for the implementation of the National Security Information Systems project, which was presented to Cabinet and approved in November 2013.

In order to rationalise, streamline and pull human resource infrastructural and financial resources for the timely implementation of the registration and enumeration exercises within a harmonised legal framework an MOU was entered into by all participating MDAs signed by permanent secretaries and executive officers of the following stake holder institutions: the Minister of Information and Communication Technology; the Minister of Internal Affairs; the Minister of Local Government; the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; the National Identification and Technology Authority Uganda; Uganda Bureau of Statistics; the Electoral Commission; the Uganda Registration of Services Bureau; and the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control.

The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014

Further efforts included a policy decision by Government to create a specific institutional framework within which management of the mandate being created under the Registration of Person’s Bill, 2014 and a National Identification Register, a centre for which all institutions requiring information may access and use the information would be established. This is the spirit of this Bill.

Objectives of the Bill 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, the minister presented this and I request to go to part four.

National Identification Card 
Among the key products of the National Identification and Registration Authority are a National Identification Card and an alien’s identification card to be issued to citizens and aliens in the country respectively.

Given that in the East African sub-region, Uganda remains the only country that is yet to issue a National Identification Card to its citizens, this Bill demonstrated the country’s commitment towards the fast tracking of the realisation of that objective.

The issuance of a unique National Identification Number and an Identification Card to every person in the National Register will have the following major advantages: 

    i) ID cards associate a host of information pertaining to a particular person. This includes information used to establish identity such as names, sex and occupation and the information used to authenticate this data such as the registration number. This card can also be scanned and searched on a national data base wherever need arises such as during the voting exercise; 

    ii) A National Identity Card serves as the distinguishing feature for the general population from illegal residence. This is also a security benefit and it highly depends on the quality of data input into the system. If an ID card system is formed with bio metric information and real time monitoring, it can also serve as surveillance and authorisation system;

    iii) The issuance of a National Identification Card is going to streamline the country’s travel documents within and outside the region. Previous terror attacks in the region have been blamed on Uganda’s failure to streamline its National Identity Card Registration System and travel documents. Therefore, with the issuance of a National ID, Uganda will be able to coordinate with other countries in the East African region in the fight against terrorism;

    iv) Further, there is need to address the rampant crime within the country by issuing a national ID to every citizen. ID cards will help law enforcement to combat the rampant identity theft in the country and to check illegal employment and ghost workers on the government pay roll; and
 
    v) The private sector contribution to development: With the issuance of the National ID, the local private sector and foreign investors will continue to initiate even more critical investments in the country once Government is able to provide important demographic, economic and social statistical data about its citizenry. 

Madam Speaker, part 5 is methodology, with your permission in a bid to save time, I would request that we do not go through this methodology.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, members can read it.

Stakeholders who submitted on this Bill 

Madam Speaker, one of those stakeholders was the Uganda Registration Services Bureau as a key stakeholder (URSB). The URSB was invited to meet the committee to give their views on the Bill since it was going to affect some of the provisions in the Uganda Registrations Services Act. 

The URSB informed the committee that:
 
    i) the bureau participated in the drafting of the registration of persons Bill 2014 and URSB was granted representation to the committees of ministerial, of policy, steering, mass enrolment, ICT, publicity and legal committees of the National Security and Information Systems project;

    ii) Consequently, URSB participated in the NSIF project based on an institutional memorandum of understanding signed by participating MDAs for the mass enrolment exercise and each registration centre at the parish level has been equipped with kits to register citizens particulars, births and deaths inclusive; and 

    iii) The URSB was therefore in full support of the Bill in its present form as it was to provide an institutional and implementation framework for the continuous registration of citizens and non-citizens after the NSIS project elapsed. 

National Information – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, I think for those others, just read the subject and then give us the position whether they supported or not. The rest, Members can read.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you for that guidance. The National Information Technology Authority, NITA-U, indicated to the committee that they got involved in the process of making this Bill and they do not object to any part of the Bill and they support it in its present form. 

Madam Speaker, 6.3 is Electoral Commission. The committee had a lot of debate on this and it even led to some dissenting voices and I request that I read it as it is. Article 61 (e) of the Constitution and Section 18 of the Electoral Commission Act enjoin the commission to compile, maintain, revive and update the voters’ register. 

During the consideration of the Bill, there were concerns from different stakeholders that the Bill would compromise the independence of the Electoral Commission. The committee invited the Electoral Commission to give their views on the Bill, the Electoral Commission presented the following opinions on the Bill: 

    i) Clause 40 (2) of the Bill does not contradict Article 61 (e) of the Constitution because both provisions do not restrict the source of information from which to compile data for the purposes of complying with the foregoing provisions; 

    ii) The Bill would not compromise the independence of the commission as enshrined in Article 62 as its independence is in the performance of its functions. However, as guided by the same Article 62 of the Constitution, the Electoral Commission can, on its own instance, collaborate with other agencies in the performance of its functions. This opinion was concretised by the Attorney-General;

    iii) Both the Constitution and the electoral enabling laws prescribe for citizenship as a criterion for supporting nominations, voting and contesting for elective positions. The Electoral Commission further noted that clause 42 of the bill seeks to cure this anomaly given that it is not the mandate of the commission to pronounce itself on citizenship and has been relying on the public during the display process to read the voters register of non-citizens and the underage among other cases; and

    iv) The spirit of the Bill is in consonance with the mandate of the Electoral Commission, which is to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote do register and exercise their right to vote. 

National Citizenship and Immigration Board

Madam Speaker, you remember that NCIB presented some petition to you and given that, I request that I again read this verbatim. 

The National Citizenship and Immigration Board petitioned the Speaker about the intended Bill, seeking to block the enactment into law of the Registration of Person’s Bill, 2014. The NCIB raised the following concerns that were premised around a perceived contradiction between some of the Bill’s provisions and those of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

On the contradiction between National Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66, the 1995 Constitution and Clause 59 of the Bill: the board informed the committee that the registration of persons was already a mandate of the board under Cap 66. 

The board argued that the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 was therefore seeking to usurp the above function by way of repealing the NCIB functions under section 7 of Cap 66; that Clause 59 of the Bill contradicts the Constitution and Cap 66. 

The Bill seeks to create a parallel board. The board further informed the committee that clause 13 (2) (b) of the Bill seeks to create a new board that shall advise the minister on the registration and identification of persons, related policy and strategic issues. NCIB here questioned whether the minister has powers to appoint a board to carryout functions that have already been given to a constitutional board appointed by the President under Article 16 of the Constitution duly approved by Parliament.

Operationalizing the existing National Registration Secretariat as opposed to the creation a new authority - Clause 4 (2) of the Bill provides for the creation of an Authority while according to the boards interpretation, the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66, (a) 31 created a national registration secretariat that has never been tested to date. The NCIB opined that the National Registration Secretariat should be operationalised for the purpose of registering persons and issuance of the National Identification numbers and National Identity Cards instead of enacting a new law and creating an Authority. 

On hierarchy, the Bill in clause 8 proposes a reporting mechanism whereas the board envisaged reporting directly to the minister. The board further noted that the Bill was silent on its relationship to the current board from which it is purporting to take away some functions provided for under Section 7 of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Act Cap 66.  The board noted that the Bill is therefore creating a parallel body to the existing board. 

The board also noted that mere cooperation with other agencies has no legal necessity and urgency to create a parallel Bill or law to the existing National Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66. They therefore, concluded that such a provision only called for an amendment of Cap 66 to insert the necessary additions. 

The board further informed the committee that the current Bill was an extract of particular provisions of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66 and that repealing section 59 of Cap 66 is therefore unnecessary. Noteworthy however, is the fact that the board was not unanimous on this matter. 

In view of the above, the National Citizenship and Immigration Board was therefore not in full support of the Bill.

The Minister of Internal Affairs 

The committee interacted with the Minister of Internal Affairs, who made the following submissions:
Memorandum of understanding amongst participating MDAs. The Minister informed the committee that the purpose of the MOU was to establish a legal framework of cooperation amongst participating MDAs, which agreed to rationalise, streamline and pool human infrastructural and financial resources for the timely implementation of the registration and enumeration exercises within a harmonised legal frame work. 

The MOU, which guided the framework of cooperation provided for: i) the rationalisation of the use of human, financial infrastructural and other resources used in the registration process:
 
ii) The centralised data collection, acquisition, access, use and management; 
iii) The harmonisation of the registration and enumeration processes; 
iv) Specification of the common data element for all registrations. 
v) The governance structure for implementation which is being used. 

The minister informed the committee that the above framework informed the policy context that had shaped the thinking of a multi-sectoral team coordinated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and hence the spirit of the registration of persons Bill 2014. 

Harmonisation of the legal framework

The minister explained to the committee that a technical team appointed by the steering committee examined the roles of the various institutions that collect personal data and found that there were various laws in Uganda that authorise the collection of similar information. 

The current laws requiring personal information are: 

    1) Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66
    2) Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act Cap 210
    3) Electoral Commission Act Cap 140
    4) Traffic and Road Safety Act Cap 36
    5) Registration for tax purposes
    6) Registration for other services that is opening a bank account, enrolling into public and private institutions of learning etcetera.

In view of the above, the minister enumerated that a multi-sectoral team recommended that in order to reconcile the various mandates, rationalise and harmonise the collection of personal information, there is need to amend the law to create one collection centre and establish linkages for other institutions to be able to access and use the information collected.

The minister noted that the principles of the Bill were established with the objective of harmonising and consolidating the laws relating to registration of persons and establishing a central register of information collected to be accessed and used by all other institutions. These principles were developed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and submitted to all MDAs for comments and input.

He informed the committee that with those foregoing principles and in accordance with Article 111(2) of the Constitution, Cabinet took a policy decision to create a task specific institutional framework responsible for managing the mandate being created under the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 through which a national identification register would be established from which all institutions requiring information may access and use the information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please hold on a bit. Honourable members, earlier on, there was an allegation that the certificate of financial implications had never been laid but I have got here the Hansard of Tuesday 30th September at 3.13 p.m. when the minister read the Bill for the first time and he had a certificate of financial implications. This is the Hansard.

I want to announce the presence of citizens from Panyolo parish in Gadumire Sub-county of Kaliro represented by hon. Kenneth Lubogo and hon. Munaaba. You are welcome. You can proceed.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

For NCIB participation in the drafting of the Bill, the minister informed the committee that before the approval of the draft Bill by Cabinet, the Bill was shared with all institutions including NCIB and DCIC as well as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Following its approval by Cabinet, the Bill was published in the Gazette on 19th July 2014. 

That given the above, it is evident that the NCIB has had participation and full knowledge of the contents of the Bill, contrary to the impression created in the petition letter to the Speaker.

Justification for the Authority 

The minister informed the committee that clause (4) of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014, which provides for the creation of the National Identification and Registration Authority, was a decision informed by the following objectives:

    i) To support the policy directive that Government should have one point of contact for registration of persons in Uganda.

    ii) To designate one entity whose sole and/or core purpose is the registration of persons and authentication of identity information. The minister informed the committee that countries, which had implemented it this way had gained considerable efficiency and effectiveness in identifying persons.

    iii) Lessons learnt and best practices from the benchmarking studies undertaken in various countries like Ghana, Botswana, South Africa, UAE, Kenya, Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Malaysia and South Korea, among others. A key learning from these studies was that there are separate legal and institutional frameworks for managing immigration related activities and the registration of persons mandate. 

    iv) Notable from these best practices, the two institutions all fell under the supervision of the Ministry of Internal Affairs or its equivalent. That the above issues had informed Government’s proposal to amend the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66 and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act Cap 210 so as to consolidate, streamline and harmonise the registration of persons in Uganda under a single established Authority.

He informed the committee that when the Bill is passed, the NCIB and/or DCIC will continue the implementation of some of their other activities like issuing passports, permits, passes and various immigration facilities and managing entry and exit of travellers to and from the country. The Authority, on the other hand, will for purposes of supervision and the day to day management of its mandate, have its own board, which will be a body corporate and independent of NCIB.  

Explanation for the policy change

The minister informed the committee that under the new era of public manage -

THE SPEAKER: Do we really need the minister’s policy change at this stage? Maybe the important one is (g). If we could have (g) recorded, Members can read the rest.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you for that guidance, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, let me read 6.5.6 (e). This policy choice was also informed by management terms and that a scenario where the DCIC would be responsible for all the above activities including registration of citizens would be neither efficient nor effective and that it is no wonder that little had been achieved by Government under that arrangement. The new policy choice would therefore help Government achieve distributed governance.

Madam Speaker and members, 6.6 was the Attorney-General on the Bill and I request to read this verbatim because it informed the decisions of the committee. The committee sought the legal opinion of the Attorney-General on certain provisions of the Bill and Articles 16, 20, 61 and 62 of the Constitution and the Uganda Citizenship Control Act Cap 66 and the Electoral Commission Act Cap 140.

The Attorney-General, through a letter to the committee dated 25 November 2014 with that reference, informed the committee that - Madam Speaker, I also want to report here that after sending this letter, he came and spoke to the letter.

6.1 on Article 16 of the Constitution that Parliament shall by law prescribe the functions of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board. The letter reads thus: 

“The Constitution does not set out the functions of the board. Indeed Article 16 of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall by law prescribe the functions of the board.”

Article 79 of the Constitution gives Parliament the power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 was introduced in that spirit. 

The Attorney-General therefore included that since the Constitution does not set out the functions of the board but gives that power to Parliament; to prescribe them by law, then the issue of the functions of the board was not specifically a constitutional matter.

6.2 on whether clause 5 of the Bill violates Cap 66, the Bill seeks to give two of the current functions of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board to the Authority to be established in clause (4) of the same Bill, that is, registering and issuing national identity cards to citizens of Uganda and registering and issuing identity cards to aliens.

The Attorney-General opined that this was not unconstitutional because, “The functions of the board are prescribed by an Act of Parliament Cap 66 and not by the Constitution.” This means that Parliament, which prescribed the functions of the board, also has the authority to repeal, revoke, receipt, cancel, replace, add to or vary the functions given to the board.

b) That the Registration of Persons Bill was a proposal by Government to Parliament to act within its authority under Article 79(1) of the Constitution to enact laws for the development of Uganda by varying the functions of the board in order to streamline the registrations of persons in Uganda.

The Attorney-General specifically reminded the committee of the Act, which merged the functions of the Broadcasting Council and those of the Uganda Communications Commission to remove duplication in the licencing of radio and telecommunications providers; the Bill and Articles 59, 60, 61, and Sections 18 and 19 of Cap 140. 

Clause 40(2) of the Bill does not compromise the independence of the Electoral Commission because clause 40(2) does not require the Electoral Commission to use the information contained in the register proposed to be established by the Bill. However, the clause merely provides that the Electoral Commission may use the data in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ register. 

I quote the Attorney-General, “There was no contradiction between clause 40(2) of the Bill and Article 59 and Section 19 of Cap 140. Whereas the Electoral Commission may use the data in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ register, there is no doubt that a person who wishes to vote must still register with the Electoral Commission in the manner prescribed by law or determined by the Electoral Commission.” 

The Attorney-General concluded that after reviewing the above provision, his opinion was that clause 40(2) of the Bill is not unconstitutional merely because it grants the Electoral Commission the discretion to use the data in the register.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Madam Speaker, I think I will not go into the details of this; Members can read it. However, allow me to read (f) because there was a contradiction that there was no money in the MTEF for functionalising the activities of the Authority. 

So in (f), at the end of the on-going National Identification and Registration Project, the Ministry of Internal Affairs expects to have saved Shs 30 billion. These are the funds that are going to be utilised in the setting up of the Authority during the transition period. 

Madam Speaker, I have a letter to this effect, which was written by Ministry of Finance to the committee indicating that they would provide this money to operationalise the Authority once created by this Bill and once passed into law. 

Committee observations and recommendations

Having internalised, analysed and met with various stakeholders, the committee hereby makes the following observations:

    1. The Bill intends to cure the existing duplicity, time and resource wastage by individual government institutions currently collecting information on persons in Uganda by creating a single authoritative centre charged with the harmonisation and coordination of the collection, safeguard and update of the comprehensive National Information Register that will cater for all the different institutions’ data requirement.

    2. The committee observes that the Bill is going to create a National Identification and Registration Authority. This has been necessitated by a policy shift by Cabinet aimed at amalgamating all the government agencies involved in the registrations of persons in the country. This will result in avoidance of duplicity, minimisation of resource wastage, enhanced harmonisation and coordination in the collection, update and use of data relating to persons in Uganda. 

The committee therefore recommends the creation of the Authority since it is going to cure the problem of duplicity and enhance coordination of the collection and maintenance of personal data.

    3. The committee noted the concerns of some stakeholders that the Bill was violating the provisions of Article 62 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Electoral Commission Act Cap 140 Sections 16 and 19. 

The committee observed that the Bill is however intended to establish a central registration point for information on persons in Uganda within a legal framework through which various Government MDAs will access and use information from the National Information Register for carrying out their different mandates.

    4. Further, concerns were raised that clause 40(2) of the Bill violates provisions of the Electoral Commission Act. However, the committee observed that clause 40(3) also provides for other government MDAs to access and use the register information. The committee discussed clause 40(2) of the Bill, which had been initially thought to compromise the independence of the Electoral Commission that derives its mandate from Article 59 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The committee further observed that this argument does not hold since clause 40(2) does not mandatorily require the Electoral Commission’s usage of the information in the national register by way of obligation but rather by way of resource and according to its own discretion.

    5. While the certificate of financial implications that accompanied the Bill indicated that the funding requirements were not in the budget of the MTEF period, the projected NTR, which shall be generated by the Authority could be used as a source of funding for its activities. 

However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clarified that the Authority was going to use the Shs 30 billion surplus from the National I.D project to kick start its operations. The Minister of Finance has tasked the Minister of Internal Affairs to submit the Authority’s 2015/2016 work plan for consideration in the budget process of financial year 2015/2016 as the Authority generates its NTR. The NTR arising from the provision of the Authority’s services shall be collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority on behalf of Government and will be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

    6. The committee observed that clause 21(2) proposes that all fees charged for services rendered under this Act by the Authority and civil fines and penalties expressed in monetary terms and recovered by the Authority under this Act shall be retained by the Authority and used to offset the cost of administering this Act. 

The committee recommends that a portion of the fund should be retained by the Authority and access to the fund be after submission of detailed work plans and procurement plans to the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development before the Authority can access the fund upon appropriation by Parliament.

    7. The committee noted that whereas the mandate to register persons in the country is held by the National Citizenship and Immigration Board, the enactment into law of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 would repeal part of the constitutional mandate of the board. 

The committee noted that Article 15 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that Parliament shall prescribe the functions of the board. Parliament is also within its constitutional powers to amend existing laws in which case the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 would be an amendment to the existing laws on registration of persons in the country. 

The committee further observed that other functions such as issuance of visas, travel documents and the control of borders will remain the mandate of the board, a function huge enough for the DCIC to execute.

    8. Clauses 23, 24 and 25 of the Bill, give powers to the Authority to operate bank accounts, to borrow and invest surplus funds on the approval of the minister respectively. 

The committee observed that the mandate to open and operate bank accounts is vested with the Accountant General according to the Public Finance Act and the powers to borrow and invest surplus funds is vested with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committee recommends that the Accountant General should be consulted when opening bank accounts and financial guidelines on opening and the maintaining of such accounts should be in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be consulted on borrowing and investment of surplus funds.

    9. The committee further observes that the function of registration of births and deaths, that was under the Birth and Registration Act Cap 309 has been transferred to the National Registration and Identification Authority. By virtue of this, the Birth and Death Registration Act is substantially affected. 

The committee hence recommends that the provisions regarding registering birth and death under the Birth and Death Registration Act are transferred to Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 since it seeks to consolidate registration of persons and consequently repeal the Birth and Death Registration Act.

Madam Speaker, the committee therefore recommends that the Bill entitled “Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” be passed into law, subject to amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I also beg to report that there is a minority report attached to this major report. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Can I invite the movers of the minority report to make their presentation?

6.15
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the minority report on the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 in accordance with Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. This minority report is signed by four members of the committee and the main report is signed by 10 members of the committee. This shows that a big proportion of the committee agrees with the view that has been read by the chairperson.

Madam Speaker, our areas of dissent are the following:

1) In our view, the Bill is unconstitutional in its current form. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda establishes a Board called the National Citizenship and Immigration Board in Article 16 of the Constitution. This Bill, that is now being read for the second time, sets to repeal section 7(1) (a) and (e) of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66. Therefore, the Bill takes away the name and existence of the board as provided for under the Constitution.

There is a very clear principle of law ejusdem generis that provisions of the law must be read in totality and in context. As a committee, therefore, many of us disagreed with certain aspects of the opinion of the Attorney General. For instance, he referred to several law bodies that were merged: he referred to the Communications Commission, to the Uganda Broadcasting Council but these are not constitutional bodies. These are just bodies that were established by law but the National Citizenship and Immigration Board is a constitutional body. 

Madam Speaker, Article 2(2) of the Constitution of Uganda states that if any other law is inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail. In the case of Nsimbe Holdings Limited versus the Attorney General and the Inspectorate of Government Constitutional Petition number 2 of 2006, the Constitutional Court held that under Article 2 of the Constitution, any law or an Act of Parliament that contravenes the Constitution is void to the extent of the contravention.

This Bill, if passed by repealing Section 7 (1) of the Act that I have already referred to, which states that the functions of the Board shall include:

a) Registering and issuing national identity cards to citizens of Uganda, and (e) Registering and issuing identity cards to aliens, which are in line with Article 16 of the Constitution and the National Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66 passed in fulfilment of that constitutional provision; the repeal of such functions renders a constitutional body dead. 

Therefore, in respect of an already existing constitutional board, we propose that the Parliament instead amends the title of this Bill to read, the Uganda Citizenship and the Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2014. In effect, we shall be bringing the law in tandem with a board that has been established by the Constitution.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, another area of dissent was on the issue of certificate of financial implications. Under Rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure, a certificate of financial implication that certifies that the Bill has been examined under Section 10 of the Budget Act - of course now we are amending this, is a key requirement that must be laid with the Bill. However in respect to Registration of Persons Bill, the certificate of financial implications that should have been laid with the Bill has never been seen by the committee.

We know very well that one of our colleagues wrote to the Clerk and we have attached that letter as appendix one to this minority report. This letter dated 24th is signed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. He wrote to the Clerk asking for a certificate of financial implication and I can read the letter as it is brief.

The letter is dated 24th October 2014 addressed to the Clerk to Parliament and was received on 24th October 2014. 

“Certificate of financial implication in respect of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014

I write in reference to Rule 107 (1) and (2) in regard to the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is currently considering. 

As a shadow Minister of the Internal Affairs and member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee, I am requesting your office to avail me a copy of a certificate of financial implications that is signed by the Minister of Finance for the above mentioned Bill. I look forward to your positive response. Thank you, 
Muwanga Kivumbi, MP, Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs.”

Madam Speaker, this certificate of financial implication has never been received and while in the committee, a document purported to be a certificate of financial implication, was photocopied and given to Members. However, on close scrutiny of this certificate and in comparison with other certificates of financial implications on the other Bills that are before Parliament and on file in the records, the purported certificate raises serious grave concerns and threatens the integrity of this institution of Parliament.

It is a letter that is not dated and was not received by any official of Parliament. Madam Speaker, you said that during the first reading, something was tabled here but that is what we are questioning and that is why the minister was trying to bring another one here. If he was very clear that he had presented a certificate of financial implications, why is he now trying to table another document here? That means that there are a lot of fraudulent activities in this area.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, how do you explain the Hansard? I read you – (Interjections)- no, there cannot be a forgery when I am sitting here. I read out what was said in the Hansard on the 30th of September.   
  
DR LYOMOKI: Yes, but when we scrutinised the document, which we are talking about, we had questions with it and that is why we need to - 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you might say you have issues but to say that it is a forgery, no!

DR LYOMOKI: We have issues with it, Madam Speaker and that is why we needed to scrutinise that document, which was laid and this one, which is being laid now to see whether it is one and the same document. We really had issues with the other one and that is why one of our colleagues wrote to the Clerk asking for a signed and dated certificate because the one, which was circulated was not dated and the signature looked photocopied so we had issues with this. 

Therefore, we need to scrutinise even this one and compare it with the one that has already been – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think this borders and touches on the integrity of this House. If we are talking about a certificate of financial implications, which is a requirement of the law and from the Hansard we have something called a certificate of financial implications - You know when someone lays something on Table, it does not go to the Speaker’s chair. 

Is it not procedurally correct therefore, for us to look at the two documents; the one that was presented on that date and ascertain whether we are talking about one and the same document and satisfy ourselves that the document reflected in the Hansard is dated unlike the one presented by my honourable colleague, which bears no date and which is not received so that we satisfy ourselves as we proceed that we have the correct document? 

If the minister was still standing here, I would have asked him the motive of attempting - maybe for purposes of courtesy, I will not use the word “smuggle” but why the minister was attempting to present – (Interruption)- my colleague would know that in procedure we do not receive information - so that we ascertain with clarity the contents of either documents and if we are talking about one and the same document, we satisfy ourselves that we have the correct document. I beg to seek your procedural clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You know, I did not allow the minister to bring a second certificate because as far as I am concerned, and I go by my Hansard, he brought a certificate here; that is what I know. That is why I did not allow him to bring another one; there is no other one as far as I am concerned. You cannot look at what is not available. That certificate is not part of our records. I stopped him because we had already had a certificate.

MR SSEGGONA: With your permission, Madam Speaker, the minister attempted to bring something called a certificate yet we already had one on the Hansard, which for reasons of our procedure and for good reasons, was not transmitted from the Table to the Speaker. There is a question as to what was motivating my honourable senior colleague to bring another certificate at the wrong time anyway. Now questions are being put that what we had, or what Members have, is not signed and the date is an integral part of a certificate because it touches on the date when the Bill was presented. 

We would seek to know; at the time of presenting the Bill, was that certificate presented to us as reflected in the Hansard? Dated? Is it the same document that the colleague presenting the minority report is carrying? If it is not, which one is the correct document and what do we do with the wrong document that is being referred to in the proceedings of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, can you tell us what was sent to your committee because I assumed we had a certificate, which came with the Bill to your committee?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. We received the Bill with a certificate of financial implications and when we received the certificate, as a committee we scrutinised it and we had issues with it. We requested the Minister of Finance to come and appear before the committee and indeed the minister came. When he came, he made the clarifications we needed and after making those clarifications, because our concern was about lack of funds in MTEF yet if we passed this Bill into law, the Authority will need money to carry out its functions. 
 
Madam Speaker, the minister, while appearing before us, indicated that they have Shs 30 billion they can provide to the Authority –(Interjections)- but I am clarifying –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the questions raised on the floor with respect to the certificate of financial implications are clear and specific. The committee conducts business for and on behalf of this House. They raised questions and she says the questions were answered. By proceeding without informing us about those questions they had put - because a certificate of financial implications is a self-contained document; it needs no oral supplementation. By not telling us those questions, which were clarified, is the Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: What were the issues you wanted to know from the minister relating to that certificate?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. When I looked at the certificate and let me read it verbatim, “The funding requirement is not in the budget over the MTEF period. However, the projected NTRs, which shall be generated by the Authority, shall be used as a source of funding for its activities.” Then the question was –(Interjections)- Allow me to submit, please.

Madam Speaker, the question was, if we pass this Bill into law, where is the Authority going to get money to operate? When the minister came, he clarified this to us. He said that they have Shs 30 billion that the Authority can use. 

As a committee, we went ahead and required the minister to put this in writing. Indeed the minister wrote to me, the chairperson of the committee, indicating that they will be able to find Shs 25 billion to operationalise the Authority. I photocopied this and gave a copy of this opinion to the minister and this is what the minister was laying this afternoon. It is only that he did not indicate that it is an addendum. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, a certificate of financial implications takes all those issues that my honourable colleague and sister is talking about. The very fact that they would have to summon the minister to explain, confirms that there was no certificate of financial implications. To the extent that you need the minister to come and tell you verbally or supplement anything with a letter that we will get money from source a, b, c, d is a confirmation that there is no certificate of financial implications. In other words, that the Executive is not committing itself to funding and financing the operations under the law you are talking about.

By the honourable chairperson refusing, consistently and persistently, to answer the questions relating to the certificate, particularly the date and the validity of the certificate and taking us through, ‘I called the minister’, ‘I wrote to the minister’, is she proceeding correctly and are we not risking the integrity of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is unprecedented. Let us hear other views. 

6.33
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a complex problem at hand. I will start with a statement of the law and I must state from the onset that this has been very competently done by my learned young brother, hon. Sseggona. 

The Budget Act requires that every Bill presented in this House must be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. That is a mandatory requirement of the law. We cannot proceed on any Bill, whether it is a Government sponsored Bill or a Private Members Bill, without a certificate of financial implications. So we cannot go past this point without resolving the question of whether or not there was a certificate of financial implications laid on Table on the day this Bill was read for the First Time. This is a matter that, Madam Speaker, you need to interrogate and satisfy yourself and the House that there was actually a certificate of financial implications laid on Table on that day.

Number two, Madam Speaker, I have heard the submission of the chairperson and I sympathise with her. She says she received a copy of the certificate of financial implications. She queried the document that was purported to be a certificate of financial implications. It was amended and an addendum was added to that certificate of financial implications. 

Madam Speaker, I have never in the whole of my very many years of legal practice; 22 years to be specific, heard about an addendum to a certificate of financial implications that is taken to a committee and not the House. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the minutes of the committee should show what document the committee received and when. So we still need to look at the minutes of the committee and satisfy ourselves that there is a reflection that the certificate of financial implications was submitted to the committee and the members saw it. The record should show the members who were in attendance and at which meeting of that committee this matter was a subject of debate.

Madam Speaker, that said, this is a very simple piece of legislation and I do not want us to end up in court on the basis of only one fact; that we acted illegally and considered this law when there was no certificate of financial implications. 

Madam Speaker, may I request, as a way forward, that you stand over this matter, interrogate only this one aspect; the certificate of financial implications so that we all move in conformity with the law? I submit.

6.37
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have on the report a letter written by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi on the 24th October, who I believe is a member of the committee and the letter was addressed to the Clerk to Parliament. He was asking for a copy of the certificate, which was laid on Table. 
I have read through the report and it says up to date, he has not received a response. To me the question becomes, and away from the committee, why didn’t the Clerk to Parliament reply to the member? What was happening at that time that not the chairperson of the committee nor the vice chairperson but a member in his capacity as a shadow minister wrote asking - I really want some information from you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information that after writing this letter, I personally walked twice to the Clerk’s office requesting for a response to my letter and the lady there laughed twice. With a lot of humour she simply smiled and said, “You want that certificate! Well, you will have to see the Clerk herself for that certificate but I doubt whether it exists.” That was what she told me. 

It was on the basis of the contradictions that were apparent at the committee level that I was motivated to write to get a certified copy from the Clerk and I have never received one to date.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. Madam Speaker, we do not doubt our own Hansard but you read it and it said the minister laid on Table the draft with a certificate. Now that certificate could have defects. I think the conclusion comes to that statement in the Hansard. The minister laid on Table the certificate. Where is that certificate? Whether it has defects or not, can we see it? Did the committee receive a copy of that certificate? Chairperson of the committee, can you avail this House that certificate?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, as I said, this matter is unprecedented. It is possible that we could be considering a Bill that did not meet the requirements of the Budget Act, meaning that whatever we are processing was not lawful before the committee. 

So I want time to find out what transpired and I will be disappointed that all these gymnastics were going on and no one was informing me that they need help to either get the document or to clarify. I am equally surprised here after the reading of the report. 

Honourable members, I think I want time to examine this issue because it borders on the integrity of this House and it also calls to question, what people bring because you put them there and I am sitting here. 

So, honourable members, I am aware of the need for this loan and I have tried to provide the time but I think these are issues, which need to be resolved before we can proceed. [Gen. Nyakairima: “But Madam Speaker, there is a document.”] No, I would want to look at all those documents; what was laid, which is in the Hansard and what you were trying to lay today, which I rejected because I knew that we had a certificate.

6.42
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. The Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of this Bill made a serious statement on this matter in this House. He alleged that he has a document, which is a certificate of financial implications. He was stopped in his tracks by your wise counsel but this country has already known that there was a document that was about to be laid, which apparently seems to contradict what is alleged to have been presented at the committee level. Would it not be procedurally right that the honourable minister is allowed to lay this document so that it facilitates your investigation in this matter? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you lay that document.

6.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): I am the most happy to lay this on Table, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. We made sure that all important ministries and departments in this Government were consulted during the building and construction of this Bill. 

Number one, the Attorney General was consulted, the Minister of Finance -(Interjections)- let me make my point. I am going to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, as law requires, at the end of the consideration of the Bill by the committee, we were required to produce a certificate of financial implications and we did. It is on the Hansard. 

We were concerned -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, you have been magnanimous enough to allow my senior colleague the opportunity to present whichever documents he wants to present. He states that as law requires, at the end of the consideration of a Bill by the committee, they are required to lay a certificate. 

I sieve in my recollection and understanding of the law that under Section 10 of the Budget Act, this certificate is brought alongside the Bill. By misleading this House and millions of people in Uganda and elsewhere following these proceedings, is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please lay what you call the certificate; the one you attempted to lay when I stopped you. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, it is here from the Ministry of Finance, which was supposed to guide us that –(Interjections)- it is here dated -

THE SPEAKER: Read the author and the date. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: The honourable chairperson, Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, Parliament of Uganda, Kampala. The financial opinion of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014. It is signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is here. I lay it on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, as I said, I am going to examine that document. I will also examine the other one, which was brought on the 30th September and I will advise you on how to move. Because of the inability to understand whether it was lawfully before the House or before the committee, I will defer debate on this matter. Even if it becomes necessary to recall the House from recess to complete this Bill, I have the power to do it but I must satisfy myself about these documents before we proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The procedural issue I am raising is that surely you have been so kind to the Minister of Internal Affairs and it is unfortunate that my son, hon. Sseggona, is referring to him as his senior. I do not know in which area, maybe in the army. I am not so sure that my son was in the army.

The procedural issue I am raising is that they have referred to the minutes here so many times. I want to know whether it is procedurally right that the chairperson lays on the table the minutes relaying when she received the Minister of Finance who has kept money somewhere, which money is not in the budget and she came and declared that she had money and she had -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that will ensue in the debate. We are talking about whether it is lawfully before this House. That is what we need to settle before we proceed. The other one you can bring in the debate. 

So honourable members, we defer this matter until a date I will appoint to complete the Bill. Next item -(Interjections)

Item five, honourable members – (Interjections) - yes the next items are around here. Let us do this small item then we do the real item, which is outside.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO USD 175 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE SECOND KAMPALA INSTITUTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Item number five, as you have read, is a very good one and very important. We are about to commit Ugandans for 45 years as we did yesterday at almost 9:00 p.m. Given the fact that most Ugandans are not available because each of us represents a portion of Uganda so that it comes to 35 million - In Budadiri West I have a portion.

So Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we go for the other one because there, we shall be many and leave this one where we are very few? We do not have enough numbers to commit Ugandans better. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it appears that your interest is in the other item. I had already indicated that we are going to sit tomorrow so we can consider that loan. Be here by 9.00 a.m.

Honourable members, I now invite you to item number six on the order paper. (Laughter) House adjourned to 10 o’clock tomorrow morning.

(The House rose at 6.52 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 19 December 2014 at 9.00 a.m.)




