PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6576ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTuesday, 6 December 2022BILLSFIRST READINGTHE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND SPORTS BILL, 20222.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving us this opportunity. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Activity and Sports Bill, 2022” be read for the first time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to know whether you have the copy of the Bill and a certificate of financial implications. MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I confirm that I have a copy of the Bill, which I am going to lay on the Table. I also have the Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Macho, Hon. Komakech and other Members. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Education and Sports. The committee chairperson and team should ensure that they harmonise this with the Bill that was presented by the private Member. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 14TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. As you know, we are about to go for the Christmas recess and we have a lot of business pending. We want to handle that pending business before we go on recess. Therefore, today and tomorrow, we shall not have matters of national importance. We shall have them on Thursday, when the Prime Minister and her team are here.Secondly, I will amend the Order Paper to accommodate the first reading of the Physical Activity and Sports Bill, 2022 by the Minister of Education and Sports. With that, let me call upon the minister to come and perform that duty.PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6577THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022Now, because in this Bill we have clauses that were limiting the private Member – clauses with a charge on the Consolidated Fund – the Government will take over the Private Member’s Bill so that we consolidate and harmonise it. However, our rule of 45 days still stands.Honourable minister, committee chairperson and team, please, ensure that you expeditiously handle this activity. On what point do you rise, Hon. Sarah? I need to know before I can allow you to access the microphone. I have not had any communication, Hon. Sarah. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, I seek your indulgence. You can see that I had a lot of issues, which I would have communicated, but I told you why I have not done so. We have a lot of pending business, yet we are about to go on recess. So, I beseech you; let us cooperate so that we focus on the business that is substantively on the Order Paper. MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, there was a demonstration yesterday in Busia Market – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, under what rule do you rise? MR MACHO: It concerns the value addition factory, Mr Speaker. Let me build the foundation and then, state the rule -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable colleague, let us have an orderly House. On Thursday, I will give you an opportunity to raise all these issues. Many Members came and this is what I started with. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, this relates to the Bill that has been laid for first reading. We have had ministers laying “air”. Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether we have ascertained that the “certificate of financial implications” is actually a Certificate of Financial Implications. (Laughter) This is because we have had, here, ministers laying “air” – someone claims “I am laying” when they are laying nothing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, I would like to reassure you that the certificate is genuine. They had to, first, bring it to my office for verification. I can pass you a copy for your satisfaction – but you are not the Sergeant-at-Arms. (Laughter) I will give it to you and you will return my copy.Hon. Sarah, do you have a procedural matter?MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will excuse me. You returned from Maputo and, as soon as you returned, you lost your brother-in-law. So, you were not in the House. I just wanted to use this opportunity to welcome you back from Maputo and thank you for representing Uganda, Africa and our African values. You performed very well and we appreciate you for representing us effectively. You are being discussed all over the globe. That video clip, where you spoke, has gone viral. Mr Speaker, I request that you allow us, on Thursday, to formally move a motion to thank you for the work you did while in Maputo, representing this country. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. To begin with, personally, I am uncomfortable presiding over motions where I am being thanked. (Applause) I am uncomfortable with that because I cannot judge my own case. Secondly, I would like to appreciate you and honourable colleagues who supported us in this. A report is being prepared and I think it is ready. We are going to get time when we shall present it on the Floor.Honourable colleagues, on those issues, I request that wherever you represent us, internationally, be on the lookout. A lot of issues are being passed under the carpet and attributed to us. Please, be on the lookout. We shall continue defending our country and our values, as a continent. (Applause)6578ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMR TEBANDEKE: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural issue under Article 2 of the Constitution. (Interjections)  This is the supreme law; even the rules are under the Constitution -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke, that is not how we work here. The Rules of Procedure are for our own conduct. Otherwise, you will go into meetings of funeral associations - the Constitution can also be applied there. (Laughter) Honourable member, what is your procedural matter? MR TEBANDEKE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Article 2 talks about the supremacy of the Constitution. After I was elected, I took an oath to defend and protect the Constitution. We have passed here a number of Bills, following the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. However, the assenting authority has gone ahead to violate the Constitution, which I took oath to protect. Mr Speaker, it is very clear under Article 91(7) of the Constitution, where you are mandated in your capacity to cause delay of the Bill that is pending, and the President has not reacted by assenting to it. We have passed a number of Bills since February and up to now, we are still tabling more and more. How long shall we continue with the tendency of violating the Constitution, which we undertook to protect? I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, we know all the Bills that have been passed. We know the Bills the President has assented to and we know the Bills he has not yet assented to.As far as we are concerned, as presiding officers who communicate to the President on these matters, he has not yet violated any law because the Bills we have sent – and those, which are about to expire in terms of assent – we normally get in touch with him and he takes the necessary action. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION DAY , 9 DECEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Ethics and Integrity, please, use 10 minutes.2.29THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Ms Rose-Lilly Akello): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, I join my sister to thank you very much for representing us in Maputo and for remaining firm. I appeal to all the Members that when we get out there, let us talk about it; let us not shy away because even here in our country – let us champion it. Mr Speaker, I thank you for that. The statement I am going to read is about the Commemoration of the International Anti-Corruption Day, 9 December 2022. In 2003, the United Nations General Assembly made a resolution designating the 9th of December as the International Anti-Corruption Day, for global observance, to promote awareness about corruption, its dangers and how to prevent and combat it. Since then, the anti-corruption agencies in Uganda, together with their stakeholders, commemorate the day annually. This is done through a series of activities to increase public awareness about the evils of corruption and to promote public participation in the fight against corruption.Mr Speaker, before I inform you about the Anti-Corruption Day, it is essential for me to give you the key achievements of the Anti-Corruption Agencies since July 2020, especially with regard to the recovery of public funds:i) The Inspectorate of Government investigated 26 high profile cases and directed the recovery of Shs 18.2 billion from public officers who misused public funds. A total of Shs 7.2 billion has so MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 6579THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022far been recovered and paid into the Inspectorate Asset Recovery Account. ii) The Office of the Auditor-General carried out 6,763 financial compliance audits, 23 value-for-money audits, 101 specialised engineering audits, 85 forensic special audits and nine IT audits over the last three financial years.Through these audits, loss of funds was averted and the amount of money recovered was Shs 175 billion. In addition, assets and cash amounting to Shs 4 billion were recovered during the audit. iii)  The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions prosecuted 261 corruption cases, of which l68 were concluded and 110 of them resulted in convictions, which represents a success rate of 82 per cent. Resulting from the DPP’s prosecutions, Government recovered Shs 10 billion and $16,000 as well as malaria drugs valued at Shs 28 million. iv)  The Criminal Investigations Directorate of the Uganda Police Force registered a total of 318 cases, of which 56 were submitted to the DPP and 23 were sanctioned for prosecution. Through prosecutions, a total of Shs 615 million has been recovered.v)  State House Anti-Corruption Unit recovered a total amount of Shs 41.6 billion, of which Shs 8.6 billion was from inflated COVID-19 relief food prices; Shs 4.5 billion from Local Governments; Shs 3.6 billion from inflated compensation of Bukasa Inland Port-affected persons; Shs 2.9 billion worth of drugs, which had been stolen from Joint Medical Stores were recovered. vi)  The State House Health Monitoring Unit has compressively monitored hospitals and health centres in 16 districts and their findings are shocking. In Ntungamo District, they discovered 33 ghost primary health centres, employing a total of 483 staff. The money that was paid out to these ghosts in terms of salaries and allowances amounted to Shs 480 million. This matter is still being investigated and responses are awaited. In Nansana, Wakiso District, they registered a suspect and recovered essential medicines worth 1.5 billion. The suspect was charged with theft and impersonation. In Bugiri Hospital, a water pump valued at Shs 14 million, which had been stolen, was recovered and taken back to the hospital administration. In Mulago National Referral Hospital, investigations are on-going into financial and human resource mismanagement. A report from the Auditor-General reveals a loss of over Shs 20 billion.In Kampala, an individual masquerading as a medical doctor was arrested together with four nurses after they injected what was disguised as COVID-19 vaccine in over 500 staff of banks, companies and factories. The matter is before Nakawa Court.vii) Financial Intelligence Authority received 8,627 suspicious transaction reports, out of which 186 reports relating to money laundering, corruption, fraud and terrorism financing were sent to law enforcement agencies for further action. A total of nine intelligence reports related to corruption were sent to the Inspectorate of Government and their successful prosecution will lead to the possible recovery of Shs 6.4 billion.viii) The Leadership Code Tribunal has concluded 10 cases through Alternative Dispute Resolution, and imposed fines totalling to Shs 10.9 million on the respondents, out of which Shs 5.9 million has been paid to the Consolidated Fund.ix)  The Directorate for Ethics and Integrity (DEI) spearheaded an amendment of the Leadership Code Act, 2021 to require all public officers to declare their income, assets and liabilities to the IGG, and as the minister, I made regulations prescribing the declaration form. The DEI coordinates implementation of the Zero Tolerance to Corruption Policy, and has established 6580ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTIntegrity Focal Persons in all MDAs, whose role is to sensitise fellow staff on the values of integrity and corruption prevention measures. The DEI coordinates the partnership with religious and faith organisations, civil society organisations, development partners, the private sector and media institutions, which is the new strategy to fight corruption.Mr Speaker, this year’s anti-corruption campaign theme is: “Citizens Must Own Their War to Eliminate Corruption”.  The objective is to make the war against corruption a people’s war rather than a Government war. In this campaign, the masses are being empowered through mass mobilisation, education and empowerment to take ownership of this war and fight it by demanding better service delivery from duty-bearers. The anti-corruption campaign runs for the whole of this financial year and a number of activities have been and are still being undertaken. Some of the activities: i) The Africa Anti-Corruption Day, 11 July 2022 was commemorated with a national conference at Imperial Royale, Kampala and attended by ambassadors from African countries, anti-corruption agencies and non-state actors. ii) The National Inter-Denominational Prayers against Corruption were organised on Friday, 29 July 2022 at Kololo Independence Grounds. The Chief Guest was her Excellency the Vice President, Maj. Jessica Alupo Epel. She officially launched the last Friday of July as the annual National Inter-Denominational Prayer Day against Corruption and launched the Anti-Corruption Campaign 2022-2023.iii) The National Schools Anti-Corruption Challenge is being conducted in coordination with the National Debate Council to engage the youth in anti-corruption initiatives. The activity has already commenced at the regional level. The grand finale will take place in Parliament where the students will debate the cost and effect of corruption in Uganda with Members of Parliament. Since the school term has ended, the grand final will be held in May 2023. iv) Anti-Corruption Drive Caravans will be conducted in district local governments to facilitate engagement with the citizens. The activities for the drive include community meetings and spot checks on service delivery. During the drive, service delivery clinics will be conducted where citizens’ complaints will be received and where possible resolved on site. Those that cannot be resolved on site will be handled and feedback will be given to the complainants. v) Media engagements are being conducted by the anti-corruption agencies to ensure effective communication with the citizens. The media engagements include the dissemination of short anti-corruption videos, press briefings, radio and television talk shows and social media engagements. The International Anti-Corruption Day will be commemorated on Friday, 9 December 2022 in Ibanda District. Ibanda was chosen to host the commemoration because in the 2021 performance appraisals, it was rated the best-performing local government in service delivery. The activities in Ibanda District will commence on Thursday, 8 December 2022 with anti-corruption football and netball matches at Kagongo Primary School playground on International Anti-Corruption Day, 9 December 2022. The activities will begin with a procession through Ibanda town. Thereafter, a rally will be held at Ibanda Integrated Primary School grounds where an exhibition will also be held by the anti-corruption agencies, local governments and non-state actors. [Ms Akello] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 6581THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022His Excellency the President was invited as chief guest, but due to earlier scheduled engagements, he has delegated Hon. Nobert Mao, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, to preside over the commemoration. The expected outcome of the anti-corruption campaign (Interjections)- which -    THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members! Let us listen to the minister. MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: The expected outcome of the Anti-Corruption Campaign is improved citizen participation in anti-corruption initiatives, improved transparency and accountability in the delivery of public services and improved service delivery. Mr Speaker, the estimated cost of the Anti-corruption Campaign is Shs 1.909 billion. The budget for this commemoration of International Anti-Corruption Day is Shs 442 million, which has been provided by the Government of Uganda to the Inspectorate of Government. The Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) has provided Shs 150 million to the Inspectorate of Government to support the campaign activities. Mr Speaker, the major challenge faced by the anti-corruption agencies is inadequate funding, which forces them to forego some of their planned activities. My prayer is for Government to increase the funding of the anti-corruption agencies so that they can effectively fight this vice because the corrupt are richer than the agencies. Lastly, Mr Speaker, it is my honour and privilege to invite you, the Members of this House, to the commemoration of the International Anti-Corruption Day at Ibanda Integrated Primary School in Ibanda District on Friday, 9 December 2022, beginning at 9.30 a.m.Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You have given us very important and detailed information. My only concern is that you have not listed Parliament among the institutions fighting corruption. The committees of Parliament have managed to recover money – the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises), the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government), the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and all these other committees have saved much more money than what you have mentioned here. And the money we have been able to block, you know, could have gone to the corrupt. So, Parliament is your partner. Please, consider us next time. In relation to that, Parliament has given you all the necessary legislation. I expected you to appreciate these honourable colleagues that passed seven Bills in one week, which mainly focused on defining the issue of beneficial ownership, which is the biggest benchmark for hiding corruption anywhere in the world. So, honourable minister, next time, remember that Parliament is your partner. (Applause)MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Mr Speaker, the agencies, which are fighting corruption in this country, are very many and Parliament is one of them. So, we just had to get a few; actually, they are about 23 –(Interjections)-  my apologies, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this being a very important issue, I will give you 30 minutes to look at it and I am starting with – yes, because I was going to call the shadow minister - the Leader of the Opposition can do that. Leader of the Opposition, how many minutes?2.45THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to offer information to the House and with your indulgence, that the Opposition has their right of reply tomorrow, with your permission. Let the Members debate the minister’s statement and we shall offer our Opposition statement on the Anti-Corruption Campaign. 6582ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then LOP, the angle you are taking me would be that we debate the statement tomorrow - so that your reply can contribute to the debate. Honourable colleagues, with that, let us have the debate on this tomorrow. I will give it 30 minutes. MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I also thank the minister; you are really not corrupt because this is the first report that even mentions the money we are going to spend on the function. In her statement, mentioned the Statehouse Anti-Corruption Unit, which is not a legal institution coming from Parliament. We do not have any report coming from that department or unit. The guidance I am seeking from the minister is, wouldn’t it be fair enough to provide some information or any report they have that is not under Parliament, yet, they are using tax-payers money to run those activities so that if we get them, they can be tabled and we use them as our energisers in debating the statement, in addition to the one of the Opposition. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, we are not able to do that now. Let those be issues - no, I am responding to what Hon. Ssewungu is saying - for debate tomorrow. We will then pick out the important aspects and incorporate them into the business of the sectoral committees, and they will end up coming here. Lucky enough, Hon. Ssewungu is the vice chairperson of one of the accountability committees.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure gives us an opportunity to debate this statement at least for one hour. I want to persuade you, Mr Speaker and the House, to allow us debate. The statement by the shadow minister maybe can conclude it, but the appetite I have to debate this matter today –(Laughter)Mr Speaker, I looked at the Order Paper before I left home and part of the reason I am here is because of this statement on corruption. I want to persuade you to allow a debate today. The response can come tomorrow because the rules speak about the statement, not the response.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju, rule 52(2) that you referred to says, in part, thus: “…we may.” So, it is at the discretion of the presiding officer depending on the business of the day. So, the fact that I have allowed debate – and two, which is the unfortunate bit is that I have no way of preserving your appetite until tomorrow –(Laughter)– because the rules do not give me those powers. But I expect you to be here tomorrow. Since this was requested for by the Leader of the Opposition, whom I believe consults with the whips and colleagues, let us allow – because you see, they are going to raise very important issues, which can be embedded in a debate so that we have a balanced House. Instead of having a debate today, then tomorrow the LOP also presents a reply and we, again, debate it - Let us have the debate tomorrow. Clerk, capture this and put it on Order Paper tomorrow.LAYING OF PAPERSTHE ANNUAL REPORT ON INFLOWS, OUTFLOWS AND ASSETS OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 30 JUNE 20222.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 61(1)(b) of the Public Finance Man-agement Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table, the annual report on inflows, outflows and as-sets of the Petroleum Fund for the period ended 30 June 2022. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. In line with section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act and Rule 173 of our Rules of Procedure, I refer it to the Standing Committee on Budget. – There is a procedural matter.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6583THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, it is not a procedural matter; it is actually guidance. We used to refer this report to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to seek your guidance on whether the rules changed.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Every Member belongs to any committee, but honourable minister, I appreciate your guidance. Allow me to consult the rules quickly. Otherwise, even the Committee on Budget could handle it, but if the practice has been that it is usually referred to the committee on finance, let me make it very easy: I refer it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.They are all committees of this House.THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM IN RESPECT OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF PARLIAMENT ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2022, PURSUANT TO SECTION 53 OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 20152.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move under section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, to lay on the Table the Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Public Ac-counts Committee (Central Government), on the Report of the Auditor-General on Public Universities for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2020.I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In line with section 13 of the National Audit Act, I refer it to the Auditor-General, who will process it and report back to this House.THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM IN RESPECT TO THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE OPERATIONS OF THE DEPARTED ASIANS PROPERTY CUSTODIAN BOARD (PURSUANT TO SECTION 53 OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015)2.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move under section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to lay on the Table, the Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, on the two special audit re-ports on the operations of the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is referred to the Auditor-General as per section 13 of the National Audit Act. The Auditor-General will process it and report back to this House.PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD, PURSUANT TO RULE 33 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, maybe, if you could read the whole item.6584ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTREPORT OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE 78TH SESSION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND THE 44TH CONFERENCE OF PRESIDENTS OF NATIONAL PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLIES OF THE AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY UNION, HELD FROM 5TH TO 10TH NOVEMBER 2022, AT VICTORIA FALLS, REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE2.55MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I was part of this delegation, but the leader of the delegation reported to your office and requested that this matter be presented tomorrow.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I grant that.PRESENTATION OF ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT IN LINE WITH RULE 220 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE I. MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister. Okay, next item.II. MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, before the Minister of Finance comes, we made this Order Paper and agreed with Government on how you would be presenting your reports. I have not received any regrets from any of these ministers. I met the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip, but there was no indication that the minister for works and agriculture would not be here. What is the problem? Can you clarify to the House why they are not here?2.57THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we expect these ministers to come; maybe they are held up somewhere, but we expect them to be in the House. I request that the ministries –(Interruption)MR MACHO: With due respect to this august House - whereas you, Mr Speaker, as a custodian of this House and we, Members of Parliament, take a lot of time working together with the Executive to ensure that the deliberations of this House run smoothly, we have heard in the corridors that some of the ministers in this country call this “a classroom” and call you “a class monitor.” (Laughter)I, therefore, do not know whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the House is intentionally trying to bias this House that the ministers are still having lunch in the canteen, which is on the third floor of Parliament, and dodging to come and give submissions on the Floor. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is in order. Mr Speaker, she looks panicky, as if there is something wrong with her. I do not know whether she is in order. Thank you. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the Prime Minister looks as confident as ever, but again, you have made it difficult for me to rule. (Laughter) I listened to the Prime Minister properly; she never said they are in the canteen having lunch. When you refer –Rt Hon. Prime Minister, colleagues say, “But we are here; we are ready to present”. There is an order we create and so, if I am to skip an item, it means I have to go back. Our Hansard captures items and submissions, based on the order provided on the Order Paper. Whenever your ministers are not around and they are on the Order Paper, I just need communication. We have even allowed communication by WhatsApp. Send a WhatsApp message, even when you are delayed so that the presiding officer notes it. 6585THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022Colleagues, let us not dwell much on this. The Minister of Finance is here. (Hon. Ssemujju rose_) What is the procedural matter, Hon. Ssemujju?MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Order Paper you supplied has the Minister of Works and Transport as the first. The second is the agriculture minister, but we have received no explanation on what happened to these ministers. This country is facing insecurity and so, can we be told -Of course, I understand. I am one of those who were extremely excited when you became a Speaker because working with a Cabinet that is incompetent can actually be a nightmare. (Laughter) Can we know what has happened to these two ministers?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues – I always give Hon. Ssemujju respect in finding a way of – First of all, it is very wrong to come here and insinuate that a colleague is incompetent. These are Members of Parliament; these are ministers who have moved Government business and the country is moving. So, I think it is unkind, honourable member, to declare colleagues incompetent.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am sorry if it has angered them. I only said so to encourage them to be more competent, but I am sorry. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of finance -3.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I am presenting the actions taken on the resolutions of Parliament relating to the finance ministry.The ministry would like to present a report on the actions taken, in line with the resolutions of Parliament for the period May 2021 to May 2022, based on the communication that we received.The first resolution is for Parliament to urge Government to reverse the directive requiring local Governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidation Fund. ResponseSection 30(1) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) requires that all revenues or other money raised or received for the purpose of the Government shall be paid into and shall form part of the Consolidated Fund, except the revenue specified in section 29(2)(b) and 29(3). In accordance with Regulation 10 of the PFMA, 2016, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued a Second Budget Call Circular for Financial Year 2020/2021, in which local government accounting officers were directed to remit all local revenue collections to the Consolidated Fund. Under this arrangement, local Governments prepare and submit their local revenue estimates as part of the total local Government budget estimates for a given financial year. The respective local Government budgets are then consolidated and submitted to Parliament for appropriation. This process is premised on the principle of transparency, accountability and efficiency in the management of all revenues and expenditures for effective service delivery.Local revenue performanceFollowing the issuance of the PFMA, 2016, the local revenue remittance reform started with 43 local Governments in Financial Year 2017/2018. With additional capacity building, this PFMA reform increased to a coverage of 102 local governments in Financial Year 2018/2019 and later, to 175 local governments in Financial Year 2019/2020. As a result, there has been improved revenue performance ever since the ministry 6586ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTimplemented section 30(1) of the PFMA. It is illustrated in the table below. The local governments have been realising substantially higher revenue ever since they started remitting to the Consolidated Fund. Evidence is in the table below.In the Financial Year 2017/2018, for example, the number of votes remitting to the Treasury were 43. They had a revised budget of Shs 47.9 billion. Funds remitted to the Consolidated Fund - the remitted against that budget – was Shs 11.5 billion. The percentage of the remitted to the budget was 24 per cent. In Financial Year 2018/2019, the number of votes remitting to the Treasury from the local governments were 182. They had a revised budget of Shs 193.5 billion and funds remitted to the Consolidated Fund were Shs 60.7 billion, which is 31 per cent. In Financial Year 2019/2020, the number of votes remitting to the Treasury increased to 175, with a budget of Shs 201.1 billion and they remitted to the Consolidated Fund Shs 69.9 billion. That percentage, in terms of remittance to the budget, is 27 per cent. In the Financial Year 2020/2021, again 175 votes remitted to the Treasury and the budget was Shs 217.3 billion. Remittance to the Consolidated Fund amounted to Shs 104.1 billion and 48 per cent in terms of the amount remitted to the budget – so, we see an increase. In Financial Year 2021/2022, the number of V otes were 176 –(Interruption) MR ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The resolution that we are processing is quite clear. It is that the “Parliament urges the Government to reverse the directive by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury requiring local governments to remit all revenues to the Consolidated Fund”. I am finding it extremely difficult – I am very impatient with the direction the minister is taking. He can simply come to us and say, “We have reversed or we have not reversed” other than meandering around. Are we proceeding rightly?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think what the minister is giving you are the details. If you do not appreciate the details - If you say we would want a summary form - maybe, honourable minister, since you submitted these documents much earlier, you could just summarise: go to the implications of the reversal, which shows the reasons for not reversing – and we conclude.MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. I am, therefore, going to skip a number of paragraphs and go to the implications of the reversal of the policy. i) This decision will have far-reaching effects on the existing Treasury Single Account, payment processing and reporting systems. The local revenues and expenditures would be extra-budgetary – they will be outside the Treasury Single Account. ii) The Government will be reverting to the previous position where no reliable information on local revenue sources was available, negatively impacting planning and budgeting at the national level. iii) In order to implement the parliamentary resolution, section 29 and other sections of the PFMA will have to be amended to specifically allow local governments not to remit local revenues to the Consolidated Fund and spend the funds at source. ConclusionThe resolution of Parliament urging the Government to reverse the directive requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund may have been reached based on – (Text expunged.)MR LUGOLOOBI: May I be allowed to continue?[Mr Lugoloobi]6587THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, continue.MR LUGOLOOBI: The Government, having recognised the challenges and delays that local governments faced in accessing local revenues in Financial Year 2019/2020 and Financial Year 2020/2021, carried out the following reforms, effective 1 July 2021;i) Reviewed the entire business process for accessing local government revenues.ii) Eliminated non-value adding processes to enable local governments access local government revenue funds. iii) Completed the initiation/approval of local government revenue accounting warrants. The current local government revenue business process should be allowed to operate and its performance closely monitored during Financial Year 2022/2023 before a decision on this matter can be taken - (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, Hon. Jonathan Odur raised a procedural issue earlier and you gave guidance – maybe, the minister has a problem understanding the words “action taken”, which is why he is now reading the budget framework paper material, which he supplied and we already have. So, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the minister is proceeding well by defying your guidance and regurgitating the budget framework material that was already supplied yet, we are waiting for a fresh one this month.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what Members wanted was very simple: for you to go on the Floor and say “honourable members, as a ministry, we are not able to implement your resolution or we are able to” and then, you give reasons. You can even use a simpler language of “we are constrained”. When you are constrained, it is not that you have refused, but the circumstances are not allowing you.So, honourable minister, in conclusion, are you going to implement the resolution, as urged by the House, or not?MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I mentioned that there are implications and, because of those implications, we are constrained. (Laughter) I indicated three implications. One of them indicated that there are legal issues; you may need to amend the law – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is captured; put it on record. MR LUGOLOOBI:  In view of that, it is difficult for us to proceed with this matter.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am finding a lot of difficulty appreciating the statements made by the honourable minister, Hon. Lugoloobi. If this Parliament made a resolution, you are under obligation to implement it.If there are constraints - as you stated - Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to come back here on the Floor and have the resolution reversed on account of operational or legal difficulty? Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct? Otherwise, the resolution is there. In Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure, you are under duty to give action points. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to have the resolution rescinded? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The problem with Rule 220 - and this is what I had raised the other day so that we can probably revise it – is that it does not even show us what to do with these reports. This is from the interpretation and general authority of the Presiding Officer. Colleagues, I am usually constrained by motions “urging”. Of course, we are limited by Article 93 of the Constitution, but you see when you “urge” me and I refuse to be “urged” - a motion “urges” me. (Laughter)These are different resolutions. Most of the reasons behind these resolutions, honourable 6588ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTminister, are for you to see sense and see the arguments brought up by the Members.When you read the Hansard on this resolution, you could see that if the Member had not been constrained by the Constitution, as a private Member, she would have moved a motion of a more biting kind of resolution. However, we are constrained by the Constitution. Now, when constrained, we urge you to listen to the voices of the Members. What I would have expected to come out clearly - I can see you have touched it a little bit - was to address the concerns behind the motion. If you are constrained from implementing, please, address the concerns and show the Member that you are going to properly address these concerns. The main concern on that motion was that local governments collect extra revenues, but you do not allow them to utilise these extra revenues. When you allow them, it comes in the form of a supplementary budget that comes in May. You give them money and by the time they receive it, the financial year is ending and the money is returned to the Consolidated Fund. They are constrained. Those were the issues. I can see that you have tried to touch them, but we can be more explicit. 3.20 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the concern that Parliament had at that time - and which Parliament still has up to now - is the constraint of local governments receiving and utilising the money they have collected themselves.The idea of having all Government revenues put together under a single Treasury account is not disputable. What is disputable is if this money goes there, how quick do local governments receive it? For the period we have been at the ministry, we found a problem; some local governments were understating the budgets for local revenue. Once this happens and they collect more, in order for them to access this excess local revenue, they require a budget. However, the supplementary budget has been coming late.What I commit to do, before this House, is that we can pursue the process of bringing supplementary budgets as and when they fall due, especially for local revenue. This is such that if I notice that in this quarter - for instance, we are in quarter two. If I realise additional Shs 2 billion on my local revenue collections, I should be allowed a supplementary budget to be brought in early January so that these local governments can access the money in February, rather than waiting for when the financial year is about to end or another financial year has already started. Mr Speaker, in the circumstances that we cannot amend the Public Finance Management Act now, and in the circumstances that we cannot distort the Treasury single account now, what is within our means is to pursue the process of bringing –(Interruption)MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you are bringing light to this matter, but I want to seek clarification from you whether it is possible for you to introduce multi-year budgeting for local governments. This is in order for us not to need to bring supplementary budgets every quarter. If you bring a supplementary in January and then, they get money in February, it will create complications. The financial year will end and they will not implement most of the programmes. However, if you introduce multi-year budgeting for the development component, then those aspects will be taken care of. The procurement for programmes will be done; contracts will be signed for two or three years. When they get the money, they just have to call on the treasury. Don’t you think that would be better based on your experience?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, because of time, you can allow two Members to speak. [The Deputy Speaker]6589THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022MR MUSASIZI:  I had allowed Hon. Isingoma Mwesigwa to speak. MR ISINGOMA MWESIGWA: Thank you, honourable minister, for allowing me to speak. The information I want to give you regarding this matter is that the issue of local governments collecting and spending revenue at source is anchored within the Constitution. It is a constitutional matter. There is an Article in the Constitution touching on this matter. Therefore, when you come and tell us that by virtue of the provisions of the PFMA -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Isingoma Mwesigwa, could you allow Hon. Modoi to help you? MR ISINGOMA: Yes, Hon. Modoi, please, get the specific Article. MR MODOI: Let us look at Chapter 11 of the Constitution, under Article 191. We are dealing with a constitutional matter. I can read it: “191(1) Local governments shall have powers to levy, charge, collect and appropriate fees and taxes in accordance with any law enacted by Parliament…”That chapter also deals with a broader issue. We agreed to follow the governance of decentralisation. Therefore, what we are trying to do right now is just to abide by the Constitutional provision. MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to invite colleagues to debate this matter with the view of moving forward. I was here in 2015 when we enacted the Public Finance Management Act. I know what we included and why, but I would not want to go in that direction. Mr Speaker, Hon. Ekanya, is suggesting a multi-year arrangement, which is different from the discussion we have. What works - like I said earlier - can we commit that we shall be bringing supplementary budgets for local revenue much earlier than we have been doing? I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Why I referred to Hon. Modoi - and you refer to Article 192(a) of the Constitution, which gives Parliament powers to enact those rules - according to the Article, these taxes can either be in the Consolidated Fund or spent at source, and the PFMA, which we enacted here, allowed going to the Consolidated Fund. That is why the honourable member was very clear, urging reversal, whereby reversal would even include amendment of the PFMA. However, I do not want us to go so much into the legalities. The issue was the operation of the local governments.3.28THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the joint efforts of the ministers and the Members that supported this motion enmass. Certainly, they know it; Hon. Musasizi was here and it was huge labour on his part.Two things, if the intention of the minister of finance, Hon. Lugoloobi, was to offer information in form of data to Parliament, he could even have laboured to give Parliament information on how those remittances have since changed because part of the debate is that when a single Government remits Shs 1 million, they receive Shs 300,000 back. It is a fact.Secondly – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, can I guide a little? I know you have a response on this same issue and I am seeing Members anxious to debate it. Can I allow your side to give a formal response to this issue so that we continue instead of coming back specifically on this resolution if you are ready?  -Colleagues, just listen. What I am saying is simple: that LOP has a response to the action taken and I am seeing we are anxious to contribute on the matter. So, why don’t we allow LOP to give his side and then, we open it 6590ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTup for debate rather than going back to it later?  Therefore, LOP, please, do that.DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: I was under the impression that the minister was still presenting and I think there was some additional information that he was giving on that. I would be surprised if action taken is just on one point.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka, that is the advantage of being in my seat here. I am using my authority and the minister has several resolutions, but there is one resolution that is making Members anxious. So, since he has finished on that specific resolution, the LOP can respond to it so that and we conclude it; thereafter, the minister will resumes on the other resolutions.MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The procedural guidance I am seeking is for your indulgence based on the first guidance you gave; that the answers must be specific to the resolutions made by this House.Secondly, you guided that it should be linked to the operationalisation. Therefore, in my view, the ministers need to go back and respond based on your guidance so that we have specific answers to tackle all the challenges related to the motion, which was approved by this House rather than proceeding to get responses from the other side piecemeal. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What Hon. Ababiku has said is, indeed, the concern we had. Honourable minister, we appreciate you are constrained, but where you say you are constrained, can you show us how you have addressed the concerns of Members?Hon. Musasizi explained and gave commitments, but rule 220 says you have to bring it here in detail; proper and clear, not off the cuff. So, honourable Minister of Finance, please, go back and polish this very well: the commitments, which Hon. Musasizi brought, were very important. Capture them and reassure this House that you might not take this action, but you are going to address the concerns this way and then, we shall move well.MR KATESHUMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the statement of the minister, as he comes back, he needs to demonstrate that the measures as he indicated – because he indicated that he reviewed the entire business process. The honourable minister needs to demonstrate that in this financial year, the processes they are talking about have been done and the local governments are not suffering the very causes that led us to do this resolution. For us who represent the municipalities, we know that our municipalities have garbage simply because money is not released on time, yet people pay taxes for those services. So, we need the minister to demonstrate that since they have not implemented this resolution, they have put in place measures to deal with this problem. Finally, we have a challenge with the PFMA. In this financial year, there were exchanges between the ministry and the CAOs: the PFMA guides on the process of budgeting. We have seen the ministry of finance giving deadlines to the CAOs to submit budgets, when this House has not completed the budgeting process. Councils in local governments sit and pass budgets when the process here has not ended. When the budget is finally passed here, it does not reflect or is not consistent with what has been passed in the local governments. As a result, you have a lot of expectations down there and there is no process that goes back to make the corrections. So, I would like the ministry to think about the amendments that need to realign with the PFMA and the Local Government Act so that there is a seamless process in the budgeting process. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kateshumbwa, local government budgets are part of the National Budget approved by this [The Deputy Speaker]6591THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022Parliament. Local governments are given a ceiling; they should pass their budgets and bring them here for Parliament to make its final pronouncement. Otherwise, what local governments pass are indicative figures and they are not final. The final figures are made here. In fact, my concern was simple and the concern for my district is the reverse to yours. In my district, they have been calling councils to pass budgets after Parliament has passed the National Budget. So I asked: “How can you do that?” I remember we had raised it and expected the minister to come and explain it. So, really, that needs to be sorted so that local government councils are advised to pass their budgets earlier so that they are consolidated into the National Budget, which comes here for approval. 3.37MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I have great respect for my brother, Hon. Musasizi, and I do not intend to crucify him for this matter. However, as a representative, he knows we owe the people a duty of performance and representation. Just like we do here in the august House, local councillors owe their people at the local council level the same duty. The role of decentralisation is to empower the lower units to live to the aspiration of their voters in order for them to be a true reflection of what we are at the national level so that they can account to their people. That way, they reduce the burden on us to become the centre of all burdens. For example, the way we appropriate money for construction and development at the national level; they should also do the same at the local level. That is very important because at the end of the day, you may become the engineer for all roads in your constituency. Otherwise, when you go back, the councilors will say, “Honourable members and people of the society, or the people of our community, all powers are vested in Parliament. They are the ones that appropriate. We send out budgets, they scrutinise them and decide whether we weigh or do not weigh.” Let me give you an example of what goes on in our capital city here. Everyone can see potholes, but our hands and those of the councils are tied. The councillors tell you: “All the money is vested in the Consolidated Fund.” For example, in the first quarter, they had no development budget and so, potholes grew, enlarged and widened into gullies to include roads like the one in Katwe. And at the end of the day, when you ask them, they tell you, “Honourable Member of Parliament, what have we got to do? We do not control our money anymore. While we make a lot of collections, there is nothing we can spend.” Well, the powers are vested in this House: can we come up with a formula in the future, which indicates that when they collect say, 100 per cent, they can spend about 40 or 30 per cent on things that arise without our influence? Otherwise, if they cannot spend even two per cent, then why are they there and how are we helping decentralisation growth? That is why recently, Mr Speaker, you realise that in an office – was it in Sheema District or somewhere else – the CAO closed the office and went away. I am sorry if it was not in Sheema District; I do not want those people to become angry, but wherever it was – a council office was closed and everyone walked away and the reason was that they had no money to perform their duties. So, micromanaging a country from a central point – 100 or 300 constituencies plus several local councils – defeats the very same notion that we cry for, of decentralisation. –(Interjections) - The honourable colleague says I am right. (Laughter) Therefore, Mr Speaker, rule 224 is within your powers. Since we discuss all these matters as Parliament, and agree to include these honourable members of Parliament and the ministers that swear before you – (Interruption) 6592ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I thank, Hon. Muhammed Nsereko, also loosely known as the “landlord of Kampala” for giving way. The information I would like to offer to him and the House is that the Frontbench, as you see, has Members that also come from districts and local governments. And so, we also want this money to be given to the districts. The Minister of State for Finance has reported back and the dilemma is within the ambit of this Parliament to make the corrections. The harmonisation of Article 192 and the role of Parliament, and section 29 – if there is a contradiction and the law is not working rightly in the interests of the people, it can only be right and proper that a proposal to amend is made. This, we cannot lament about - it is Parliament’s duty to do that. Thank you. (Applause)  MR NSEREKO: I take your information in good spirit. Mr Speaker, like you already guided, without any doubt -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, please conclude.MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, as you guided, we have the powers to amend the law and we all realise, from both sides and from every corner of this House, that there is a problem, which negatively impacts service delivery; we need to rectify it. We are tired of urging you, sir. We would like, as a House, to remind you that if you do not do something where you are present, under our rules, the Speaker can invoke rule 224 on contempt, yet I know you are not someone who can act in contempt of this House; you are highly respected. You are a very knowledgeable individual and I have no doubt about your capabilities. Therefore, I urge you to let us sit and strike a balance to amend this law in order to improve our performance down there and as a House, we shall shine. I will take your information and –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, what Hon. Oboth-Oboth has raised is just a medium-term solution. What we want is an immediate or short-term solution and this is what we were talking about, that Members had concerns. Yes, the Minister of State for Finance, Hon. Musasizi, has given reassurance on the Floor, about addressing the concerns that led to the tabling of the motion. However, rule 220 does not allow us to do it in an ad hoc manner. That is why we have said that the minister, on this specific resolution, should go back and capture that commitment to giving the short-term solutions as we look at amending the Public Finance Management Act, like Hon. Oboth has suggested. This is because we have restrictions under Article 93 of the Constitution. MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a procedural issue and I will keep it to that. I know that these two ministers who are here are fairly modest people, but that is where their stubbornness begins. You see, this Parliament now wants to believe that actually, the reason they are doing that is because their hands are tied by the law, and I see everybody believing that. However, as I said, they are modest people, but are both stubborn. Mr Speaker, we have an item on the Order Paper - Action Taken Report - and they number from one to four. The assumption was that each minister would come and report. When you instruct someone to do something and he does not do so, you either sanction him or if you are powerless, you just get angry, go home and sleep. This Parliament simply cannot now recreate a debate that we concluded. I was here and I listened to the sentiments of everybody; there is nothing new being raised here. Therefore, I want to persuade you, Mr Speaker, that we take one of those routes.Hon. Nsereko has read rule 224, which is about the contempt of Parliament. We have listened and they have said, “We have refused”. The option is to sanction them. If we are powerless, 6593THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022let us listen to another one instead of wasting our time here redoing - we had a whole day of debate. Now, the honourable minister says, “No, you did not have all the information.” He even read the information that is in the National Budget Framework Paper, which to him is new. Mr Speaker, I am persuading you to apply rule 224 under which they are bringing these reports. Rule 224 says we can actually do something. I urge this Parliament to do something, not just to listen and persuade them casually that you can go back, frame a bit and return. Then we will never do anything.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I respond, let me allow Hon. Basalirwa to provide some information on the law.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you. Hon. Musasizi, my OB, was making reference to the PFMA. We need to set the record straight. If the reason for not implementing the resolution of Parliament is with the PFMA, then we must be very clear about it. Unless, Mr Speaker, you drew the attention of this House to section 30(1) of the PFMA, which is to the effect that – and for the avoidance of doubt it says, “All revenues or other money raised or received for the purpose of the Government, shall be paid into and shall form part of the Consolidated Fund except the revenue specified in section 29(2)(b) and (3).” My understanding is that the revenues specified in that section include revenues from local governments. Both the Constitution and the Local Government Act authorised the local governments to collect and use money. What is happening, with due respect to the minister is, it is Government violating the law. There is no legal impediment. If you were honest and acted in good faith, part of what you should have done in rule 220 in detailing the action point, would have been a proposal to have an amendment in the law, if you thought there was a challenge. However, to say you are barred by the law, yet there is a resolution of this House, would not be taking the resolutions of this House with seriousness. They should have come here and said, “We have a legal constraint, but out of respect for the resolution, we want to have this law amended”. They are not talking about it. I want to clear the air on matters of the law so that we do not leave this House believing that the failure – (Interruption)MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we made the PFMA with Hon. Musasizi and he knows it very well. We protected the Local Government Act not to disempower local governments. We allowed local governments to continue collecting money. Local governments collect money in terms of procurement on behalf of the Uganda Revenue Authority. If you are procuring services from the local government, for instance, to build a school, you pay a tax and that tax goes to the account of the local government, which then transmits it to URA. So, there is no legal provision. The information I am giving is that there is no goodwill in the ministry of finance to allow local governments to collect money and spend it. As Hon. Lugoloobi said, they think local governments embezzle this money, which increases corruption. The minister of finance has allowed the company handling the national identity card to collect money in total violation of the PFMA. The finance minister has also allowed the company to collect money on Entebbe Expressway in total violation. They collect it and take it to a private account. There are very many areas where you have allowed total violation. Otherwise, all money, unless authorised by Parliament, is supposed to go to the Consolidated Fund account. Under the Local Government Act, the law allows them to collect money and spend it - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Let us conclude this matter.MR BASALIRWA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, for record purposes, our colleagues that side on the Frontbench should give another reason for 6594ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTnot implementing the resolution of Parliament, but not hide under the law. Otherwise, the law is very clear. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we have concluded this matter. All of you have submitted and I appreciate it. However, I had already ruled and guided as per Rule 87 of the Rules of Procedure. You gave very useful information. I have been watching to see whether they are taking notes. Members, we do not want this to be a contest.Minister of Finance, On Thursday, come back on this issue after you have consulted the Attorney-General so we can close it and have it sorted out. Members are dissatisfied with your action taken and you need them to come on board. We are still early in the budgeting process and so, we can cure this.Minister, please go to the second resolution. On Thursday, I will put you on the Order Paper to handle this matter. MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, Resolution No.2 was: Resolution of Parliament to highlight the decline in ethical and moral values in the country and propose solutions for reversing the destructive decline. Parliament was urging the Government to ensure increased budgets to accountability agencies, such as the Judiciary, the Police, and the Inspector General of Government. ResponseThe budget of the Judiciary, the Uganda Police Force and the Inspectorate of Government was enhanced as detailed below:JudiciaryIn addition to the enhanced funding of Shs 177.53 billion to the budget of the Judiciary in the Financial Year 2021/2022 for the recruitment of judicial officers and to facilitate them to effectively execute their duties, the Government provided additional Shs 5 billion for the Financial Year 2022/2023 for the construction of court buildings. On top of the 177.53 billion, which we added, we have added another Shs 5 billion, making it nearly Shs 190 billion. Uganda Police ForceThe budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 for Uganda Police Force was enhanced by Shs 62.397 billion as follows: i) Shs 1.5 billion for the Directorate of Crime Intelligence to enhance its capacity to scale up the human intelligence collection capabilities. Shs 23.897 billion for settlement of domestic arrears; ii) Shs 3 billion for the renovation of existing barracks;iii) Shs 20 billion to cater for shortfalls in classified operations;iv) Shs 14 billion to cater for operational shortfalls (fuel, food and general maintenance).Inspectorate of GovernmentMr Speaker, the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 was enhanced by Shs 26 billion to strengthen transparency, accountability and anti-corruption interventions. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, I have seen some of you moving out; please, pass by the reception and pick copies of the revised Rules of Procedure. Also, I would like to inform you that, tomorrow, we shall be debating and concluding a motion from the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to do with disciplinary action on our colleague, Hon. Persis Namuganza. I want to give you that notice.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the minister presented something on action taken. I did not hear it, but he quickly presented something – talking about figures of even two financial years ago – and quickly sat down. (Laughter) [Mr Basalirwa]6595THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022Can we be helped? Let the minister tell us the action they took.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, the problem is that that corner was a bit busy. (Laughter) I know it was very brief; it was about a page - because I have a copy here - and it is even on our intranet. You can check on Alfresco. You might be dissatisfied with what he has given, but he has taken action. The people surrounding Hon. Ssemujju –(Laughter)- Hon. Lillian Aber, I am going to chase you away. I do not know whether the Government Chief Whip has deployed around Hon. Ssemujju. Today, he is surrounded by NRM. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, the procedure we had taken was simple: the minister presents and then, we get the alternative. I wanted us to remain with that. I took chance to read through. I will not allow some of these things to be presented now. For example, on the one for the Uganda Road Fund, we shall be wasting our time. On the one for the Uganda Road Fund, please, also go back and report together with the one of local governments because they are more or less the same and you have not taken any action. We are still facing the same problem. So, instead of wasting time presenting and then we say “go back”, we would rather, from the onset, say: “Go back and clear all these things”. (Applause)3.59MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for that decision, but I also want to air out the fact that on the very Floor of this Parliament, I raised the issue of the Tree Fund. If we are considering that, then, we need to consider all that holistically. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is also within the timeframe for your reporting. Please, report on that too. We passed a resolution here on the Tree Fund. Thank you. Next item. IV) MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ministry of Internal Affairs requested me – I have their request for permission. V) MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your kind guidance on whether the matter of Vinci Coffee that I have seen under Trade should not have been responded to by the Ministry of Finance. I wonder whether they agreed to exchange the responses.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think they aligned it because of the committee that handled it. In Parliament, it was handled by the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. That is why they preferred that the trade minister can continue with it. Defence -4.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, defence and internal affairs are quite related. While – the other week – we made a presentation, we are waiting for the debate and any response from my good friend from Masaka, the Leader of the Opposition –(Interjections)–  in waiting, if that makes you happy. However, generally, our position is still that we would be able to handle any other reactions to the report that we made, jointly – the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, can I give you tomorrow to make your response?6596ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT4.02THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): I apologise in earnest if I am dragging you and the House backwards. I am getting correspondence from my able trustee, who was here when I was away, that actually, the minister for trade made a presentation and referred Vinci Coffee to the finance ministry and the finance ministry is bouncing it back –(Interjection)- No, no, no. I know what I am talking about. The Speaker is listening attentively and I made an apology to him, in earnest, so that I can seek his guidance.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide on that quickly. The agreement between Vinci Coffee and the Government of Uganda was signed by the Ministry of Finance. So, let the Ministry of Finance go and be the one to respond to the issues, which were raised in the resolution. (Applause) I will give you space on the Order Paper to do that. Honourable minister, do you want to say when you will be ready? The Government does not work in silos; you are integrated. So, link up with the trade ministry, harmonise and respond.MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, we shall work with the trade ministry and report back next week. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Bwanika, do you want to raise anything to do with that – because we have already guided. Procedure?DR BWANIKA: Mr Speaker, I saw one of the agriculture ministers in the House and I thought that it is procedurally right that he gives the action report from that ministry to this House. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, I have already jumped them. I called them, but they were not here. I have to continue with my Order Paper. I will give them an opportunity another time. Procedure, Hon. Ssemujju?MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the rules specify matters that require a response from the Leader of the Opposition, that is the National Budget Framework Paper, the Budget Speech and the State-of-the-Nation Address. The procedural issue I am raising – because you have made a decision that we await the response – is whether the rules have now been stretched that for every matter where the Leader of the Opposition is going to make a response, a debate will be the following or another day.These three are specifically in the rules – that once the State-of-the-Nation Address, the Budget Speech and the National Budget Framework Paper - I do not want to say what I said earlier that I looked at the Order Paper and my appetite was to debate all these matters, but they are now being pushed to tomorrow or another day. That is why, Mr Speaker, I am raising a procedural issue on whether I should now prepare that if there is a matter, it will await a response and then, debate is the following day.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we have two sides in this House: the Government side and the Opposition side.The Leader of the Opposition does not respond to each and every matter. We have those ones, which are clearly provided for in the law. However, for others, where the Leader of the Opposition feels he wants to give an alternative policy direction or proposal, he comes and requests the presiding officer. He came, we discussed this with the Prime Minister, we know and in fact, they also applauded the responses by Hon. Sseggona when they had left him here for each and every aspect. We were benefitting – because, you see, they were scrutinising – this is good for the House, to see that engagement can be on policy and clear action is taken. Therefore, I do not see it as a problem. If we were to confine ourselves to the rules, then what it would mean is very simple; that the Leader 6597THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022of Opposition is not given chance beyond the budget and the State-of-the-Nation Address; he would be like any other Member here. Therefore, since the Leader of the Opposition requested, as the Leader of the Opposition and we allowed, I beseech you, colleagues, that we continue and we get his – Hon. Atkins procedure.MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, I really want to thank you for the opportunity - everything else can be renewed, but not time. If somebody tasked each or any one of us to rewind the clock by one second and then say, “I have $1 trillion to do that, you cannot recover time.” Mr Speaker, you guided us wisely that you got a lot on your plate. But there is a culture that is trying to find its way in parliamentary business, especially from the front bench. Every time they come over here, it is as if they are not ready. The reason I am saying that is these people are busy – the ministers – and that is a fact. However, a ministry has a PS, directors and commissioners, and many of those technical people - even PhD holders. I really wonder whether our ministers ever tap into those intellectual capabilities. My procedural issue, Mr Speaker, is; for how long are we going to continue, with ministers just coming with half-baked information, information that is not self-contained and wasting a lot of our time? Thank you very much. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I did not know that there is information which is self-contained. (Laughter) Let us appreciate each other and support each other and look at improving every day. Next, Minister for the Presidency. Honourable minister, wait a bit, there is a clarification that Hon. Basalirwa wants to put across.   MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ssemujju raised a matter regarding the guidance you have given when the ministers make statements, whether the Leader of the Opposition or shadow ministers should, as of right, make response and a debate ensues. Now, the rules are silent on that issue. A practice is being developed by your guidance that once statements are made that side, then there should be a response before debate ensues. Mr Speaker, just for purposes of clarity, now that the rules are silent on that issue and you are giving guidance on it – just to be very clear that henceforth, that should be the procedure to be adopted. This is because what Hon. Ssemujju is saying is that once there is a statement by the minister on the Order Paper, and the minister has presented it, the rules require that under your guidance, you allow a debate; that is what the rules say, you allow debate with or without a statement from the shadow government. Now, there is a variation – and maybe for purposes of creating clarity, because the general authority of the Speaker, under Rule 7 and 8 where the rules are silent on an issue, the guidance of the Speaker becomes part of the rules and at the next codification, they are embedded in the rules. Therefore, I think, it is important that you give clarity that it is a precedent, so that the Leader of the Opposition does not even have to come to your office to ask for time to respond to a ministerial statement; it now becomes a matter of practice and a matter of procedure. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the matter is clearly provided for in our rules – Rule 53(1). It gives the Leader of the Opposition latitude to make statements on any of the business, and it talks about State-of-the-Nation Address, Budget Framework Paper, Budget proposals, alternative policy or action upon any matter. Therefore, the rules are very clear; it is not that we are going with a general authority. But in 6598ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTcase of any grey area – Hon. Oboth, do you want to make clarification?MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Asuman Basalirwa, the MP Bugiri Municipality, the President of JEEMA and the only representative of JEEMA in this House, and the chairman of the football club and my –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is the chairman of sports, in the whole House. (Laughter)MR OBOTH: The chairman of sports and my former Guild President at Makerere – the way he won it is not debatable here - Mr Speaker, you have guided and this matter should be put to rest. Unless the way you guided and said the Leader of the Opposition actually sought or expressed interest that they would be responding, the general authority or the general powers of the Speaker, if you look at it, and Rule 53 cited, be comforted. In the House - you are either on the other side or on this other side; you cannot be in the middle unless you are UPDF. (Laughter)This should be put to rest as you have really guided. If we were to move on, on this matter, the rules guide – what has been the practice here is that the Leader of the Opposition would have the first right of reply on any matter here – whether on a matter provided for or not, but it has been a practice. Therefore, I want to implore my brother – and he knows he is my friend; we share a boundary in the constituencies, he knows that I mean well. I know that he means well for this country, let us not find this legal jargon to impede the progress of this House. Thank you. I want to agree with your guidance.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The only thing that needs to be concluded is whether you are eating together. (Laughter) The Minister for the Presidency - 4.15THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Ms Rose-Lilly Akello): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The resolution of Parliament to highlight the decline in ethical and moral values in the country and propose solutions for reversing the destructive decline; urges Government to take urgent practical steps to address the increased decline of the moral and ethical values in order to place Uganda on a pedestal of moral stability, peace, security, unity as well as prosperity.The action takenThe National Ethical Values Policy His Excellency, the President launched the National Ethical Values Policy in October 2013. The objective was to integrate and mainstream ethical values in all social, economic and development activities. There are 10 National ethical values: respect for humanity and environment, honesty, to uphold and defend the truth at all times, justice and fairness in dealing with others –(Interruption) MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You clearly indicated at the beginning of this session that we have quite a number of reports to handle. During the presentation of the action taken reports, you guided the ministers not to waste time; taking us through preambles because by the time we brought this motion, we were aware of the policy of October 2013 and all the other policies. What we want is the action you have taken. Therefore, take us straight to the action that you have taken. Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister to take us through the preambles? When we bring a motion, we go through all those policies. Is it procedurally right for her to read those preambles rather than going straight to the points? She has read the recommendation and she should take us through the action that the Government has taken, in the interest of time. Thank you, Mr Speaker. [The Deputy Speaker]6599THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think it is because of the framing of the rules, which talks of details. Since this was submitted, Clerk, capture the whole statement on the Hansard. Minister, take us straight to the action because we have been with it for some time. Clerk, capture the whole statement so that the minister’s issues are captured well. MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me now go straight to the actions taken. The Directorate for Ethics and Integrity is disseminating the National Ethical Values countrywide in institutions of learning, MDAs and local governments. They partnered with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Curriculum Development Centre to incorporate the National Ethical Values into the secondary school curriculum, and for the senior women and senior men teachers to rebuild morals and ethical conduct in primary schools. They, together with the Pornographic Control Committee, partnered with cultural institutions and civil society organisations to sensitise the youth about the dangers of promiscuity, pornography, alcoholism, and drug abuse. We all need to work together to rebuild the morals and ethical conduct of the society. The Government put in place a strong legal and institutional framework to combat corruption and theft of public resources, laws such as the Inspectorate of Government Act 2002, te Leadership Code Act, 2002 and the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009, were enacted. Institutions such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Office of the Auditor-General and CID were established. However, the public has neglected this constitutional duty to expose and combat corruption. Corruption is so entrenched in society to the extent that corrupt individuals with ill-gotten wealth are cherished and recognised as hard working and successful persons in society.Regarding the obnoxious practices such as homosexuality, Members are aware that the Anti-Homosexuality Act, which had been enacted by Parliament in December 2013, was nullified by the Constitutional Court on the grounds that it had been passed without the necessary quorum, as required by the law.However, it is important to note that Article 31(2) of the Constitution prohibits marriages between people of the same sex and section 145A of the Penal Code Act makes it an offense for any person to have carnal knowledge against another person against the order of nature. It is generally accepted that prevention is better than cure. It is more effective for us to prevent those offensive practices than handling them post mortem.It is our duty, as parents, to counsel our children against such practices. As the Bible says in the book of Proverbs Chapter 22:6 “Train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old, he will not depart from it.”Let us, as parents - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you tell us the action taken? If you say that the action you took was to read the Bible – just tell us the action taken. MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Mr Speaker, it is not an action, but I am reminding us that as parents –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rule talks about action. If there is no action, do not mind.MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Let us, as parents, play our role in preventing those offensive practices in our families and communities. That will be an effective way of opposing those practices. The Directorate for Ethics and Integrity has, since 2016, been spearheading development of the – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I am sorry. You are making me interrupt you, which I would not like to do. You seemed to be continuing, but now you 6600ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTare on Resolution No. 3. You should tell us, “Resolution No. 3 urges the Government and religious institutions to set up peer review structures, mechanisms and departments to foster ethics and morality.” Then, go to the action taken. However, you have now skipped the part of the resolution and you are flowing straight.MS ROSE AKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was trying to follow this whole write-up -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The resolution had very many recommendations. They are the ones you are responding to. In your own book, you have one, two and now, you are going to three. Read the resolution and show us the action you took. It is very simple. MS ROSE AKELLO: Resolution No.2 urges the Government to whole heartedly step-up efforts to stop theft of public resources, apprehend and punish law breakers, as well as oppose emergence of obnoxious practices such as homosexuality.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have finished reading that one. Go to resolution three. MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Parliament urges the Government and religious institutions to set up peer review structures, mechanisms and departments to foster ethics and morality.Mr Speaker, I was just beginning to read this and then, I will give you the steps. That is why I started with this. The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity has, since 2016, been spearheading development of the religious and faith organisations policy through a wide consultative process. The policy seeks to address the problem of manipulation and exploitation of Ugandans through misrepresentation of faith and lack of transparency and accountability framework in some religious organisations. The policy objectives1. To promote a culture of accountability among different religious faith organisation players. 2. To provide a framework for the registration of all religious faith organisations.  3. To provide for legal and policy – MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are receiving these action taken reports from the Government. I am finding it very difficult that the minister is not able to pick the direction that the House wants. The ministry of trade presented, I think one of - and I encourage the Frontbench to look at how the trade ministry did theirs. Why is it not possible for all the other ministers to pick that approach so that we can proceed because we are going back and forth over the same matter? You have tried to guide the honourable minister, but she seems not to understand you. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we first put this on hold and advise them to look at how the trade ministry processed their resolution so that next time, we come back, we can just proceed straight away, Mr Speaker?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, it is just a matter of the actions you have taken because when we read through this, we do not see the actions taken at all. Honourable minister, I appreciate it because it is policy related, but it is not like the rest, which are very sharp to do with budgetary allocations and the amendment of rules. However, when you read the Hansard very well, you notice the Members were very clear that A, B, C and D needed to be done so that in future, if one went to read the Hansard, they would easily pick out the actions you have taken. Otherwise, this is just general in nature. Honourable minister, please, go back and sharpen your submission so that we can have clear actions that have been taken. [The Deputy Speaker]6601THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe as the minister goes back, it is also important for her to inform this House what actions they have taken. This is because the minister is talking about the anti-pornography committee, yet she is aware that Court, I think on the 13th of August 2021, declared some provisions of the Anti-Pornography Act unconstitutional. So, it would be good for the minister to also inform us what they are doing or where they are, as far as that is concerned. Also, when you read what the minister put down - honourable minister, you have the answers, but you are going into preambles. You came up with a draft policy and the consultations have commenced. That is what you should tell us; that you hope that before the close of this financial year, you will have presented the draft policy. That is what you should say, but not to go round and round. That is just the addition, I wanted to give. Thank you, Mr Speaker.MS ROSE-LILLY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with my sister. Everything is here; maybe it is just because of the preamble, which I am taking you through, but I beg that next week, I will come with a report on the actions taken. Most obliged.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On actions taken, I want us to stop here for today. Debate on this matter will resume tomorrow. Let me go to the other matters: we have a very important matter to do with our traders. I do not know whether it should be among the first items tomorrow. Is the Chairperson, Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here? Clerk, please, capture the item on trade among the first items for tomorrow because it touches a very important aspect to do with our business community, especially people downtown and in small business ventures. So, tomorrow, ensure it is among the first items. Let us go on to the next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE ERRATIC ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IN WEST NILETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, you have 15 minutes, but we shall capture the whole report on the Hansard for record purposes. 4.30THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay, on the Table, a copy of the minutes of the proceedings that culminated into this report. This is a report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the erratic electricity supply in West Nile. As you guided, I will try as much as possible to be quite brief and to summarise the report, especially in view of the fact that we uploaded this report quite some time ago. And so, I believe honourable colleagues have already gone through it.However, allow me to say that during the Plenary Sitting of 11 August 2022, Hon. Lawrence Songa, MP for Ora County, Zombo District, on behalf of the Members of Parliament from West Nile Subregion, presented a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to urgently address the electricity supply challenges in the West Nile Subregion. Parliament adopted the resolution that culminated the discussions therefrom and directed the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources to investigate circumstances surrounding the delay in the electrification of West Nile Subregion and report back to the House, in accordance with Rule 159 of the Rules of Procedure and the committee hereby reports.6602ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMr Speaker, allow me to first give a background of this report. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, as amended, enjoins the State to promote and implement energy policies, which ensure that people’s basic needs and those of environmental preservations are met. The Energy Policy for Uganda and the Electricity Act, as amended, operationalise the provisions of the Constitution in regard to these energy policies. The movers of the motion noted that West Nile has never been connected to the national grid. Citing the Electricity Act, they noted that in an effort to address power shortages in the West Nile region, the Government of Uganda, in 2003, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, granted a concession to the West Nile Rural Electrification Company commonly known as WENRECO, to generate, distribute and sell electricity in West Nile for a period of 20 years. The petitioners acknowledged that WENRECO, having failed to fulfil its obligations, Electro-Maxx was contracted to supplement power generation in 2019. However, despite this intervention, they stated, West Nile’s electricity supply to date is unreliable, unstable, unpredictable, costly and is characterised by constant power shortages, interruptions and blackouts.They further noted that the Government of Uganda has previously made promises to have the region connected to the national grid by September 2022, which was just a few months ago, but this was postponed to March 2023. The prayers sought in the motion were:1. Parliament urges Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development to urgently provide funds to the Uganda National Oil Company to supply fuel to Electro-Maxx to generate the licensed 8.2 Megawatts of electricity to be supplied to WENRECO and to ensure a stable and reliable supply of electricity to the people of the West Nile Sub-region. 2. The Ministry of Energy to fast-track the evacuation of the electricity 132KV line to West Nile and also expedite the work at the sub-stations in Arua and Nebbi districts to enable the region get connected to the National Grid.  3. The Government avails all the required funds to speed up the completion of the 6.6 Megawatts at Nyagak III and the Government should replace the second turbine at Nyagak I to generate 3.5 Megawatts installed capacity instead of the 1.7 Megawatts that was being generated at that time. 4. The ministry of energy upgrades the existing electricity network in West Nile region to be able to distribute high voltage 132KV from the National Grid Transmission Line once evacuated to the region by March 2023, as promised by Government.5. The Ministry of Energy intensifies the expansion of the network to rural areas to cover all the parishes in West Nile subregion to support the Parish Development Model and reduce the high rate of environmental degradation.6. A forensic audit of the operations of Electro-Maxx be conducted to ascertain whether Uganda has obtained value for money for the period Electro-Maxx has operated in West Nile.7. A compliance audit be carried out on the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) in relation to the operations of Electro-Maxx and WENRECO. Mr Speaker, those were the prayers and this House adopted those prayers. As a committee, we also adopted these prayers as the terms of reference for us to proceed. The methodologies we employed were as follows:[Dr Otaala] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6603THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022Undertook physical visits and inspections. Mr Speaker, the methodology is indicated in the report. I will now focus on the committee’s findings, observations, and recommendations. The observation in this report is made on the various prayers that I have just explained above in the electricity sector of West Nile. They are matched as practically possible to the prayers made by the movers of the motion. Consequently, observations were made on Electro-Maxx Uganda Limited and WENRECO. We made recommendations on Nyagak III, the transmission infrastructure projects, and other incidental matters.Background to the power supply in West NileIn meetings we held with key stakeholders in West Nile, the committee was informed that WENRECO took over the operations and infrastructure originally owned and operated by the Uganda Electricity Board in a concessional agreement that became operational in 2003. WENRECO inherited a generating facility that was producing 1.5 Megawatts of electricity from heavy fuel oils and serving less than 1,000 customers for approximately four hours per day.WENRECO decommissioned the generators after the commissioning and coming on board Nyagak I in September 2012, which has an installed capacity of 3.5 Megawatts. Due to the increase in demand, Nyagak I was unable to meet demand in West Nile. This consequently led the Government of Uganda to enter into an agreement with Electro-Maxx to relocate and install an additional 8.2 Megawatts diesel facility from Tororo to Arua to complement generation from WENRECO. Currently, West Nile has an overall installed capacity of 11.78 Megawatts of electricity, that is, 3.5 Megawatts from Nyagak I, which is a hydro-power plant, and 8.28 Megawatts from Electro-Maxx, which is a thermal generating facility. However, the committee was informed that although Electro-Maxx had a licensed capacity of 8.28 Megawatts, the tested capacity was 6.5 Megawatts while the highest ever produced capacity was three Megawatts. The committee was informed that peak demand for West Nile is six Megawatts and suppressed demand is estimated at five Megawatts. The committee observed that as per the reported installed capacity from Nyagak I and Electro-Maxx, Arua should be having sufficient capacity to meet its current and suppressed demand. However, this is not the case as load-shedding and outages remain rampant in the region. 4.2 Actual total electricity supply in West NileThe committee extracted generation figures from ERA’s Comprehensive Electricity Supply Industry Database. The database gives figures from WENRECO’s actual generation per quarter and what it buys from Electro-Maxx for the period 2015-2019 as reflected in the table below. Computations were made to obtain the average power produced in Megawatts and I want to refer you to the shaded columns in the report, that is, the last three columns, which is not reflected on the screen. You will see what we have computed to be the actual generation in Megawatts. You will also see the WENRECO   generation in Megawatts; 2.32. 2.55, 2.18 etcetera.Similarly, for Electro-Maxx, which is meant to generate 1.28 Megawatts, you can see what they are generating – 1.09 Megawatts, 0.56 Megawatts, 0.78 Megawatts etcetera. From the table, you can see that both Electro-Maxx and WENRECO are generating below the capacity that was agreed upon. From the table above and figure one that you will see subsequently, the committee observed that the total generation for West Nile from the two generators - WENRECO and Electro-Maxx - for the period 2015–2021 ranges from 1.07 Megawatts, the lowest value reported in 6604ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTQuarter One of 2019 to the highest value of 3.41 Megawatts reported in Quarter Four of 2021.    THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you can see the time I gave you and you are just on page 9. Please, go to page 48 so that we go to recommendations straightaway. DR OTAALA: Thank you, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. I hope my colleagues managed to read the report in advance -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not your problem. DR OTAALA: On page 48, Mr Speaker, I beg that on each, I just go to the recommendations.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please.DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, the recommendations are that;i) The ERA should ensure that tariffs are competitive and fair for the consumers;ii) A cooking tariff be introduced for the off-grid schemes as is the case for Umeme, to reduce reliance on biomass for cooking; andiii) The lifeline units for WENRECO should be increased from 8KWH to 15KWH to align them to Umeme rates so as to encourage consumption.Health, safety and environment concernsOn health, safety and environment concerns at the Electro-Maxx generation facility, the committee recommends that:i) An appropriate industrial floor that is safe to use in generation facilities, is resistant to abrasion and can manage the loads and traffic on site be installed in the switching station; ii) WENRECO   should decommission its abandoned generators as per the decommissioning plan that was submitted to the National Environment Management Authority;iii) The floors at the generators should be fixed and proofed to prevent oil spillages;iv) Additionally, an interceptor to manage oil spillages and run-offs on site should be constructed;v) Appropriate number of sanitary facilities should be availed expeditiously to address the needs of both female and male workers and visitors on site; andvi) Monitoring and maintenance of the plant facilities should, routinely, be carried out to ensure that they are in good working conditions. Fragmented planning in the sectorMr Speaker, on fragmented planning in the sector, the committee recommends that:i) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should establish or strengthen the planning function for electricity generation, transmission and distribution; ii) The Minister of Energy should not enter into new agreements for generation, transmission and distribution until the energy policy and energy Bills are tabled and approved by Parliament;iii) In future, Parliament should ensure that approval of funding for the development of generation projects should be done simultaneously with their transmission components; andiv) The Government of Uganda should stop negotiating power purchase agreements with deemed energy clauses. [Dr Otaala] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6605THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022TransmissionRegarding transmission losses, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that to fully realise the envisaged benefits of the Kole-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission project, the Ministry of Finance, UETCL, and the Ministry of Energy, with their consultants, should consolidate all efforts to ensure that this project is completed and commissioned by March 2023 as a way of reducing technical losses at transmission. Impact of loadsheddingRegarding impact of loadshedding, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the plant availability of the operated plants be increased, power dispatches increased and the connection of the West Nile region to the national grid be expedited to avail stable and reliable power supply to West Nile. ConclusionIn conclusion, Mr Speaker, the need for adequate and reliable electricity is key in driving Uganda’s vision of transforming the whole country from a peasant to an industrialised economy. Despite West Nile being a trade hub connecting to South Sudan and the DRC, it experiences rampant loadshedding and power outages, which have hindered its contribution to the economic transformation of the country. The reasons for this unreliable electricity are attributed, majorly, to the region not being connected to the national grid, thus failing to tap into the excess electricity available from the rest of the country and the other benefits accrued from being connected to high voltage transmission networks and substations. A good transmission network ensures that sources from different loads are synchronised, transmission loads are reduced and there is easier control for remote and onsite functions. Further, Mr Speaker, the two generators in the region are dispatching far below their subcontracted and installed capacities, thus failing to meet the demand for the region.To address the rampart loadshedding in the region, the Government of Uganda has put in place several initiatives to overcome this challenge. In the short term, the Government is constructing a medium voltage line connecting Olwiyo to a substation in Pakwach.Mr Speaker, I am happy to report that West Nile has actually been connected already – since our intervention. This line was expected to be commissioned in November 2022. However, the long-term solution is the completion of the Kole-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission project, which connects West Nile to the high voltage electricity backbone transmission infrastructure, by March 2023.Thereafter, Government will have to invest in the distribution network so as to increase the West Nile’s rate of electricity access. Therefore, the committee, in its findings, agrees with the prayers of the movers of the motion, except in Prayer No. 1, where it recommended that the contract of Electro-Maxx be terminated rather than the Government of Uganda providing funds to the Uganda National Oil Company to supply fuel to Electro-Maxx to generate its licensed capacity. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I will give an opportunity to the minister first. He might have updates for us.4.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Opolot Okaasai): Mr Speaker, I thank Parliament for actually bringing this on the Floor for debate. The submission by the committee is actually helping us and also highlighting the efforts the ministry is putting in place to address the constraints of electricity in West Nile. I totally agree with the findings, so far, of the committee. The most important thing in this report is actually highlighting the recent efforts put in place to 6606ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTaddress the shortages of electricity in West Nile. I wish to confirm that the 33 KV line is actually on in West Nile and power has relatively stabilised in the region. There may be occasions when there are outages and the outages are because we incur a lot of losses of electricity in the 33 KV line. The 33 KV line was supposed to end in Nebbi and Pakwach. However, because we wanted to test if we would deliver stable power to Arua, we decided to extend it and we are now merging the power generated in -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just a minute. Whips, can you help me? We are here doing serious business, but I hear people making noise outside. I do not know what they are - can someone help us? Go on, honourable minister.MR OKAASAI:  We have actually successfully connected the power generated from Nyagak I and it is being complimented by the 33 KV line, which we have successfully delivered to Arua. (Interjections) - Yes, clarification allowed.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the honourable minister is going to be here. I wanted you to conclude, honourable minister. Please, conclude and then we shall allow questions, which can come to you during the debate because we are going to have a debate.MR OKAASAI: So, that connection has been done. The delivery of power now in the main grid, through a 132KV line, is progressing well and we expect that that work will be completed by March.On the distribution of the delivered power to West Nile, I wish to, again, thank the Members of Parliament for passing the loan. It is actually that loan, which is going to help us increase and distribute power in West Nile. That one is likely to take slightly a longer time, but within the loan, we shall connect the various institutions of Government through the solar mini-grids. I also wish to point out here that the West Nile is going to have excess energy because Nyagak III is also on course and as the chairperson highlighted, we actually need money to complete it. We also have a station for generating 20 Megawatts in the West Nile from solar. With those sources complemented, we expect West Nile to get stable power and also export power to the DRC and South Sudan through that route. I wish to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I am going to open up debate, colleagues, and I will give first priority to MPs from West Nile.I will start with Hon. Onzima, then Hon. Siraji Ezama and Hon. Mamawi – the five. Please, allow me to start with colleagues from West Nile. Two minutes for each one, then the former Minister of Energy.4.57MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you. I thank the committee for work well done and also the minister for the highlights he has raised.The issue of power in West Nile has been a long-term issue, which should have been sorted. Regarding these challenges of fuel and the rest, the initial agreement was that as we work on taking power from Karuma to West Nile, the region was supposed to be connected via Adjumani. As we speak, Adjumani is actually not on Nyagak. It is on power from Owen Falls Dam via Lira and that was the agreement. These losses we have incurred through fuel supply and the rest were issues that came in when some few individuals looked at the power problem in West Nile as a business. I have purposely stood up on this issue raised by the minister - that some of the power problems in West Nile will be solved through solar energy. Honourable minister, we expect a reliable source of energy. [Mr Okaasai] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6607THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022You know, we have been hearing this, that there are plans being cooked to supply solar power to West Nile. I think our problem of power should not be seen as a market for people to do business. We do not want that solar there; we want reliable, industrial power because we have been frustrated on this issue. The proximity of West Nile to South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo provides reliable development opportunities. We can only realise these opportunities when there is reliable industrial power in West Nile, not just solar. Solar should never be in any picture in this. If it is there, it must go to the deep rural areas, not to supplement energy. For a long time, we have been longing for power that can bring about development in West Nile. Government’s emphasis, as of now, is on agricultural chain development and also value addition. If we do not put this power in place that can help us and we begin talking about solar and the rest, when shall West Nile develop? Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, in the national energy mix, there is no way you can remove solar energy. The whole of Dubai – please, wait, honourable member - is surviving on solar. Now, the generators you are complaining about for lacking fuel are those of around 10 Megawatts. This is a solar plant of 20 Megawatts – double - going to feed into the grid. To me, honourable colleagues, you should be welcoming solar power. There are countries running on solar alone – very reliable power. You have very good sunshine in West Nile. I do not want it to go on the record of Parliament that we said West Nile does not want solar - no.MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, what I said is that if we are to have solar in West Nile, it must go to supply the rural areas and supplement the energy of the rural population. Of course, solar is very important. I acknowledge that because right now, power has not reached the other areas, and people survive on solar energy. Even at my home, I use solar power.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, I want to clarify this to you properly; that all power generated will go into a pool. From the pool of power in West Nile, it loses colour; you cannot know this is for solar, thermal or hydro – no. It will be electricity; simple.5.02DR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate Government’s effort to connect West Nile to the national grid. It is something that we have been longing for. We thank Government for that. However, the 33KV that West Nile is connected to is like a drop in the ocean. You cannot even see an electrical pole in most of the districts and parishes. So, I appeal to Government to do all that is possible to make sure that if we want the Parish Development Model to succeed in our area, those subcounties and districts that have not had power for a long time should be connected, so that we walk the same footsteps with other districts in Uganda. Thank you.5.03MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, aware of the power challenges in West Nile that we have been addressing in this Parliament.The issue of power in West Nile is from two different angles: Firstly, we have electricity which is supplied from the national grid in Adjumani and Moyo Districts, but the challenge we have in Adjumani and Moyo is the power outage. What we expect is we need a substation in Adjumani, which is in Madi Subregion, part of West Nile. It is unfortunate that when the committee was given time to go to West Nile, they thought West Nile is only Arua and greater Nebbi. They did not reach Madi Subregion, which is part of West Nile. We complained and we are still complaining that we need the committee to reach Madi Subregion, which is part of West Nile, to ascertain the power challenge in that region. (Applause)6608ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMr Speaker, in the same region, we have a complete district of Obongi, which has no single electricity pole – and this is in Uganda. So, we expect the committee to also give us a report as far as Obongi in Madi Subregion in West Nile is concerned. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, before I allow others, can you first clarify that? That you reduced West Nile to Arua and Nebbi- why didn’t you go to Madi Subregion? DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to beg my colleagues from the West Nile subregion that we adopted a methodology on how we would conduct this study. As you all know, in all scientific studies, you cannot reach everywhere, but you sample. I think that is a standard that all of us will agree is always adopted when carrying out such research. That notwithstanding, our report is a clear reflection of what is pertaining to the whole subregion. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you understand. The main issue for West Nile is just connecting them to the national grid, whether we rotate around whether we do what, connecting to the national grid is the solution. So, if it is connected, Hon. Mamawi, your area would also benefit. It would be a problem if the minister refuses to come, but the committee was doing a study. So, honourable minister, I encourage you, please link up with Hon. Mamawi and visit Madi Subregion of West Nile. (Applause) I will inquire from you next week if you have done it.  Hon. Basalirwa is offering to accompany you.MR OKAASAI:  Mr Speaker, I appreciate the sentiments from our colleagues from West Nile. I know what you feel. We are trying to do everything possible to make sure we deliver power- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aza, I am giving you an opportunity to speak; do not disturb the minister.MR OKAASAI:  On the issues raised on solar-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, please, you will respond later; I have said, visit Madi Subregion - go support our colleagues, these are your colleagues.MR OKAASAI: Yes, Madi Subregion - I understand what they are talking about. However, Madi has a separate intervention; there is a line that is going to come from Gulu - the other route is going to be strengthened and we are going to build a substation in Madi to actually bring that power down from Gulu. So, that one is going to be done; it is in the plan. Then the distribution, you cannot put a distribution line when you do not have food. Let us deliver the food and then start sharing it. If I put the lines there, they will be redundant. So, let us wait for the power to be delivered, and I said that it is going to be a priority of the ministry in the new project.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I repeat, can you go to the Madi subregion with your MPs and support your colleagues and explain this to their constituents?MR OKAASAI: Most obliged. I will actually go there.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. That is how you support colleagues and I like you for that; you always do it. 5.08MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Chairperson of the committee -(Interjection)-  I need to be protected. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected, honourable member; proceed.MR AZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my dear colleagues. Thank you, chairperson of [Mr Mamawi] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6609THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022the committee for your report. Honourable minister, you have made a commitment before Parliament, the Speaker and everybody. You have made a commitment on the Hansard that in March next year, the whole of West Nile will be connected and there will be stable power; that is what we are waiting for.We get power from the Owen Falls Dam. However, as I said before, it is not stable. We will be very grateful if by March next year, there will be stability of power in the Madi Subregion. Why do we need to have stable power in the Madi Subregion? Honourable minister, the place is near the Sudan border. We have always had interruptions in the network and the South Sudan internet. We need stability of power so that we can use the internet, and our schools and local governments can use their computers to transact business. Not only that, but also these days, applications for jobs are online. We need to have power so that we can have access to all these facilities. Government business and everything is done online and using computers, which require power. Therefore, we need power in the Madi Subregion. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.10MR JOHN LEMATIA (NRM, Ayivu Division West, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to thank the committee for that report. The issue of power in the West Nile region is a concern. However, allow me to bring it this august House, and particularly to the minister, the issue of the network in West Nile. Our power system and network in West Nile is in such a way that when power in Arua is off, it will definitely be off in Maracha, Koboko and Madi. I want the minister to help us and address the issue of the network in West Nile. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me start with Hon. Sarah, Hon. Chemonges, then I go to this side.5.11MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. And just to note, from their report, it is clear that the Government has been paying Electro-Maxx  and WENRECo for what they have not been producing - this is what I gather from the report. Therefore, I want to support the idea that there be a forensic audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor-General. Secondly, I hope the clarification I want from the minister - the Government got into an agreement with WENRECo in 2003, and this agreement was for 20 years. Mr Speaker, there are normally people moving in the corridors to renew contracts of such companies that have even failed to deliver. I hope that the Government is not going to get into another agreement with this company because their contracts should be ending in 2023. Therefore, I hope that there will not be a further extension before we receive the Auditor-General’s report. There must not be any renewal whatsoever. Lastly, in the interest of time, Mr Speaker, on the issue of corporate social responsibility - this company was supposed to connect power to health centres and build some schools and other facilities; their contract is ending, and they have not delivered on that part. That is actually cheating the people of Uganda because that was part of what they were supposed to do, in signing the agreement with the Government. Mr Speaker, I hope that all these issues can be followed up. I am glad the Prime Minister has walked in. I hope we shall not hear that the Government has signed an agreement with WENRECo yet they have failed to deliver. We welcome the idea of the extension or the connection of West Nile to the national grid; 6610ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTthat is the way to go. That is not another country; we are in one country. Therefore, I am glad that that has been done, but also to bring to the attention of the minister that while we talk about power in the West Nile, some of our investors, manufacturers, and people with industries around the Namanve are complaining about power fluctuations; they cannot operate, some of them have had to shut down. Some think I am still in the ministry. They keep sending me messages yet I am no longer there. So, honourable minister, please, also attend to our investors and those industrial parks and ensure there is stable power in those areas. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.15MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for the report presented. We are here as representatives of the people. Today, the people of West Nile would have loved to hear it very clearly as to when they will be connected to the national grid. However, you will realise that in the two submissions, while the chairperson talked about March 2023, the minister stated that it will take a while. So, I really want to, as a leader, get clarity from the minister; what does he mean by the statement: “It will take a while for the people of West Nile to get power”? Secondly, I would like to know from the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, the justification they had in differing with the mover on the first recommendation that Electro-Maxx’s contract be terminated. What is the justification? We want to know. If the people of West Nile feel that this contract should be terminated, what right does the committee have to refuse, without giving justification to the people of West Nile and the people of Uganda? Thank you. 5.16 MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this very important report that is trying to help our colleagues from West Nile because they are always crying about power. I take this opportunity to bring it to the attention of the House that the same problem is occurring in Kween District and the entire Sebei Subregion. Today, there is a power connection in Sebei Subregion from Sipi River. However, it is very disappointing that whereas we see power passing over, only 10 per cent of the region is connected. It is also disappointing that while we see power generation taking place in the region, we are not connected to it fully. Therefore, while I thank the committee, the minister should assure the House and the people of Sebei Subregion that from the loan we approved recently, at least all the sub-counties in the Sebei Subregion will get connected to power. This should be so because we have stayed long without power, which has affected the entire Sebei region; people are unable to do value addition to their agricultural products. 5.18MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee on Natural Resources and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, for the work so far done in the West Nile region. I was personally involved when the committee conducted the activities in the region. I appreciate them for the depth of their activities in the region.One thing that did not come out clearly from the report, which I would love to mention, is the lack of capacity by WENRECo in handling power supply in the region, in terms of power distribution. We mentioned to them that WENRECo staff are not properly acquainted with the skills on power distribution. That is why there is constant power breakdown in the region, especially when there are some weather changes.[Ms Opendi] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6611THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022When it rains or whenever clouds form, the power goes off. The staff have no capacity to maintain power supply, as it happens in other parts of this country. Therefore, there is that element, which had not come out clearly. Secondly, there is the issue of the infrastructure in the region in terms of connectivity. The wires and transformers that are used seem to be obsolete because any slight disruption that occurs, power will just blow up. And the committee did not capture this properly. So, when this bulk power comes to the region, it should be sustained and distributed equitably, the way it is done in other parts of the country. Thank you very much.5.20 MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We probably need to clarify to the Members from West Nile that there are timelines for the different companies, and the minister should come out clearly on that. When will the generation be exhausted in the region? When will the transmission be exhausted? What are its timelines? When will the distribution be accomplished? Chairperson and the line minister, you need to inform the House about all this because I notice that transmission targets are being confused with the distribution targets. Likewise, it is important to understand that these companies have different mandates. Somebody may think I have done my part, as a generation company. However, when people do not actually see distribution in their households, they will think you have done nothing. This has to come out clearly in the report. Thank you, Mr Speaker.5.21DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for the report presented.I would like to talk about three issues regarding this report. One is on the 6.6 Megawatt Nyagak III Project. This project is at different stages. While the construction works are almost at 90 per cent, there is still no work on the lines. What is going to happen is that we will have the dam completed and generation will start, but there will be no evacuation and then the country will be forced to pay for dimmed energy, when we do not have the resources; just the way we are spending money on Aswa. I would like the ministry to confirm that with the Shs 24 billion to complete that project, the construction of the lines is going to start in time. Secondly, when you read the report, you notice that it brings up the plight of the people of West Nile regarding power supply. The access is about between 0.5 and 8 per cent compared to the national average of 28 per cent. Since we recently passed a loan here, I am of the view that this should be the opportunity to connect West Nile very close to the national grid. I, therefore, would like to say that the connections that we allocated to the West Nile region are very inadequate, in terms of bringing West Nile very closely. The third thing is what Hon. Sarah Opendi raised. The minimum power supposed to be provided by Electro-Maxx is 3 Megawatts, but in the report, you notice that since they started the implementation of this project in West Nile, what they have provided is only 1.09 Megawatts. This is just about 7 per cent of what they are supposed to provide yet they have been paid to generate a minimum of 3 Megawatts. What this means is that a lot of money has been spent on services that have not been provided. I, therefore, think, as prayed in the motion, that there should be an audit, both on Electro-Maxx, WENRECo and ERA that supervises these providers. We need to know whether there was value for money in the services provided by Electro-Maxx and WENRECo in the region. Thank you very much. 6612ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT5.24 MR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. I have three observations: Obongi is the only district in West Nile without power.To the chairperson, you used a scientific approach of sampling. We have three scenarios in West Nile, ladies and gentlemen. There are districts completely without power, there are districts with lines and poles that have not been connected with power and there are districts with unreliable power. The recommendations cover the unreliable power. We have not heard about those poles standing without lines on them. We have not even heard about the poles and lines without power. What have you recommended on that?Finally, for Madi-Okollo and Obongi districts that have no power completely, that should be considered a matter of urgency. I beg to submit. Thank you.5.25MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the chairperson of the committee for giving us a very wonderful report. The drive behind the development is power and when we talk about under development in West Nile, one of the reasons behind that is the lack of power in the region. The Chairperson said that they used sampling methods as the methodology. How I wish next time when using that methodology, they go to the extreme end of West Nile so that we come up with objective results.Secondly, we are talking about the poles; Nebbi District is also a victim of power. Sometimes poles are taken to the district, but the technical staff is not informed. Nobody is aware of who dropped the poles and where they will be put; they just pile them. I think we need to be organised. Whenever such activities are taken to the districts, municipalities or cities, they should connect with the technocrats in the districts. I submit. Thank you. 5.26MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is something I need to clarify with this House and my friends in West Nile. The Government is taking power to West Nile and West Nile is going to be connected to the grid. But we need to understand that when power is taken there, the 132KV has to be dropped down to 33KV; we are now talking about substations to be distributed in areas. From 33KV , it has to be dropped down to 11KV . Now from 11KV , that is when we are going to do the distribution. Now, that is when we can say that West Nile is connected. The question, which is going to be asked in March will be: the Government has connected us, but we do not see power. This is because they do not know the process of distributing power to the houses or the industrial areas. So, Members from West Nile, probably, the minister should come up and clarify when the companies are going to start such that these people realise power in their areas. Thank you.5.28MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, chairperson, for the report. Mr Speaker, I just have two issues to raise. First, the issue of power in West Nile is an issue of Greater North, including Lango subregion, and I share the sentiments of my colleagues from Madi-Okollo so that they get the power that comes from Lira through Gulu. In Amolatar, we know the days we have power; they are Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays. The rest of the days, we do not have power. How I wish the plans that the minister is talking about of solar - you have to be mindful that much as you have records of electricity in every district of this country, consider the issue of stability of electricity in these areas. The second issue is the costs. I want to thank the chairperson for giving us the different sessions SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6613THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022of the cost that comes with this electricity. Yes, we have electricity, but one of the reasons you see so many poles and wires passing and our people are just looking at the wires is because of the costs. Honourable minister, we would like to hear from you on the issue of how our people can actually access the limited available electricity in our areas. Thank you. 5.29DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarity. The minister has stated that West Nile has been connected to the national grid with 33KV .First, how much power is in 33KV because the peak in West Nile is around 6 Megawatts? If you connected that 33KV , how come Members from West Nile until now, are saying they have never seen your power? Honourable minister, we were together with you in Karuma. You showed us a line that was going to West Nile and that was a month ago. You said you had connected, but the people of West Nile are saying they have never seen that power. We want to leave this House knowing whether West Nile is currently connected to the national grid or not. Before we talk about the distribution of power in the houses, is there power in West Nile from the national grid? The people of West Nile need to know that so that we now talk about the distribution. Thank you.5.31MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I have keenly listened to the report of the chairperson and I agree with you on holding ERA responsible for regulatory failure. There is a lot more they should have done in holding the power distributors responsible, but they did not, and that must be investigated to a logical conclusion. The assertions being made here that West Nile is now on the national grid - honourable minister, I just called you a few days ago at night actually, because I was there and there is no power in West Nile. The information we have is that your system there has not been synchronised with the local system and as such, that power cannot go to West Nile. What you are talking about is just lines, which do not have actual power. (Laughter) I would really want you to get in touch with the technical people to get those facts right. As we talk, in West Nile, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has not pumped enough water for about three months. All these problems are a result of power. In the Nyagak III Hydropower Project you are talking about, the Government is supposed to provide counterpart funding, but you are not clear where that money is; so, the contractor cannot be able to do work. You have listened to the people and the chairperson has ably listened to the cry of the people. In West Nile, we are paying one of the highest tariffs and there has not been a clear remedy from the ministry. Whereas you are talking about the recent borrowing –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oguzu, do we have a special tariff for West Nile? Are they charging you a tariff different from the rest of the country? MR OGUZU: Yes, we are actually paying much higher tariffs than what the rest of the country is paying and that disadvantages the people of West Nile. Sometimes our people think this is a very structural problem created to keep some parts of this country backward. People have lived in energy poverty for a very long time. You borrowed money - honourable members, I would like to inform you that in this recent borrowing, the whole of the north, which is one of the underserved regions in this country - there would be 140,000 connections. Compare this to the rest of Uganda: central region will get 460,000 connections – and you are already well-served; western Uganda will get over 6614ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT200,000 connections, and eastern Uganda will get more than 200,000 connections. The north – from West Nile to Lango, Acholi and Karamoja – will get 140,000 only, yet they are living in darkness. Is there equity in this country?One time, we met the President in Entebbe and the honourable minister then, who is seated in this House, told the President, in our presence, that West Nile did not have capacity to consume power – and you are looking at me now. (Laughter)- You see this kind of injustice being done to the people.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, you are making everyone guilty. Every minister is being judged. Can you identify the minister? You said he is here. Every minister is now looking shy and guilty. (Laughter)MR OGUZU: Mr Speaker, I am only trying to draw attention to a problem that has persisted for long and we are looking for a solution and the solution -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is the solution to make the whole Frontbench guilty? (Laughter)MR OGUZU: The solution can only come if the Members appreciate the magnitude of the problem we face. If you go to West Nile, the environment is completely devastated because the people depend on biomass. We are talking about climate change, but the people of West Nile, who have not seen power, are dependent on biomass and this has depleted the environment. We would have expected very clear solutions like it is the case in the other parts of Uganda, for example, that gas cylinders should be supplied such that people can use them for cooking. However, those solutions are not very clear. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. MR OGUZU: We are hosting refugees. The refugees have contributed to the depletion of our environment, but there is still no clear plan. Most importantly, honourable minister -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you do not want to listen to the Speaker. It seems you have taken over completely. MR OGUZU: I am sorry -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have given you so much time, Hon. Lee. Please, conclude. MR OGUZU: In conclusion, honourable minister, the information I would like to give you is that the money we borrowed to take power to subcounties - that project is not delivering. The lines have been abandoned there; they are incomplete. You need to pay attention to that.Two, for the West Nile grid extension project, there are people who gave wayleaves, but have not been compensated. I gave you and the chairperson of the committee information that there are project items, which have not been accounted for and should have been investigated. I really think you should listen to the Speaker’s advice that you need to return to West Nile and listen to those problems. There are much bigger problems, which this report has not conclusively addressed. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, this has really surprised me. I know we have a company generating and also distributing power in West Nile. However, how it should work – we have areas, honourable minister, that are not generating any power, but are receiving power at a low rate. We should have subsidised West Nile if it was necessary. (Applause) There is no way we can say “West Nile, you have your special rate” as if they are not part of this country. That is a real shocker.In my area, I am receiving power, but I am not generating anything. Now, West Nile, which [Mr Oguzu] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6615THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022is generating, is being punished with a higher rate. That is unacceptable. What we should do – when you read reports of ERA, each distributor or generator is given a rate. Now, what we should do is to have a uniform rate for the country and then the Government can chip in on other areas. Two, honourable minister, the problems you have in West Nile are mainly to do with River Nyagak not being able to generate the power you anticipated it could. Now you are even building another dam on that same river that disappointed you with the first dam. (Laughter)I think we need clear assurance that this time, you got the designs right. I was on the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources – and I am happy Hon. Muloni is here. We quarreled with her several times on the issue of Nyagak. They said that River Nyagak, during the dry season, completely dries up. Now, you are adding another dam! Hon. Muloni, can you give us some information? 5.40MS IRENE MULONI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to colleagues’ in thanking the committee for the report and all the efforts that are going into ensuring that the people of West Nile have reliable power supply like any other part of this country. Mr Speaker, of course, the process that the Government undertook to ensure that power extends to all parts of the country took advantage of the existing resources. So, for West Nile, before the main grid could be connected, they tried to harness the existing power sources, including hydro. Now, on River Nyagak, the first dam, which is totaling 3.5 Megawatts – two of them generators - At that time, the demand for power in West Nile – you know there is what we call “suppressed demand”. There is what is installed and what people can consume.The issue is that West Nile region is very vibrant – and I really sympathised with the people of West Nile. They are very active and vibrant: the demand was growing very fast, meaning that whatever plan had to be made was to ensure that everything was accelerated. When Nyagak Dam was commissioned, the two generators were able to supply West Nile, but the supply was outstripped within a very short time and that is why there were all these efforts of getting solar, getting 33KV as the 132KV and, finally, these 220KV and 400KV into West Nile. All those were interventions by the Government – how fast or how quickly can we really help the people of West Nile? Now, when taking advantage of a resource – while we have the Nyagak upstream, you take advantage and also build more dams downstream so that you can make use of this water, which is running at the different points along the river, to actually get electricity. So, whatever intervention the Government was making was really for a good cause – to ensure that all these benefits got into helping the people of West Nile. So, there is no harm building another dam downstream – it is trying to tap the same water so that it generates at Nyagak and also downstream. Of course, the sizing of the projects depends on the volume of the water.Also, the afforestation – you know, how much water runs into rivers depends on the trees that we have. Yes, if we cut forests, definitely, our rivers keep drying up. So, we must make sure that afforestation takes root so that River Nyagak can run throughout the year and, therefore, whatever dams are constructed along the lines would be able to generate electricity. That said, I just want to put my other point to the committee and the ministry on the issue of tariffs. I appreciate their recommendations, where they say they want competitive and fair tariffs to all Ugandans. (Interjection) - Let me finish.6616ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTFor a fair and competitive tariff, that is a very loaded statement. I do not know whether the committee and the ministry can give us indications of pointers, in terms of the tariff and the timelines, so that we see that yes, we are driving towards that. The second issue is on the cooking tariff. We appreciate. When I look at the tariff structure, it is only from 80 units up to 150 that they provide for the cooking tariffs. What happens to these people who benefit from the lifeline tariff, before they consume up to 80 units? It means they are paying at a higher rate for cooking. If we want to help them, then maybe this cooking tariff should not skip that band; it should pick right away from the 15 units, crossing up to 150 units so that all of us, as Ugandans, benefit from the cooking tariff. Extending it to West Nile, definitely, they should also benefit from the cooking. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Getting that technical guidance and benefitting from that memory. Honourable minister, you need to tell us because I am seeing some reliance on Nyagak III. Maybe chairperson, you have to interest yourself on the hydrological studies done for Nyagak III, if Nyagak I has failed. The same environment, same river, same water volume, which failed you and you are putting another dam? One plate which failed to feed two people and now you are adding four more people to feed from the same – Are we Jesus to say if you get –(Laughter)- five loaves of bread, you will feed 5,000 people? These are issues, Chairperson, you as the committee should tackle, but I hope the minister can –I have not picked you, honourable member. When you get a microphone and you keep – I feel like I am being harassed here. I tend to drop you forever.5.46MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, but as we speak for West Nile, I want to tell you, minister, that where I come from – 120 kilometers from Kampala, in the Bukomansimbi – most areas have no single pole that gives people hope that maybe we shall get power later. Three months ago, the Speaker, the Rt Hon. Anita Among, instructed the minister to come up with the electrification action plan for Bukomansimbi. Up to now, we have not seen that plan. I want to ask the minister and the ministry in general; what did the people of Bukomansimbi do to the ministry, so that I can talk to them and we apologise? Or if it is a debt, we come and pay.5.47MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must add my voice in thanking the committee for doing a great job. Indeed, we all agree that issues of West Nile must be prioritised, but honourable minister, I want you to pick keen interest in the contractors that you are going to give this work. You remember when you came to us in the Committee on National Economy, there were some contractors who never delivered on the task that they were given. Honourable minister, there is connection and effectiveness. Case in point is in Kitgum District, we have poles and lines, but there is no power. When giving reports, you will say Kitgum District has been connected. What we know is, we need the power to be there. Also, the cost of connecting the power: let us prioritise issues of schools, churches, hospitals, and ensure that these are the areas that we address first. If we do that, honourable minister, we will not have such debate again. If we do not handle all these issues we are bringing out while having this debate, then we may come [Ms Muloni] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6617THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022back again here with the same complaint, as a matter of national importance. Otherwise, we thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.49MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really appreciate the committee for the report as well. What I want to bring to light is the fact that the issues of rural electrification have become very critical and not only unique to the West Nile Region, but in my area in Kassanda District. We have villages like Mirembe, Kyakatebi, Kasana – they are right along the road where the electricity lines pass, but they have never been connected and they also simply stare at the power lines all the time. We have a number of villages, including my own village in Kasana; the biggest percentage of that district has no electricity at all. We have been talking about this electrification for a very long time, but the ministers always forget that Kassanda is a district. They tend to think that we are a village, still in Mubende District. I really hope that they can prioritise Kassanda District.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, even villages deserve power. Even when Kassanda is considered a village, they should give it power. (Laughter)5.50MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for his very good report. I also thank the minister. When we talk about West Nile lacking power, I really feel the pain because in Karamoja, there is one district, which is exactly like West Nile – and that is Abim. Power came to Abim in 2006, but up to now, the district headquarters is still in darkness. The X-rays in the major hospital - Abim Hospital - cannot run. Mr Speaker, like my colleague said, for them, they are sure that they get power on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, but for Abim, it is quarterly releases. (Laughter)In one quarter, we get power for 10 days. Our connection is from Pasmek, which is in Pader. We request the minister, as you look at the West Nile to also look at Abim. I request you to direct him to come to Abim too so that we get sorted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I know Hon. Okaasai does not need to be directed. He will come to Abim. Isn’t it, honourable minister? You are going to Abim? – Very good. 5.52MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of electricity in West Nile is very urgent. The DR Congo is now part of the East African Community and we need industries there in West Nile. If we do not do that, we shall do re-export of either products from Kenya or some products from Kampala. At the moment in West Nile, the Congolese line up for products from Kampala and products from Kenya. Products of simple industries that would be in West Nile. Therefore, if we do not fast-track connecting West Nile to the national grid, we are losing national revenue. At the moment, we would be getting money as part of taxes from West Nile. Secondly, we are failing to get jobs. Those people would be getting jobs from industries. Therefore, I wonder why we are not connecting West Nile using the excess power the President has been talking about. Does it mean that as power travels from Jinja to West Nile, does it disappear on the way? (Laughter) If it can move from Jinja to Rwanda, from Jinja to Kenya, from Jinja to Sudan? How can that power fail to move up to West Nile direct instead of waiting for Nyagak, which has been failing? Mr Speaker, we need to act quickly. Otherwise, we shall continue failing to get jobs and to get revenue. Thank you very much.6618ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT5.54MS FLA VIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee chairperson for the report that he presented here. I kind of got anxious that West Nile is about to see light. I was there not long ago; I think the honourable member for Nebbi will bear me witness. Madi Okollo, Obongi and Terego did not have electricity – because I was there physically.We cannot continue to talk about connection; the people of West Nile need electricity in their homes, industries and at their places of work so that they can do value addition, and also be able to join this country to transform their communities. Mr Speaker, I have listened to the Members. I do not want to tell you what happens in Kyegegwa; that I also do not have electricity. I would like to propose that the Ministry of Energy comes here to Parliament with a profile of each district and how electricity coverage is per district –(Applause)- so that we know which district has five per cent, which district has 10 per cent because we all cannot come up with motions. The electricity coverage in our districts ends up only seeing lines as tourist attractions, but not electricity in the houses, industries and workplaces. Mr Speaker, I would like to implore the ministry to come up with a profiled electricity coverage scale-up and plan for each district. Thank you. 5.55MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, but also, as part of Teso, I thank the minister for the poles and lines that have been lined up in many of our districts. We thank you for that. (Laughter) My question is: when will those lines be switched on because that is what people are asking for? In Kaberamaido, you have done a lot of coverage, in terms of putting up the poles, but we are looking forward to that being switched on.The other issue I want to raise with you, honourable minister, is pricing for connections. There are some places where people say they are being asked for Shs 2 million for a connection. Other people are saying Shs 3 million; others are saying Shs 1.5 million. It would be good if the ministry can come out clearly on what that cost of connection is.Lastly, as other Members have said on the issue of schools and Government institutions, we still have schools that are not connected and they are asked to also pay to be connected. It is the same with churches. If there could be affirmative action for those, it would be helpful. There are also several hotels and tourist places, which are really an investment for the Government, but they are not connected. We still have areas, including in Soroti, where there are guesthouses connected, but it is very intermittent and so, they cannot host visitors. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition? Chairperson, a minute. Let the LOP say something.5.57THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to assure the honourable chairperson that he is safe. (Laughter) I can see him agitated a bit –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is excited to see you on the Floor. MR MPUUGA: I like him. We have sparred over energy matters and at some stage, we had consensus.First of all, I would like to remind him that while amending the Electricity Act, we did advise, on our side, that we should consider amending the V AT Act to bring V AT for domestic consumption to 10 from 18 per cent. SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6619THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022I thought that if you had taken that cue, the debate about the cost would not be arising now. So, we are going over the same matter that was not considered. We need to rethink it.Secondly, the issue on page 30 relating to the ongoing Nyagak III project: my concern is, when discussing the issue of Vinci Coffee, Mr Speaker, I raised it here, through a motion without notice, and the House took that motion to the effect that all contracts before the Government must have an eye of Parliament. I can see contracts here. Parliament is investigating Bujagali over what is considered a “fraud contract”, in which possibly billions of money were lost. Has the committee considered looking at these contracts the Government is undertaking under Public-Private Partnerships? I hope, through action taken reports, we shall have a report from the learned Attorney-General on these contracts that we demanded for, as Parliament, to be tabled for the attention of Parliament.Third and lastly, is the issue of dimmed energy referred to - on I think page 29 or thereabout – on page 32, to be particular. If you consider how much money the country loses in paying for dimmed energy, our last calculation from my side could power over 10 districts in this country.So, the question is: did the honourable chairperson consider whether Government is alive to the cost and the challenge of still contracting, where dimmed energy is still considered a cost to the taxpayer, instead of actually – We even advised that the cost of dimmed energy resources could be channeled into connecting communities and it is in millions of dollars. So, is the minister alive to the challenge of dimmed energy and how we have variously advised that actually, this is a nugatory cost to the taxpayer and there will be no cost if Government vacates payment for dimmed energy?I would like to hear from the chairperson and what they are doing about it; that in the next budget, we are able to do away with this cost and make it an available resource for connecting communities. I thought I should bring out these issues. Otherwise, I want to thank the committee for hazarding this report and its attendant problems. At the tabling of the loan for the energy sector, I remember I rose up for an advisory that the minister, as a matter of equity, tables the beneficiary areas or regions, so that Members are comforted in the fact that we are all serving the same country. (Applause)I was away when that loan was being considered, so I do not know whether it was one of the considerations of the committee because what I am hearing now is it seems that it was never an issue. So, the debate is back.We have a loan passed. It is generally available to whoever can either lobby, speak nicely or tell some consummate lies, but not as a matter of equity for the taxpayer. So, will the minister assure this country that actually, the taxpayers in Kassanda and other places will derive equity out of this loan to which every taxpayer is liable? (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, it does no harm for you to re-table, even if you did so already, the beneficiaries for that loan and the areas that are going to benefit. Please lay it on the Table and then we shall share it with colleagues so that they know the areas that are going to be covered in the country. This also brings us to the one for rural electrification – the one we passed for Last Mile Connection. You started on implementation and we went through very many issues. That time, I was a backbencher; I am now a presiding officer. Sir, this time, I have the power to direct. The other time, I was begging; now, I cannot. So, we seriously need an implementation update on that report. (Applause) 6620ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTWe should have finished a long time ago. We should be having power in all subcounties of Uganda. (Applause) We should be having power. Remember when we were working on it with Hon. Tumwiine and group - no, no. I am not opening this, colleagues, please. Honourable minister, we also need that. I will give you space on the Order Paper on Tuesday to give us two things; one, an implementation status report for the Last Mile Connection REA Project for all subcounties in the country - the updated status report. Number two, the beneficiary areas for this loan, which we passed, so that colleagues in their areas know and start preparing - I expect all them on Tuesday. Clerk, capture that.DR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start by responding to the issues raised by my senior brother the LOP, in respect to dimmed energy, and whether the loan we passed recently actually provided for equity in terms of national coverage. I would like to say that the electricity access scale up loan that we passed here recently is meant to address most of the challenges colleagues have raised here, including connections of public facilities like schools, health centres and churches, but also to improve on our cooking methods so that we move away from the use of biomass. Now, two weeks ago when we passed that loan, one of the major considerations that the presiding officer then considered, and which I think was debated comprehensively, was the issue of national coverage. Was this loan meant to cover just a few areas or the whole country? And indeed, that was the consideration; that the loan is meant to cover the whole country. The allocations notwithstanding, the honourable minister will give us details of how much is going to the East, North, Central, West- those are the details. However, suffice for me to say that, that loan has national character. Equity notwithstanding, the minister will give the details about that. That loan is meant to address the issue of dimmed energy to boost consumption, so that we do not continue paying money for energy not consumed. I must say that while undertaking this study, we specifically got concerned about the fact that Nyagak III Dam is almost getting completed, which meant that very soon, if the Government does not provide its part of equity, then we are going to lack evacuation. That is why we made a strong recommendation, that the Government should urgently provide Shs 24 billion, which is its equity on that project, being a Public Private Partnership (PPP), so that we do not generate power and there is no evacuation. That was our consideration, that if it means borrowing more money, they would rather borrow the Shs 24 billion so that the lines are connected. The assurance we got from the contractors is that once the money is provided to them, they will be able to execute that by March 2023. They already have the plan, everything is done, what is left is just giving them the money and they will execute. Now the other issue that I really want to address was raised by Hon. Pacuto, who wondered why we recommended for the termination of the Electro-Maxx contract, as opposed to what the presenters of the motion prayed for; that UNOC be given money to provide fuel to Electro-Maxx to generate power. Our considerations are that what UETCL is paying to Electro-Maxx to generate already has a fuel component. Therefore, the onus is not on Government, again, to give UNOC money to buy fuel. What we saw in Electro-Maxx was a company that is facing financial challenges, and it had failed on its obligation. That is why we disagreed with the prayers of the movers of the motion that the Government gives fuel through UNOC. Therefore, we said no, this is a company that has failed to meet its obligation; its contract should be terminated, and indeed, the company should be investigated. [The Deputy Speaker] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6621THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022We made strong recommendations about investigating the whole thing. We recommended a forensic audit by the Auditor-General, and we believe, although I did not have the time to take you through this report, I believe the whole report is going to be captured as part of the Hansard of this House, and that the recommendations that we made will be followed to the letter. Mr Speaker, I do not want to drag on, I want to leave the rest to the minister to respond to because basically, the other issues are for him to respond to - those are implementation issues, and the mandate of the Executive is to implement. Ours as the Legislature is an oversight function. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable minister, conclude.MR OKAASAI:  Mr Speaker, my chairperson has spoken. There are only a few clarifications, which I would wish to make.On the loan, equity and connections, I will oblige by what the Speaker has actually asked me to do. I am comfortable with the distribution; every part of the country is covered - you will be able to see what has been given to your district. In addition, this depends largely on those areas - like the questions that have been asked. You see lines running above the heads, but there is no electricity. This project is actually supposed to step that power down, make it available and connected to the households and the end users. Secondly, the project is purely talking to the Parish Development Model; connecting power to those growth centres, those industries which you have in your places, the grinding mills, institutions, schools, health centres - that is what the project is actually addressing, making sure that power is used for productive purposes, but it will also go to households. However, if the households are far off the grid, that is where the solar system comes in. When the school is far from the grid, we are actually bringing in the solar system and to health centres. We are working with the Ministries of Health, Education, Water, and Trade to guide us where we shall take the power, including irrigation. Connectivity: the project is mainly addressing the distribution part. We have been talking about dimmed energy - the dimmed energy is because there is poor network for distribution. There are very many areas that are not connected and there are very many areas where we have not taken power. Therefore, the project is majorly for distribution and connections. There is going to be no transmission. This is expected to absorb the dimmed energy, which we have been registering. That is the sole purpose of this project. For the benefit of Members, I am now going to also lay on the Table the beneficiaries I am talking about. It will come out clearly. Those who were here when the project was being debated upon, remember the beneficiaries. The power is - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are concluding, honourable colleagues. MR OKAASAI: Nyagak and Public Private Partnerships (PPP) is being addressed. What we need for Nyagak to come into production is Shs 24 billion that we are asking for. Within the Shs 24 billion, the transmission component is inclusive; so, it is not going to be dimmed energy. If we get the Shs 24 billion, the transmission line is going to be provided to link it to Nyagak I. Once it is linked to Nyagak I, it will be distributed all over the country. There are very many questions on the connections and the cost of connections. This project is going to address the policy of the Government on free connections. We are going to have over one million connections done targeting households that have one pole or no pole connection. It is going to be done in the implementation of the free connection policy. No pole is going to hang without a connection. 6622ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTThe Government is coming to implement a free connection policy through the project. There is no point in saying, “affirmative action.” The Government is going to implement affirmative action for all those who desire to use electricity in this country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable minister.MR OKAASAI: There are lines, which are not connected, and there are poles which are hanging without a network. That is a priority of the ministry now. There are so many lines, which are technically commissioned. They have transformers and conductors; for example, you can find a pole in front of a household when the household is not using electricity. I urge Members of Parliament - if you went and stood near a transformer that is making noise, it means that line has been technically commissioned; it is ready for connection. I am going to produce a list of those lines which have reached that level and lay the list on the Table here such that Members of the lines that are complete and the population can use them, even if they are not politically commissioned.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know the challenge. People do not have Shs 700,000 or more for connections. By the way, if it was in my powers, honourable minister - I want to be open about this - I would even connect that power for free to everyone. (Applause) The reason is, in just one to two years, you would have recouped this money. Moreover, you are paying for this power; whether consumed or not, you are paying for it. If it was in my power, I would connect everyone because I would recoup this money quickly. It is very simple, honourable minister. When you tell people “if you hear a sound in a transformer, know that it is ready…” In economics, it is a very simple term called “constrained demand.” The service is there, people want it, but they are constrained by the charge.MR OKAASAI: Mr Speaker, I take your sentiment. This is why this project on the implementation of the free connection policy came into place. Just give us two months: this policy will be implemented fully throughout the project.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you, honourable minister.MR OKAASAI:  For the other questions, which have been asked, for instance, the one on solar, West Nile is very lucky because they have a proper energy mix in the region. They have hydro and we are bringing more hydro through our grid. They have the potential for solar. The solar will be connected to that grid. It is not going to be standalone; it will be fed through their substations and they will use it to stabilise the power. West Nile has also got the potential for producing geothermal energy in Pakwach. All these are going to be exploited. West Nile is going to be the exporter of power rather than a user of power. They will have more than what they need in their region when we bring all this into play. There was a clarification sought that I said would take time. There are different types of energy. If I deliver bulk power at 132KV , it ends up in the substation, then, I have got to start developing the distribution network; stepping that power down to 33KV and 11KV . That is the power that will go into houses and industries. That will take us time to develop. West Nile is going to be a priority, even in the project and other projects that the ministry is handling. We shall endeavour to bring West Nile at par with the rest of the country.I wish to appreciate the people of West Nile. My friend, Hon. Lee, knows very well that the 33 KV has not actually been properly synchronised onto the network of West Nile. We are using UEDCL to do that. The report I got showed that they have succeeded in harmonising the network in West Nile –(Interjection)-  No, this was last week -[Mr Okaasai] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6623THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 6 DECEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are responding to a Member who is not on record. MR OKAASAI: I am sorry. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reader of the Hansard will look for the connection of your submission and -MR OKAASAI: It is being taken care of using UEDCL. WENRECo was not able to do it so we had to bring in UEDCL. Finally, West Nile, we have heard your cry on WENRECo. WENRECo’s   concession is coming to an end and it is not going to be renewed. The UEDCL is taking over West Nile as a Government company, to ensure that power is stabilised in West Nile. That is the last question. For the rest of the questions from other regions - one thing I wish to point out is that they have the backbone electricity. Kassanda has a backbone, but the distribution is lacking. You have those big lines going overhead - we are going to step them down and then we shall distribute power.On Abim, I share with you –(Interjections)-  okay, let me answer the one on Abim. For Abim, we know your power is coming from Gulu and it is through a distribution line. There are a lot of power losses in Abim –(Interruption)MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was directed by the Chair last time to bring a comprehensive report on the state of electricity connection in this country, detailing all areas. So, this piecemeal approach that the minister has chosen would defeat that purpose. Let him come here, as directed by the Chair last time, and give us the report with details so that all Members can feel that he has taken care of their concerns. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you direct him to come with that statement?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, piecemeal responses – no. Let us stick to what we agreed on.MR OKAASAI: So, I am concluding by assuring those whom I have committed to go to their regions that I will go. Abim and Obongi districts, I am coming.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You have seen that you still have very many issues. The Speaker also directed you to bring a response to the issues raised by the Shadow Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on power outages. I will give you space on Thursday. You were directed to bring it this week. So, I will give you space on Thursday and I hope you will be ready. (Applause) It is on the issue of the national outages that we continue getting – and a permanent solution. Secondly, I saw the report you gave in relation to what the Leader of the Opposition said – on the areas that are going to benefit from the loan. It is not helpful at all. When you list that Mukono will get this much, Mitooma this much, Obongi this much: how will I know whether my constituency is in or not? We need details. (Applause) The project must have gone into detailed designs and, you know, which village, parish and subcounty - those are the details we need. The list you gave is not helpful at all. (Applause) So, if you need more time, we can give you more time, but you give us a detailed list, which Members can respond to. Finally, this is a word of caution, generally. Honourable minister, I think you see why Members are raising very many issues with your sector: it is to do with service delivery. There is a general belief among Members that even if we had issues of service delivery, they were worsened by the merger of the Rural Electrification Agency with the ministry. (Applause) Now, again, you are proposing to merge the whole energy sector into one entity. I wish you success, honourable minister, in regard to that.  (Laughter)6624ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTIf you have read the signs, you have read it. With that, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the erratic electricity supply in West Nile be adopted, with proposed amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a very urgent matter. I give you one month to table an action taken report, as per Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure. I want to clarify on the issue of action taken reports. The Government side has taken the action taken report to mean annual, bi-annual or quarterly reporting. No, the time starts counting from the day the House makes a resolution. This is so that we do not have this business of compiling very many reports and we fail to give them the justice that they deserve. So, honourable minister, it is one month from now. The moment we come back from recess, I expect you to give us an action taken report because you could see that most of the issues were not long term, but short term. By then, you would have addressed the issues to do with the recommendations of the committee.Honourable colleagues, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 December 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) [The Deputy Speaker] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT