


Thursday, 14 December 2017

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. First of all, I would like to remind the Anglican Chaplaincy that there is a Christmas Carols Service today at 4.30 p.m. and the Archbishop will be coming. I hope we shall be able to do our work quickly and also go and thank God for the work done this year.

Secondly, honourable members, you may recall that in February 2017, we elected our representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). Unfortunately, up to today, they have not taken oath because Kenya National Assembly has not elected their Members. The Clerk to the East African Legislative Assembly issued a notice that they would want to swear in the Members on Monday, 18 December 2017. However, that will depend on the outcome of elections today in the Kenya National Assembly. In that regard, I would like to ask the Minister of East African Affairs to follow through what I have done so far.

I have written to my counterpart, hon. Muturi, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya. I spoke to her and reminded her that they are delaying part of the corporation by failing to elect their members. I hope that they will elect their representatives today. Otherwise, if they do not elect today - I would like to call upon the Council of Ministers and Summit to weigh in and ensure that one of the legs of the corporation does not collapse.

Thirdly, yesterday, I received a report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, concerning the constitutional amendment Bill. I also received the minority report. I am giving notice that we shall convene on Monday at 9.30 a.m. so that we can have sufficient time for debate. Therefore, Parliament will convene on Monday at 9 O’clock, to receive both reports and thereafter debate will ensue. I am now directing the Clerk to upload both reports on to the iPads so that Members can study them during the weekend in readiness for Monday.

Honourable members, on Tuesday, 12 December 2017, hon. Karuhanga, Member of Parliament for Ntungamo Municipality raised a matter of national importance in which he stated that hon. Sam Kutesa, Member of Parliament for Mawogola North Constituency, who is also the Minister of Foreign Affairs was involved in bribery. He stated that this action had caused disrepute to this House and that the honourable member should be brought to book in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Hon. Karuhanga laid on the Table a charge sheet containing several counts preferred by the Federal Bureau of Investigators (FBI) against two persons. One is Chi Ping Patrick also known as Patrick C.P Ho and one Cheik Gadio. The charges were sanctioned by the Trial Attorney of the Criminal Division of the Southern District of New York, and presented to court on 16 November 2017. 

It is alleged that the two accused persons while in the southern districts of New York and elsewhere in the USA, did violate the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act by conspiring willfully and corruptly by use of mails as a means and  instrumentality of inter-state commerce and did an act in furtherance of an offence by giving something of value, to wit money to a foreign official, the Ugandan Foreign Minister, to secure an improper advantage and to induce the foreign official to use his influence with the Government of Uganda to obtain business for their energy company.

We are aware about the code of conduct which requires Members of Parliament to conduct themselves in a manner that maintains and strengthens the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and should not by their conduct bring the institution of Parliament to disrepute.

Honourable members, the charge sheet laid on the Table by hon. Karuhanga relate to the two persons I have named. However, hon. Sam Kutesa has not been charged. I have established that the named persons were arrested and are being tried under the USA judicial system. This being the case, it is still premature for Parliament to delve in any investigation because we do not know whether he is going to be a witness or something else. Otherwise, for now it is premature. Let us wait for the outcome of the proceedings in New York before we take other action. Thank you.

2.58
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I certainly oblige by your ruling. What I thought was very particular is that when we hold public offices and we are under investigations, the likelihood of influencing the investigation becomes apparent. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be prudent to allow an impartial, free and fair investigation without any influence by hon. Sam Kutesa, so that he does not utilise his position as the Minister of Foreign Affairs to curtail and fail effective investigation. That is why the proposed motion is not on censure but to allow a free and fair investigation process, so that he does not use his office to carry out - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, are you proposing to go and investigate a matter which is in the court in New York? It is not in his jurisdiction. How will he investigate in New York? 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, like other countries in Africa, Europe, North America, many other countries corporate on issues of such a nature. I think we do not have a particular grudge as a nation with them. Therefore, if there is an inquiry in the conduct of our public officer on something he committed on the land of another country, we can establish a select committee to cooperate with them - (Interjections) - I know hon. Sam Kutesa has lots of funds and resources and I know how complex it is to address such a matter in this House -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are you suggesting?

MR KARUHANGA: What I am suggesting, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: I am asking what you are imputing.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, with the influence and resources the Foreign Affairs Minister has, it is proper he steps aside for the investigation to be free and fair so that Ugandans -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my difficulty is I have no jurisdiction in the United States. I have no authority to send a team to the United States on a crisis which is not here. If it were here-

3.02
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, you are very right. However, leave alone the other matter in the USA, the further dilemma we have is where our Ministry of Foreign Affairs issues a press statement agreeing that the Minister, hon. Sam Kutesa, was named in the graft. However, they tried to put some justification. They did not give the minister an opportunity to get on record. 

If it was irrelevant as my colleagues would like us to believe, then, there was no way the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would have plotted to make denials. However, at the end of the day, honourable members, you should know it is not hon. Sam Kutesa at trial but it is Uganda. 

When I keep quiet as someone trades the name of Uganda where I am a shareholder, it would be the lowest service I or any Member of Parliament could ever render this country. You recently saw our own, hon. Kabafunzaki, was framed just on an allegation. He was arrested and taken to Nalufenya on Saturday and a complaint was done on Monday. (Applause)

Now, if we could not give a benefit of the doubt to one of us, we should then stop playing double standards in this country and this Parliament in particular. Let us pronounce ourselves on this matter. We may not be interested in what is going on in the USA courts but the information we have here is to the effect that USD 500,000 was wired to a bank account in Uganda. Here, in Uganda, we have the Uganda Financial Intelligence Authority which could have tracked that money.

Madam Speaker, if that is not credible enough to Members, what is then credible enough to honourable Members of Parliament? I do not want us to be partisan on this matter. Let us debate it freely and fairly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad he has stated the financial intelligence point of view. Please, let them complain with the information we have. We also have laws in Uganda. Let them complain as concerned citizens.

Honourable members, if the offence was committed here, I would have no problem. However, I have no control over another jurisdiction. Are you now going to interrogate the State Attorneys in New York?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, Rule 86 on the decision of the Speaker or Chairperson states: 

    1. “The Speaker or the Chairperson of a Committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or Committee”. 

    2. The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson on any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

You communicated last time that you were going to make a ruling and you have guided this House and made a decision. Is it procedurally right for somebody to go against your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I pray the American court works very quickly and gives us a final position. Then, we will know how to move.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery we have councillors from Kotomor, Agago led by Mr Jacob Olinga, the LC III Chairperson. They are represented by hon. Franca Akello, Woman Representative for Agago District and hon. Edward Otto of Agago County. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, a few months ago, when we were at the Uganda North America Convention, we agreed with the banks and real estate institutions which were exhibiting there to come and showcase their products here. This would avail interested Members and their constituencies an opportunity to secure the property or open bank accounts and perform other transactions.

Therefore, the exhibition will be here from Monday 18th until the 19th December 2017 in the South Wing parking lot. Those who are interested in looking at the products can access them from there. Thank you very much.

3.08
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In March 2010, the Public Service ministry set up a framework on what constitutes hard-to-reach areas and Buvuma was part of them. Civil servants in Buvuma started receiving the hard-to-reach areas allowance from 2010 which is 30 percent of the basic salary. 

However, in 2016, the Ministry of Public Service suspended Buvuma from the list of hard-to-reach areas. The reason was that the town council of Buvuma is not hard to reach and the district headquarters of Buvuma are located in the town council. To my understanding, what constitutes a hard-to-reach area is the access to that area. As far as I know, Buvuma has not yet become part of the mainland; it is still an island.

In February 2017, I, together with the District Chairperson and the council wrote to the Ministry of Public Service. On 4 October 2017, I raised the same issue here. Madam Speaker, that day, you directed the Minister of Public Service to come here and report to Parliament within two weeks. As we talk now, it is beyond two months.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the assistance I seek from you probably is to compel the Ministry of Public Service to assist Parliament on what constitutes hard-to-reach areas so that my civil servants in Buvuma can serve. The purpose of the hard-to-reach area allowance was to retain those civil servants. Thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give this House is that when you are going to the island, you go through Bukakata road. To justify that it is a very hard to reach area, even Bukakata itself is impassable. Therefore, the information I would like to give is that after this House passed a loan to construct Bukakata Road, Government totally failed to implement the project. Sincerely, Buvuma Island is a hard to reach area. 

THE SPEAKER: I am glad the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. I think we would like to express our concern that the standing for the islands is not focussed. It is the people who live on the main land that are planning but they only plan for the mainland and not the island constituencies. They have never gone there actually.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Nyendo-Bukakata Road is on the programme for being tarmacked. We have even got the money from the Islamic Development Bank. The bank has to approve the design. Unfortunately, we faced a problem so it got delayed but later on, it was approved –(Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in order to come here and deceive this House? Since 2013, that is the same statement being read here. Are you in order, honourable minister, to keep deceiving the House that Bukakata Road project is being considered and it is under design? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works and Transport, before I make a ruling, how far have we gone with Bukakata? 

3.13
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, the designs and everything were ready but there was a delay from the Islamic Development Bank in approving that loan. Nevertheless, we are about to implement it because they have already approved it. Thank you.

3.14
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I think we should ask these ministers to be a bit serious. We have talked about these delays since 2013. This is because a Member of Parliament from Buvuma Islands explained to us their problems and this has also been supported by the same members, who also come from islands. 

Let me say this; we are about to raise another issue about the electricity loan that we passed here for Kalungu District, Kamuli District and other districts that are going to get power through loans. However, it has been three years so far and the loans have never been effected. 

Madam Speaker, when you fail to perform, you have to inform the Members of Parliament and the House. How do you bring an excuse to this House that the bank refused the design after the loan was taken and had been passed here? It is not true. I really do not support that school of thought. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are moving away from the issue that came to this House. How was Buvuma Town council removed from the hard to reach areas? It used to be there but the Government removed it. The islands are difficult places. You inform hon. Robert Migadde why you removed his town because he comes from deep in the islands. 

MR KASAIJA: First of all, Madam Speaker, before I come to that point, I think to show you the seriousness on this road, let me promise to come here, bring full details with figures and dates. I was in Khartoum to negotiate that loan and we will show you how far Government has gone. Can I ask you, Madam Speaker, that I come with a statement here to show you facts about this road?

Two, you have asked me if we plan for the islands; Madam Speaker, we plan for the entire country. Just as I plan for Bundibugyo, I also plan for Buvuma Islands. You can look at our national plan – (Interruption) 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of order that I am raising is; can the minister clarify the points that hon. Migadde brought up? We have civil servants in Buvuma Islands who are working in a hard to reach district. I think it was the Seventh Parliament that clearly categorised districts termed as hard to reach. Right now, we do not even attract workers that can work there because of the hardship. 

There is some additional allowance that is given to the workers that come to Buvuma. You are aware that every district has a town council. However, right now, the workers in Buvuma Town Council want to run away from Buvuma Islands because their hard to reach allowance was scraped off. May we know why? 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the concerns of Members who come from areas that are not benefiting from the hard to reach framework. As a Ministry of Public Service, we are trying to review that hard to reach framework. We know that many areas within districts had benefited from it but when we carried out an assessment, we realised that some of those areas within a district may not be categorised as “hard to reach.” We have a criterion –(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is Buvuma District and it comprises 52 islands. It does not touch the mainland and that is why we are bringing this issue here. Why is the town council not considered as a hard to reach area? Why is the minister continuing to say they discovered that some areas do not qualify to constitute hard to reach? In other words, he is insinuating that the same issue on the Floor of Parliament - that Buvuma does not qualify. Is the minister in order to continue misleading this Parliament? Is there a bridge? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, I would really like to appeal to you to be sensitive to the issues of the islanders. About four years ago, I nearly drowned on Lake Bunyonyi. I had gone to open a clinic and the boat got stuck in the water. Fortunately, I did not die but I came back here and said we needed water ambulances for the island districts. I even followed it in writing to the minister but we are still buying ambulances, which run on the road, and we have not bought any ambulance which works on the water. 

The islands include Buvuma, Mayuge, Namayingo, Rubanda, Kalangala and so many others. Therefore, hon. Karubanga, please give us answers on the hard to reach areas and the Prime Minister should tell us about the plans for the islands. 

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said, we are reviewing the framework. Many changes have happened and some areas which used to qualify now have roads reaching those areas - (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am very aware that these are appointed ministers who know what exactly should be done. You have guided very well for the minister to answer the question: have the islands been removed from the hard-to-reach areas? Is the minister in order to confuse the House without giving us the answer?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer, where have you put Buvuma islands because it is an island? They are actually islands.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, in particular for the case of Buvuma islands, I will go, investigate, and give a report. However, as I said, we are carrying out a review of the framework and I am requesting the Members to give us time to bring the reviewed framework so that they can see whether their areas will benefit or not. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, you know we are about to do the budget framework paper in December.  Therefore, I think we need to have those answers quickly so that Members know whether they are going to be provided for in the budget. When can you bring it? Can you bring it next week?

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, since the budgeting process is ongoing we will bring it next week on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, bring the report on Thursday.

3.24
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to bring something to the attention of the honourable minister. You were in Bugisu recently, Madam Speaker, and you saw the situation in Bugisu. Most of our population lives in the mountain but the services in those places are actually near to nothing.

I am wondering whether on the priority list all the Bugisu districts are actually - there are areas that you can reach but most of the population especially those that are mountainous are hard-to-reach. There are implications and issues to do with schools and roads going to those areas. Therefore, I hope that the review includes Bugisu sub region.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, bring a report about all hard-to-reach areas in the country; we will discuss it and Members will express their views.

3.25
MR ABDULATIF SSEBAGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. A year ago, we made an amendment in the Financial Act and opened the doors for Islamic banking. Two years down the road, the minister of finance has been promising to finalise the regulations but up to now, the regulations are not out. 

The President has been moving around especially in the Arab world assuring investors that Islamic banking was passed and indeed, they are open for transaction. May I inquire, Madam Speaker, from you where we are as far as Islamic banking is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: I think I can only ask the minister of finance; we did our work here and made the law.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MR MATIA KASAIJA): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. This very House passed the law about Islamic banking. What had been the problem are the regulations and I am glad to report to this House that they are ready and soon, we will be able to publicise them after which we can proceed with Islamic banking. (Interjections) Well, it is Bank of Uganda that is working on them, but Madam Speaker, if you can, please allow me to return with the statement about this issues and the Bukakata-Nyendo road. I will tell you precisely the day it should be coming into force.

THE SPEAKER: Yes minister, we will be happy to get that information.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, we launched the Parliamentary forum on Islamic banking and we have been interacting with both the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. It is a ping-pong game because when we had our meeting with Bank of Uganda, they said it is the Minister of Finance delaying the regulations. Now the Minister is saying it is Bank of Uganda.

Therefore, I would request, Madam Speaker, that since we agreed and opened doors for Islamic banking and Ugandans and investors were prepared for it, could the minister liaise with Bank of Uganda and we come up with a final statement on Islamic banking?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we shall come with an authoritative position and give it to this country.

3.28
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to raise issues that border on the protection of personal liberty and access to justice. Between 8th and 24th October, the following persons were brutally arrested by security agencies. As we talk now, the family members have informed me that these people are detained in Mbuya by CMI and they have never been produced in any courts of law.

Access by their family is equally denied something I find in violation of Article 23 of our Constitution. I would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs and Minister for Security why they have allowed their officers to act with impunity.

THE SPEAKER: But who are those people?

MR OGUZU: The arrested people are; Baka Isaac, Asiya Geoffrey and Ngungu George. They were all arrested here in Kampala. Secondly, I would like to find out why these people cannot be tried in courts of law. Thirdly, why are their families being denied access to them? 

The other thing I would like to raise is that in 2007, the Minister of Justice through a Statutory Instrument 26 created a Grade 2 magistrate court in Maracha at a place called Obujo. To date, that court has not taken effect. 

Last year, in an instrument issued on 13th September, the Minister of Constitutional Affairs again issued another instrument that created three Grade 1 magistrate courts in Maracha. Up to now, these courts have not been operational and access to justice for our people has been denied. I need to understand from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs why these courts are not in operation to date. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is directed to come and explain why the courts are not operating.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL BUDGET MONITORING REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/17

3.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the annual budget monitoring report for financial year 2016/17

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

THE LEASE AGREEMENT FOR KAMPALA INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS PARK, NAMANVE

3.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay at the Table the lease agreement for Kampala Industrial and Business Park, Namanve. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the agreement is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which had requested for it.

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE WORLD PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS, ACHIEVING THE 2030 AGENDA THROUGH INCLUSIVE DEVELOPMENT, BALI INDONESIA, 6TH – 7TH SEPTEMBER 2017

3.32
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the delegation to the World Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals, Achieving the 2030 Agenda through inclusive development, Bali Indonesia, 6th – 7th September 2017. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report will be debated on a date to be agreed.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, we made an amendment to the rules - rule 33 on the laying of reports provides that there will be at least a brief summary of the report to highlight the key recommendations contained in the report. Rule 33(2) provides for the laying of reports of Parliamentary delegations abroad. Therefore, are we proceeding right by simply receiving the report just like under the former rules?

THE SPEAKER: I recall that we passed that amendment that we do the highlights. I do not know whether he has them.

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, whereas it is not in written form, I can quickly highlight a few issues about the report. 

Madam Speaker, you did nominate and send a delegation of four Members of Parliament to go and participate at the World Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals under the theme “Achieving the 2030 agenda through inclusive development” which was held in Bali, Indonesia from 6th to 7th September 2017.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that during the presidency of hon. Sam Kutesa at the United Nations headquarters in New York, the UN declared the 17 Sustainable Development Goals that should be people-centred and built around the direction of sustainable development which looks at inclusiveness, gender, equity and democracy.

Madam Speaker, during the conference, a number of recommendations were made. The details of the report will be uploaded and shared with the Members. However, I would like to read through the recommendations:

It was recommended that the parliaments from countries such as Indonesia, China and Sri Lanka have set up substantive climate change committees. Climate change being one of the key components that must be taken into consideration while pushing the development agenda, it was recommended that all the other parliaments that are participating should consider setting up climate change committees in their respective parliaments. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, it was also recommended that funds be allocated on national budgets of parliaments for climate change interventions. It was also recommended that climate change issues be included on the syllabus of the primary and secondary schools curriculum in the respective countries. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, it was recommended that parliaments should work hard and find a way to benefit from climate change support organisations such as the Green Climate Fund, the Adequate Fund, the Clean Technology Fund, the Strategic Climate Fund as well as the Fresh Investment Programmes. These are the technical wings of the climate change interventions. I suppose that the taskforce that is being set up in Parliament should be able to follow up on how Uganda and Parliament of Uganda can be part of those that benefit from these various funds.

Madam Speaker, it was also recommended that there is need to support industries that recycle plastic materials such as plastic bottles and papers. While there, whereas the argument of total ban of plastic materials was presented, the members noted that plastic materials and plastic waste is already in circulation and the best way to reduce it is for us to support recycling so that, that which is already in the environment can be extracted through that system.

Madam Speaker – (Interjections)- honourable member, the opportunity will come for you to debate the report. Another recommendation is that Government should promote the use of renewable energy and coal energy in Uganda just like the other partner countries are doing. 

It was also recommended that the Sustainable Development Goals Secretariat be established and strengthened at the Parliament of Uganda. Currently, Sustainable Development Goals is housed under the Department of Corporate Planning and Strategy but probably we will do well to have a functional secretariat like it is with other fora. It was recommended that the national budget passed by Parliament should be sustainable development goals-oriented.

It was recommended that inclusive participation of all gender strata in Sustainable Development Goals and Climate Change initiatives should be encouraged at all times.

Finally, it was recommended that Parliament of Uganda should designate a permanent delegation to participate at the world Parliamentary Forum on sustainable development like it is with all the other bodies in which Parliament of Uganda is active.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, poverty and climate change remain a global challenge. Therefore, Sustainable Development Goals will not be achieved if climate change and poverty alleviation are neglected. It is needless to say that as we pursue sustainable development, we must always bear in mind inclusivity in development and gender concerns.

In accordance with Rule 32 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and on behalf of the Ugandan delegation to the World Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development, I beg to submit the report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the debate will follow on a time to be appointed. I only want to point out that for the Parliament of Uganda, the Commission has already established a budget for tree planting and in the next season, every Member of this House will be facilitated to go and plant trees. What we are doing at the moment is to identify which trees are good for which part of the country so that when we send you, you go with trees that are suitable for your area.

Honourable members, we have already issued instructions that the report should indicate compliance. There should be one on human rights and another on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Unfortunately, this is not happening. Actually, yesterday, we had a battle between the Chairperson of the Human Rights Committee and the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources on whether the Biofuels Bill Act, 2016 was complying with the human rights instrument.

I would like to ask the clerks that draft these reports to put in - how does the law fit in the SDGs and human rights commitment so that we can organise – honourable member, you are burning with some issue.

3.41
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am delighted and I welcome our delegation back. I made a suggestion to the committee to consider the creation of a climate change committee, which could help us, fast-track the activities of mitigation and adaptation to the climate change. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be right that we have the formation of this committee and we comply as indicated by the delegation. Otherwise, as a country, we rely on the fora which cannot account directly to this House. Even then, as a Parliament of Uganda, that is the only link we need to fill. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine the possibility of an SDG committee because we do not have it and yet it is crucial to the issues on climate change. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS ON THE PREPAREDNESS OF THE OIL AND GAS SUB SECTOR FOR THE COUNTRY TO ACHIEVE FIRST OIL IN 2020
 
THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is not here. Is there anyone who can lay the paper on the Table? 

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report on the preparedness of the oil and gas sub-sector for the country to achieve first oil in 2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources to study and report back to the House. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO FORMULATE SPECIFIC  INTERVENTIONS TOWARDS THE IMPROVEMENT OF EDUCATION STANDARDS IN DISTRICTS THAT CONSISTENTLY PERFORM POORLY IN NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not visible.

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, it is already 4 O’clock and we are supposed to have Prime Minister’s Question Time but the Prime Minister is not around. I would like to know whether this item will be handled or not.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Prime Minister’s Question Time is item five. Proceed, hon. Mungoma.

3.45
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to formulate specific interventions towards the improvement of education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations. I move this under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. However, the motion that was uploaded on the iPad is under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by Members from both sides of the House.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The motion states:

“WHEREAS objectives XVIII(i) and (ii) of the National Objectives And Directive Principles of State Policy obligate the state to promote free and compulsory basic education and take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunities to attain the highest educational standard possible;

AND WHEREAS Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, guarantees a person’s right to education;

AWARE THAT Government formulated a number of educational policies namely; Early Childhood Development Policy, 2008; the National Physical Education and Sports Policy, 2004; the Uganda Students Higher Education Financing Policy, 2012 and Education  Sector HIV/AIDS Workplace Policy which variously aim at ensuring that the right to education is realised by all;

NOTING THAT annually, three major national examinations are administered in Uganda by Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) namely; Primary Leaving Examination (PLE), Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE), which result in the award of certificates to successful students;

FURTHER NOTING THAT when results are announced by the National Examination Board, the best and worst performing schools and   districts are ranked by the media, until recently, by the National Examination Board;

CONCERNED THAT from 2012 to 2016, the districts of Luuka, Kween, Iganga, Bulambuli, where I come from, Namutumba, Bukwo, Kaliro, Buyende, Bugiri, Bududa, Manafwa, Mayuge, Kamuli, Kayunga, Kapchorwa, Serere and Kyankwanzi have consistently and annually performed poorly in national examinations, while the districts of Wakiso, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Masaka, Ntungamo, Kabale, Jinja, Rukungiri, Kabarole, Gulu, Lira, Bushenyi, Kampala, Mukono, Kasese and Masindi, have consistently excelled in national examinations; 

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT Government has not formulated specific interventions aimed at uplifting education standards in poorly performing districts nor has it put in place remedial measures to help poorly performing schools and districts to get out of the cycle of poor performance;

COGNISANT THAT the absence of such interventions aimed at improving education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in Uganda has created a vicious cycle where poorly performing districts continue to perform poorly while the other districts continue to excel. 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    a. Government puts in place measures to uplift education standards in the districts that persistently perform poorly in national examinations.

    b. The parliamentary Committee on Education and Sports investigates the persistent underperformance of schools in the poorly performing districts of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let him justify his motion first.

MR BURUNDO: I have the justifications for the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to formulate specific interventions to improve education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I stand before you to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament - 

THE SPEAKER:  Are you repeating it?

MR BURUNDO: That is where I am going. I stand before you to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to formulate specific interventions to improve education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations in Uganda. 

Honourable members, education is one of the most fundamental human rights that is essential for the exercise of all other human rights. It promotes individual freedom and empowerment and yields important development benefits not just for individuals but for society at large. 

Madam Speaker, the right to education is so fundamental that the 1995 Constitution not only guaranteed and protected it but also obligated the State under Objective XVIII (i) and (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy to promote free and compulsory basic education” and “to take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standards possible. 

On the international level, normative instruments of the United Nations and UNESCO lay down international legal obligations for the right to education. These instruments promote and develop the right of every person to enjoy access to good quality education without discrimination or exclusion. These instruments bear witness to the great importance that member states and the international community attach to the right to education.

The above legal instruments obligate governments all over the world, including Uganda to fulfil their obligations, both legal and political, with regard to providing good quality education for all to implement and monitor education strategies more effectively. The fulfilment of the right to education can be assessed using the 4As framework which asserts that for education to be meaningful, it must be Available, Accessible, Acceptable and Adaptable. The 4As framework was developed by a former UN special rapporteur, Katarina, on the right to education.

Honourable members, in Uganda, the right to education can only be achieved by a few mainly in urban and semi-urban areas in the districts of central and western Uganda. For students in other areas, attaining the right of education is almost impossible. 

For instance, according to the district performance ranking of 2014 PLE results, Masaka Municipality was top with 1,245 candidates and it stood at a percentage of 54 per cent candidates passing in division one which was the best grade under the Uganda National Examination Board’s grading system. Masaka Municipality was followed by Bushenyi, Mbarara, Rukungiri, Kabale, Fort Portal, Ntungamo, Mukono, Lira and Entebbe Municipality respectively. 

Kampala was the best overall district with 8,224 candidates attaining division one against 27,926 candidates who sat for examinations in the district. On the other hand, the districts of Kween, Yumbe, Bulambuli and Bukwo each had one percent of their candidates passing in division one. For instance, in Kween, of the 2,769 candidates who sat PLE, only 15 passed in division one. 

Honourable members, in 2015, the same districts of Kampala, Masaka, Wakiso, Bushenyi, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal and Ntungamo performed excellently while their counterparts in other districts registered less than ten candidates in division one. They include Bukwo District with nine pupils in division one, Nwoya and Bundibugyo Districts each with seven in division one. Napak, Kalangala, Kween and Lamwo had six candidates each in division one; Buliisa had five pupils in division one, Buvuma and Nakapiripirit each had three pupils in division one. Ntoroko had two pupils in division one; Abim and Amolatar districts registered one pupil each in division one while Amudat District had no candidate in first division. 

Such districts have been branded as the worst performing districts despite the challenges they encounter. For instance, Amudat registered no first division and had four candidates in division two, seven in division three, 29 in division four and seven candidates ungraded. Also, available research I did together with the researcher indicates that between 2012 and 2016, the worst performing districts in the Primary Leaving Examinations were Luuka with more than 70 per cent failure rate, Kween with 65 per cent failure rate, Iganga with 75 per cent failure rate, my district, Bulambuli, with 70 per cent failure rate, Namutumba with 78 per cent failure rate, Bukwo with 65 per cent failure rate, Kaliro with 76 per cent failure rate, Buyende with 70 per cent failure rate, Bugiri with 77 per cent failure rate, Kamuli with 77 per cent failure rate - (Laughter)- Kayunga with 75 per cent failure rate, Kapchorwa with 74 per cent failure rate, Serere with 70 per cent failure rate and Kyankwanzi with 77 per cent failure rate.

Now, according to UNEB, a good performance entails all candidates being awarded between division one and four. It should be noted that at the end of P7, pupils sit their first major national examination, the Primary Leaving Examination (PLE), which you all know.

Everybody knows that presently, PLE has four examinable subjects; English language, mathematics, science and social studies. Hon. Abott, can you get me water? (Laughter) The best possible mark pupils can achieve is a total of four aggregate, which means one point earning them a distinction in each subject. The worst total is 36 aggregate and that is nine points in each subject. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, this Parliament employs Chamber Attendants that wear white uniforms and usher us as the proceedings of this House go on. Is it in order for hon. Silas to first of all break the rules by crossing from one side of the Floor to another as he provides water to a colleague, which is not his job? Is it also in order for the honourable member to demand that hon. Silas provides him water? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Silas is a boy scout, he has been responding to an emergency. So it is okay. (Applause) 

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think she just wants to draw the attention of the honourable members. Students between four and 12 points pass PLE with first grade or division one. Those with scores between 13 and 23 get a second grade and that is division 2; 24 to 29 get third grade while those with 30 to 34 pass with a fourth grade. Those who score 35 to 36 are taken to have failed. 

Therefore, the pupils from the worst performing districts pass in fourth grade or obtain no grade at all. Since education is a powerful tool by which economically and socially marginalised adults and children can lift themselves out of poverty and participate fully as citizens, the high failure rate in those districts means that children from these districts are most likely not to attain their full potential. The poor performance also creates a number of problems such as increased levels of poverty, high rate of unemployment, high prevalence of diseases, high rate of school drop outs and high population rate. 

Indeed the spatial trends of poverty and inequality in Uganda (2002-2005) indicate that the districts with a high failure rate also had the highest prevalence of poverty. At that time, Kyankwanzi was the poorest district in Uganda. When one considers the performance in national examinations, one finds that the poorest form the worst performing districts in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is against this background that I moved a motion for Parliament to resolve that: 

    a) Government formulates a policy to improve education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations. 
    b) Government puts in place measures to uplift education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations.
    c) The Parliament Committee on Education and Sports investigates the persistent underperformance of schools in the districts in the poorly performing districts in Uganda. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR BURUNDO: Madam Speaker, the way I looked at the honourable members’ faces, it is like they doubted the source of the information. They were not sure whether I stood here to lie to the whole Parliament or to confuse them. Therefore, I am now laying the statements of release of the 2016, 2015, 2014 and 2013 PLE results by Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB) on the Table. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we had given this matter only 30 minutes but he has used quite a bit more. The seconders will just use three minutes. 

Honourable members, before hon. Abott takes the Floor, on this side are the Tumboboi Grandmothers’ Savings and Credit Associations from Kapchorwa. I was with them on 30 November where we were campaigning in that sub county against Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). These are the people who have joined the campaign to end FGM in Kapchorwa. (Applause) 

Therefore, we invited them as a gift of exposure so that they can come to Kampala to see Parliament and go reenergised for the work. They are represented by hon. Rukiya Chekamondo and hon. Kenneth Soyekwo. You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.07
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I think I will take very few minutes according to your direction. I come here to second the motion urging Government to formulate specific interventions towards the improvement of education standards in the poorly performing districts. 

We appreciate the Government for having introduced Universal Primary Education (UPE) and then Universal Secondary Education (USE). However, just like my colleague has said, there a number of loopholes that should be looked into to make sure that those education standards in Uganda do improve. It is this Parliament and the ministry that must perform thorough surgery to make sure that the standards improve.

I will just go into a few areas which I think will improve the education standards, when the intervention is made. Madam Speaker, the issue that my colleague has not mentioned and brought before this Parliament is that all those districts and areas have low staffing. 

Madam Speaker, when the Government introduced Universal Primary Education, what was not considered properly was the teachers that are supposed to be taken to these areas. The ceiling and the population of the students is something that is still not being taken seriously. For example, you find a school of a population of 600 pupils with three teachers. It is something that is laughable and must be looked at seriously.  

There are some areas where we have also made research, especially the hard to reach areas. There are teachers whose names are on the payroll but they are not physically there. This is causing problems. We have seen schools with ceilings of seven to 10 teachers with only three teachers in those schools. The ministry must come up with a policy on how it is going to tackle those areas that are termed hard-to-reach and hard-to-serve. It is not a matter of saying we have 20 teachers as a ceiling yet there are only three teachers. 

Madam Speaker, another problem that must be checked properly is teachers’ accommodation. This is a problem in this country. We appreciate the time of the school facilities grant and the classroom completion grant. The Government tried to construct teachers’ quarters but I think as we talk, accommodation for teachers is still wanting in this country. Therefore, the Government must do something.

Madam Speaker, another area is inspection. The Government is releasing a lot of funds for inspection. One time when we went to Kenya and somebody referred to inspection as “coca cola inspection”. That means that people sit with head teachers and ask, “What is the problem?” but they do not move to these schools.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should not be an onlooker. They should make sure that they move to these schools and find out what is taking place. The problem is with the ministry; they do not move around. 

I would also like to add that there is a problem concerning the late release of the capitation grants. When you move to these schools, you find that they borrow money, maybe Shs 6 million or Shs 10 million, but the head teachers have run away from the schools because the Government does not release money in time.

There is also a high rate of dropouts. The environment in these schools is not conducive, especially for the girl child. 

We have a policy that we do not want to create more boarding schools but how will Buvuma and Bukoli Islands, with a number of islands far apart from each other, keep up without a boarding secondary school? Therefore, the Government must undertake thorough investigations to find out how it can do all these things.

Madam Speaker, you have seen and heard here that there is no proper definition for a hard-to-reach area. The ministry must come up and tell us what their definition is and if the definition is there, these areas should be given priority.

I conclude by saying that it is high time the ministry, as prayed by my brother, comes up with very serious measures to save this country from its collapsing education system. Thank you.

4.14
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion urging Government to formulate specific interventions to improve education standards in the districts that have been mentioned, which have been consistently performing poorly.

A lot has been said by the mover of the motion about the statistics on how performance has been consistently poor. I would like to emphasise a few of the areas that I feel Government should intervene in.

Madam Speaker, you know very well that in this country, the standard for job placement is academic performance. If you do not pass a certain level, you are considered a reject in society and you may not achieve any status in society. All these districts are within the country but they are consistently performing poorly and nothing is being done. 

We have been having UPE and USE for quite some time now but we have never had any report on the review of UPE as a policy. Can Government review this policy and see whether it is working or not? In my district and many other districts that are performing poorly, the parents have given up. 

There are certain contributions that parents agreed to make to support the running of these schools. However, this money is not forthcoming, even the UPE funds, which the politicians, including me sometimes, talk about. We say this education is free, and indeed it is free because even the knowledge is not there after not paying for anything. 

Parents do not want to contribute and the funds come very late, most of the times during holidays after the term has closed. The head teachers and the teachers are therefore put in a fix together with the parents who do not want to contribute anything. The head teachers end up using their own money. What kind of quality education are we really giving to the nation? Therefore, I urge Government to review UPE. If it is not working, let us formulate another specific policy that can help.

Madam Speaker, another policy, which is causing confusion in these rural districts, is the thematic curriculum. According to this curriculum, they have to teach using vernacular from primary one to primary three. This is despite the fact that we are also promoting Early Childhood Development (ECD) and in these ECD centres, children are taught in English. When these children come to primary one, you begin teaching them in vernacular. From primary four, a child is taught in English. 

What is the prescribed period for language development? After being taught in English for three years, new things are introduced on which one will be examined. These children are bound to fail unless they repeat primary seven five times to grasp the concepts and be able to write them.

Government should review this policy, otherwise the poor districts will continue to perform poorly and they will never feature anywhere. Moreover it seems as if no one is bothered; life goes on.

In addition, teachers need to be motivated. I would like to say that I was a teacher and I taught for three years before leaving for another place. We need to take a bold step and sensitise the parents in some of these districts to know the role they are supposed to play. If we only emphasise free education and not inclusive education where everybody is involved, no one is going to care. Look at how some of us care for our children. Outside there, no one cares for these children and yet they are the leaders of tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, the cost of education is too high in this country. Very soon, the poor will not be able to afford. I tried to calculate the cost of educating one child from primary one to secondary school using very low fees of Shs 50,000 per term for nursery school and Shs 300,000 per term for secondary school. One would need about Shs 9.7 million to educate one child from nursery to senior six, not even university. This is too high. What are we going to do about it? If we are still going to emphasise the issue of UPE and USE, Government should really get serious and help our people.

As a result of poor standards, among others, the poor are continuously being excluded from Government because as I told you, the basis of employment in this country or anywhere is academic performance, unless there is another thing that someone can tell me. Even at higher education levels, Government sponsorship is dwindling every time. Government has introduced the loan scheme but it depends on one’s performance. Unless Government brings some affirmative action or specific interventions to help our people get out of where they are, the poor will get poorer – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I am still concluding with the seconders. 

4.20
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I join colleagues to support the motion urging Government to improve on the education standards in these districts that have persistently performed poorly. If you were to critique the current education policy to find out the extent to which it has enabled the learners in Uganda to acquire the basic skills of literacy and numeracy, it would be an effort in futility. Why? It is because these programmes of UPE and USE are very laudable and ambitious - free education but free of knowledge. 

The massive enrolment is impressive, especially in primary. This massive enrolment of pupils without commensurate expansion of facilities is another effort in futility. You look at the pupil to classroom ratios in these particular districts and they are deplorable. If you look at the teacher to pupil ratio, the workload of the teacher is overwhelming. A teacher cannot do any marking at all. Actually, they no longer subject pupils’ work to scrutiny because you have 120 pupils in a class and you have to mark all those books. Examining every pupil is almost impossible.

Secondly, the learning and teaching materials are inadequate and therefore, if you look at the pupil to textbook ratio, it is very poor. These are some of the factors that are responsible for poor performance in these districts.

Madam Speaker, the hard-to-reach districts constitute a serious issue because almost three quarters of the districts that have been mentioned are hard to reach. The question of attraction and retention of teachers is almost impossible. Go to Bududa and the entire Bugisu and Sebei sub-regions, for instance, whose terrains are difficult. To access a school, you have to do serious walk-to-work, climbing the mountainous terrain. 

Sometimes, during heavy downpours, the few existing roads are not motorable and if you try to walk on them, they are very slippery. As such, most teachers use districts like Bududa to access the Government payroll but then jump out to look for greener pastures in places which are not hard to reach. To attract a civil servant to work in Bududa Hospital or in a primary school in Kween or Bukwo is easy but to retain them is close to getting ice in hell.

Madam Speaker, besides what my colleagues have already recommended, I would recommend that the equalisation grant be reinstated. This grant used to be for those districts that were lagging behind in growth and development. It was a form of affirmative approach to those districts that were performing poorly. Hard-to-reach districts should be brought on board to benefit from the 30 per cent hard-to-reach funds so that the question of attraction and retention is nipped in the bud. Thank you very much.

4.25
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that this should probably have come at the end of the debate, but I thought I would move in accordance with rule 57 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament that we amend the motion. In my opinion, the general education situation in this country is not what one can admire. I would imagine that today, it those schools you may have named that are performing poorly but tomorrow, it will be a different set of schools. 

I would desire that we demand that the Ministry of Education and Sports undertake specific interventions to uplift the standard of education and give accountability of what they have done. I want to believe that there are standards already but what is the implementation like? Is there any survey that has been done?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I was proposing that we amend the motion not to be selective but to include all the schools and education standards in the country. Thank you.

4.27
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report that they have given to Parliament. I come from a rural area – (Interjections) - I seek your protection, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please allow the Member to make his submission.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: I come from a rural area in Nakaseke. Recently, when I visited Germany with hon. Odonga Otto, we got a report from one of the Germans asking why there is automatic promotion of pupils, especially in UPE schools, in Uganda. Unless we address the quality of these pupils, the quality of our professionals in this country will also be compromised.

The majority of the professionals we have in this country, specifically in this Parliament, used to study in these rural areas and they would go to Makerere University. However, today it is very hard to find a pupil studying from a rural area like Nakaseke coming to Makerere University. The administrators we have today, the big politicians we have in this country, were the beneficiaries of that quality education but today they have been compromised because of politics.

Under our NRM Government, most school lands have been sold. We used to have pupils doing their physical education in school playgrounds but today, all the playgrounds have been sold to investors. It is as if tomorrow we will not have – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for giving way. We have many policies in this country and among the many policies there is one on automatic promotion. Automatic promotion is not a good policy. The way Ugandans are implementing it is extremely poor and if we continue like that, it is going to erode and destroy education in this country.

Madam Speaker, we borrowed this policy from other countries. However, in order for automatic promotion to succeed, the teacher to pupil ratio must be one teacher handling less than 50 pupils in a classroom. In Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Is that information or you are submitting?

MR OLANYA: I am giving information. Madam Speaker, you know I am a teacher and as a teacher, I think of building the background first. Please allow me to finish this point. 

THE SPEAKER: But you are taking his time. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague. We should not borrow policies that may not benefit us. I pray that you will give me time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, I was about to conclude. In Nakaseke where I come from, when you look at the teacher’s quarters –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time.

4.31
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Regarding the issue of performance in the different districts that have been mentioned, I do not support the inclusion of other districts. In last year’s performance, Luuka was among the worst performing districts. However, the situation in Luuka cannot be compared to what is in Wakiso. Therefore, the state – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The motion before the House is very critical to the nation. The presentation made by the mover of the motion was diverse and it covered most of the districts. Moreover when we are elected to come to this Parliament, we do not only concentrate on the constituencies that we represent -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, we debate for all the constituencies represented in this Parliament. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to say that he does not support the inclusion of other districts in this motion when we are dealing with a matter that concerns the entire country?

Madam Speaker, the education system in Uganda is very alarming. The gender aspect has not been addressed. When we are talking about –(Interjections)-  Is the Member in order to say that? 

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear him say that.

MR KISA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I was saying is that when you look at what happens in the districts that were mentioned, the situation is critical. In Luuka District, I do not recall seeing any school with accommodation for teachers. The teachers move long distances and as a result, they report to school late because the current primary schools do not provide accommodation for them.

Madam Speaker, the state of the learning environment in Luuka District is very poor. Children are studying in dilapidated buildings. You cannot distinguish between a door and a window or even between a ventilator and a window. In some of these districts, you find pupils of different classes studying in the same room. A single room can have pupils from P.1 to P.4 being taught by different teachers. This cannot be comparable.

Madam Speaker, I found a situation - (Member timed out.)

4.35
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion and I would like to thank the mover. I agree that the issue raised by hon. Osegge is a national matter that should not be isolated to specific districts. Although my district was not included, it faces the same problems.

Madam Speaker, if we want to synchronise the status quo, we should be ready to synchronise the quagmire we are in, which is the illusion that we are entertaining in this country. These policies come into existence without thorough analysis and sometimes they are made to hoodwink people for a specific target, and we are yet to see more. 

Madam Speaker, if you look at UPE, it is meant to bring up the people to understand their holistic nature of living. However, the challenge is that UPE came into existence, and then USE came up. You remember it was meant to cater for four children per family but because it was the political actors who were promoting this, the other one simply jumped on board without thinking about the resources.

Madam Speaker, it is high time Ugandans appreciated that   children belong to all of us and not the Government. If Government’s statement says, “do not pay for your child” and yet that child is missing that holistic education - Performance in these districts is very poor. Sometimes, they have only one person in second or third grade and yet you are saying that people should not pay fees for these children. This policy is meant to divert the entire nation.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Government to focus on what we have continued to mention on the Floor of the House –(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this motion because of the profound effect that this gap creates between the best performers and the poor performers for the rest of their lives. It impacts on both their social and economic lives. 

Madam Speaker, what hurts me is that I grew up knowing that we had and we still have brilliant children in Madi sub-region. Before they start school, you know that you have bright children. However, the moment they start school, they fail to perform. Where is the problem? It is because of our failure to manage our education system. As long as we do not address our education system, we are going to disadvantage brilliant children who are supposed to have bright futures.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that beyond the investigation that has been proposed, we should also investigate why some schools keep on excelling. We have been hearing about cheating and usually, Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) focuses on cheating during examinations. However, some of this cheating is managed before examinations start. Some of these learners are coached. Questions are sent to the schools before examinations begin. Therefore, in the end, some of our schools are seen not to be performing just because they do not promote cheating. 

Madam Speaker, we need to investigate why private schools perform better than our own Government aided schools and yet most of our citizens are in Government aided schools. Most of these children are too poor to go to private schools. 

I totally agree with Government that the objectives of programmes such as UPE and USE are good; the major problem is with the implementation, and it originates from poor planning. Therefore, Government should properly plan the implementation of some of these programmes because our citizens need free education due to the poverty levels. Thank you very much. 

4.42
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion but I would like to say that it is more of a blanket one. I think there is need to categorise issues of gender and more so special needs. You find a school like Ngora School for the Deaf where all the deaf children fail. The best will have a fourth grade and there is no effort by the ministry to find out why these children are failing.

Madam Speaker, I am a teacher by profession. I know that there is no teacher who is an expert in all subjects but a teacher is sent to a class of 150 pupils and is expected to teach English, SST, science and mathematics. He is supposed to prepare lessons, mark exercises and come back the next day to teach. 

I would like to say that we are abusing the rights of these teachers. These teachers are not allowed to go for further professional development. Once you apply to go for a course, you are told to leave the payroll. When you go back, there is no incentive. Those days, when you were a certificate holder and you upgraded to a diploma, your salary would be increased. Nowadays, even when you upgrade there is no motivation. What do you expect these teachers to do? 

Madam Speaker, the other issue is on the environment. Those places you have mentioned, especially in eastern Uganda, which I represent, are very unfortunate. I would like to support what the honourable member from Luuka has said that in these schools, there is no difference between a window and a door. 

You cannot expect a teacher to teach and manage P.1 and P.2 effectively just because the human resource is limited. Teachers are trained every year at grade three level but Government has never come out to open the ceiling to ensure that these people are placed in various institutions. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only about P.7. What about the foundation where our children start from? In eastern Uganda, we are still speaking Lusoga and Ateso from P.1 to P.4. When these children reach higher classes, they begin gambling. Some teachers do not know numeracy and you expect them to teach P.7 mathematics. The same teacher is supposed to teach English and he cannot write a composition; what do you expect this teacher to teach? I am basically saying that inspection is very poor - (Member timed out.)

4.45
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the experience of the Local Government Accounts Committee. We have been going around the country receiving the Auditor-General’s reports that they have used to audit the performance of education across the country. Our committee found out that the Ministry of Education and Sports has not been able to achieve the minimum standards set across the country in the area of education. If the ministry has not been able to fulfil the standards, how do you expect miracles from the grassroots? (Applause)

The failure of education arises from the Ministry of Education of Education and Sports because they have not achieved the minimum standards. Let me ask a question to this country this afternoon. When schools sit for exams for admission to universities, the cut-off points to these universities are set and the country knows them. However, those cut-off points do not include students who are admitted under the district quota system. What is the difference between the quota system and the cut-off points for admission to universities? 

That tells you that there is a problem and we need the ministry to explain how they can ensure the quality of education in that arena. We will then all join to clap our hands because there are so many children coming from that district -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochen, I have not understood; are you saying that children on the quota system are not eligible to be admitted?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, when they set cut-off points for admission to university, these points are clearly stated. However, when you go to the rural districts, they pick students far below the cut-off points. What does that mean, regarding the quality of education?

Madam Speaker, in hard-to-reach areas like Kapelebyong in Amuria, I have over seven community primary schools that have operated for over ten years without Government accrediting a trained teacher. These schools have not been coded - for instance, Angaro, Achomai and Achinga - and each of them have over 300 children. What miracle would you expect in terms of performance in that area? 

That is why I say that whatever problems we are facing in this country arise from the failure of the Ministry of Education and Sports to address the pertinent issues that affect the education sector. I believe that there is a conspiracy in the area of education; some people are deliberately suffocating some regions so that they cannot compete with others. 

Madam Speaker, I am not ashamed to raise - (Member timed out.)

4.49
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion. When the PLE results for 2016 came out, I went to Agago to reward the pupils who had passed in division one. I did not find any girl child who had passed in division one.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the programme that Parliament had giving out sanitary pads in northern Uganda. I wish that it is also extended to Agago as we are far away towards Karamoja. Thank you.

On the issue of parent’s schools, I must say that we have a number of parent’s schools we have forwarded to the ministry; for instance, Otek Primary School was put on the list before this Parliament was constituted. 

Madam Speaker, poverty is a very serious problem. For us who are very far from cities like Gulu and very near to Karamoja, many times we are spectators. We see good things going to Karamoja or to the regional hub in Gulu and in many cases, we are forgotten. It is very important that Government comes up with a serious strategy to try to access some of these places that are in the buffer zone. We are, many times, left out because we are not in the spotlight. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of electricity and affirmative action, I lived in Canada and I know that the aboriginal people had war for a very long time and they were given affirmative action. In northern Uganda, for several years people suffered and what we are facing today is the effect of the war. We therefore need affirmative action because it is long overdue. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.51
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable Member of Parliament from Bulambuli for an extremely vital motion. The motion is urging Government and the sectoral Minister of Education and Sports to refocus its policy on primary education, particularly in the districts he has mentioned. 

Madam Speaker, in the dictionary, the word “primary” has a specific definition. If an English person says something is primary, he or she means that it should occupy the first position. Therefore, in education, we all know how central primary education is. 

My worry is that because of numbers, we are not going to do justice to this motion. We are likely to meander here and there because people are already talking about hard-to-reach areas. Kamuli District, where the Speaker comes from and which many of us know very well, is not a hard-to-reach area. Iganga is also not a hard-to-reach area. 

I, therefore, seek for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that we focus on this motion much more deeply and task the Committee on Education and Sports to scientifically carry out an empirical study. There are reasons for the poor performance of primary education generally but largely in the districts mentioned. I would like to urge Members not to politicise this otherwise good motion and start pitting regions against each other. 

There has been a steady decline of performance of primary education in the rural areas of this country by and large. When you talk of Wakiso, you are talking of Mt St Mary’s College Namagunga, Buddo, Gayaza and other schools around, not to mention those schools surrounding Kampala. It is evident that performance has been going down in rural areas in favour of – (Member timed out.) 

4.54
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a teacher by profession. 

Madam Speaker, we might say that Wakiso is better. However, today you were supposed to be the chief guest at Imperial Royale where over 15 schools from Wakiso were appealing to you and the two members of the children’s forum, who represented you, to come to their and rescue and cause change in the education system. They said that it has badly affected many of them. These are some of the words the children said. 

They said that the Ministry of Education and Sports is favouring a few. They also warned this Government not to do what is being done. The children cited poor and total neglect of inspection departments. Every district gets millions of money every quarter but inspectors of schools totally stay in their offices and do nothing. 

They also cited reasons why private schools are doing better than Government-aided schools. They all agreed that it is not about the pay of the teachers because all the Government teachers present accepted that they are paid more than the private teachers. Therefore, they appealed to you to intervene and the ministry to empower the inspectorate department, if we are to improve on their chances of joining higher institutions of learning.

Madam Speaker, this is for you, because you were just represented and it is going to the media. They talked about a poor foundation. They said that you do not expect pupils with a poor foundation to join Makerere University, Kyambogo University or Makerere University Business School on Government sponsorship. This is because at the end of the day, it is only children from rich families that go to better schools and perform well and, therefore, they are awarded the opportunity to join higher institutions of learning. 

Madam Speaker, they appealed that there should be a way in which those who studied under UPE schools can be supported to go to Makerere University with different points from those that go through private schools –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MS JENNIFER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member who came up with this motion and I would like to add my voice to other Members’ to support it. 

The issue that I would like to raise first is abolition of practical papers in all schools in Uganda. I do not know whether the Ministry of Education and Sports has come across this letter that was authored by the Uganda National Examinations Board. It says that practical papers such as physics, chemistry and biology will be scraped off the syllabus in all secondary schools. We are talking about the poor performance now; I do not know whether it is through this that probably UNEB and the ministry think that our children are going to perform well. I do not know whether the ministry has come across this letter. However, I request them to come and enlighten us about this letter and what they based on to decide to scrap off practical subjects in secondary schools starting from senior one. 

I am so glad that the Minister of Education and Sports, who is also my science teacher and taught me chemistry in secondary school, is here. Therefore, he knows exactly what it means to have practicals for science subjects. 

Secondly, let us talk about education and what is happening within our country. I have heard my honourable colleagues say that there is good performance in Wakiso, Kabale and other districts. I would like you to specifically look at which schools perform well; they are mostly private schools, where the parents are paying over Shs 700,000. Can our parents who are deep in the village handle that payment? 

When we talk about performance, it should be general, but there is a problem in Government schools. It is not only in the districts that they have talked about but also in Wakiso, Kabale and Rubanda, where I come from. Look at the first grades that we have had; in some schools, there were even no girls with first grades. 

Therefore, I think Government needs to go back to the drawing board and examine what the teachers are going through. They should also look at the accommodation of the teachers and their feeding. How can a teacher teach your child when his children are at home? How can they perform? I, therefore, kindly request the Ministry of Education and Sports to go back to the drawing board - (Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministry has a tendency of moving alone. When they started thematic education, they did not even bring it to this House; we just heard that they had implemented. We are talking about skilling Uganda and then you say no woodwork, no technical drawing; really, are you skilling Uganda?

5.01
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion. I would like to make two comments. 

My first comment is about the congestion in schools, which leaves a lot to be desired. The Member who moved the motion talked about Abim. The challenge we have in Abim is that the last coding of schools was done in 2006. We have written many letters; we have 11 community schools but since 2006, no school has been coded. The children end up congested in a particular school and there cannot be any meaningful learning in a school or classroom where children are congested.

I have also observed in the schools that most of the children spend a lot of time looking for water because these schools do not have water sources. Fetching water has become another extracurricular activity. I do not know what the ministry of education is doing about this.

Even when you go to these schools in Abim that we call the best performing schools - Morulem Boys Primary School – the pupils of primary one to six sit on the ground. How do you expect good performance? Recently, we went consulting on a day when the children were sitting their Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). People challenged us and asked what we were going to consult about when children were writing exams on the floor. We really need to style up as a Government.

The other thing is the staff morale. The morale of the teachers also has an impact on the way a child is taught. The report I got last week is that many teachers’ names have started disappearing from the payroll. Who is deleting teachers’ names from the payrolls? 

In addition, the issue of hard-to-reach areas has lost meaning. It has lost meaning in the way our Luwero Triangle lost meaning and became a pentagon. (Laughter) We really need to focus on what we mean because even in these hard-to-reach areas, there is segregation. In Karamoja, for instance, the rural areas are called hard-to-reach areas –(Member timed out.) 

5.04
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to start by putting on record two fundamental findings that have been recorded at international level about Universal Primary Education in Uganda. 

One of them was conducted by a Kenyan NGO called Uwezo. Uwezo is a Swahili name that means capacity. They subjected a primary three test to 100 candidates of PLE and these were the findings: 30 per cent of the candidates understood the questions of primary three and 70 per cent did not.

Madam Speaker, I am a teacher. Understanding a question and giving right answers are different. Someone could be asked what 2+2 adds up to, for example, and they give the answer as 6. According to “understanding”, they got that one right because they knew that the answer had to have some numeracy. However, those who gave the answer as “Kasibante”, for example, never understood the question besides giving the wrong answer. Madam Speaker, if we continue sitting and looking on, UPE could be translated as “universal poor education”.

The other fundamental finding I would like to put on record before I submit was conducted by UNESCO. I do not want to talk about what UNESCO is; we all know what it is. They carried out a survey on school dropout rates across Africa and Uganda was only next to Chad with 60 per cent. It is the second highest in the whole of Africa. Actually, 75 per cent of these were girls, and one of the fundamental causes for this was something to do with sanitary pads. I know hon. Bakabulindi will come in and say something after what I intend to submit. Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is very serious.

I support the motion. However, I wish to correct the impression that there is a particular region in the country where the Government of Uganda is doing well as far as education is concerned. Madam Speaker, I represent part of Kampala where Government is said to be doing well in education but most of the schools, if not all, that are doing well are private schools.

Actually, in my constituency, the only three Government-aided schools are within a locality where we have some of the poorest people in the country. The private schools doing well in my constituency cannot attract any single constituent because they are not affordable. Therefore, as far as education in Rubaga North is concerned, Government is doing poorly –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: The information I would like to give my colleague is that from where I live, which is part of Wakiso, I drive past a school called Kamuli Primary School. The school is even worse than the one in my district in terms of structures and the compound, and yet it is a Government school.

MR KASIBANTE: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this is a very serious matter that needs to be thoroughly investigated. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that you cause investigation of the same by the Committee on Education and Sports. Actually, what is taking place is not education but pupils spending some time in school and going back home at 4.00 p.m. Going to school and learning are two very different things. There is no learning as per the report – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Franca Akello comes up, I would like to say that I think I reported here some months ago that in Mayuge, seven subcounties have no secondary schools.

5.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this motion and I would really like to reiterate, just for emphasis, the importance of the issue that was mentioned by some Members, especially hon. Angeline Osegge. 

It is important that the Ministry of Education and Sports addresses the challenges of education, but not piecemeal. The moment we begin mentioning districts, especially those mentioned in the statistical information that was provided by hon. Burundo when he was presenting his motion – Of course, he is very right; schools across the country are performing very poorly. 

Madam Speaker, I am an authority on education and as a teacher, I am an interested party. Therefore, I would like to mention here that learning is not taking place in most of the schools across the country, especially rural schools. We are just burying our heads in the sand thinking that children learn when they go to school. We have the same challenges that Parliament has consistently been addressing itself on. Right from the Eighth Parliament and Ninth Parliament, we have been bringing these issues up and requesting the Ministry of Education and Sports to address them.

Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament who hail from the districts with poor performance are here crying before this House that we address these issues. We would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports that as they formulate these regulations, they should consider all rural schools across the country. 

My district, Agago, was not mentioned but we are not performing well either. We have schools where pupils study under trees. We have 26 schools that are not coded. They are far in the rural areas and are not accessing quality education. When you go there, you will find over 300 children in a rural school – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to give information that it is the municipal schools that are performing very well. A case in point is Lira, which has been mentioned as performing well. However, when you search in the first 100 schools in the country, Lira does not fall amongst them. If it is mentioned among the districts that are doing well, then it is only the municipal schools. 

I would like the Ministry of Education and Sports to investigate why municipal schools perform well and the rural schools do not perform well yet these teachers graduate from the same institutions? Where is the challenge? If you let a teacher from the municipal school go to a rural school, the school will still not perform well because they will relax. Can you investigate where the challenge is?

Secondly, can we know as Parliament how much money the ministry is putting aside for inspectors of schools? Money for inspectors is not there and they are not inspecting the schools. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I also ask you to address the prayers. We are only raising the problems but not addressing the prayers.

5.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first, to salute my colleagues who have raised these very pertinent issues at the right time. 

The issue of education in Uganda determines our future. As an individual, I must testify to this House that I am here because I was generally born a bright child. (Laughter) Otherwise, the conditions under which I studied were not as easy the way you might assume.

Madam Speaker, Katakwi District has not been mentioned here but its performance in terms of primary school education is actually very poor. Let us also talk about Bukedea and Kumi where I come from. We need to dissect this report. Let it be two-edged. There must be a distinction between the private and public institutions. In Kumi Municipality, I have a school called Kelim. For a long time, they have not been able to produce a pupil in division one. The same applies to Aterai Primary School, Kabata and others. Why? It is only the rich people who are able to take their children to the good schools. 

If you carry out an analysis, most of the people who are able to take their children to private schools - for instance JoyKim Nursery and Primary School which is doing well in Kumi - are from outside Kumi. Some of them come from Kampala and because the performance is good and they can afford the Shs 250,000 or so in Kumi, they leave Kampala and take the children to Kumi and you will assume that the performance of schools in Kumi is good. However, things are bad down there. That is the truth about Uganda and the system of education.

I would like to point out the issue of poverty. There is a big relationship between these. You cannot buy food to feed your child when you are poor. The poverty is also connected to the poor agricultural system. There is no irrigation system in most of these places, therefore they cannot produce food that they can sell to take children to schools – (Member timed out.)

5.18
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to associate myself with the motion and I would like to thank my colleagues for moving this motion. However, I rise to persuade our colleagues who brought the motion - this is a rejoinder to hon. Osegge’s point – that we amend this motion to reflect a spirit that encourages the Government to address the endemic problems that are affecting the education system generally.

Madam Speaker, doctors are normally good at providing solutions because when you go to them, they will look at you, diagnose your sickness, prescribe the medication and administer it. Our colleagues have diagnosed the problem but if we administer the medication using what they have proposed, we are going to give this problem an under dose and it will not be dealt with.

Madam Speaker, I used to be an RDC in Serere. One time as I did my monitoring, I went to one of the schools and I found a class unattended to. When I inquired why it had not been attended to, I was told the chemistry teacher who was transferred from Kampala had not come to Serere. Since I am a chemistry teacher, I picked chalk and went to class. However, if I say that the failure of teachers to go to villages is the reason is the reason village schools are not performing well, I will not have been thorough. This is because there are other problems that I found on the ground that could have caused the students not to perform well.

In 2004, I was teaching chemistry in Bishops Senior School, Mukono, which is Government school. I had two very good students in my class but one of the private schools in Kampala came and poached them. They offered them scholarships and took them and in 2006, they were in the newspapers and this gave clout to the private school. However, if we say that poaching of those students is partly the reason schools in villages do not perform well, we would not be thorough.

The point I am raising is that these problems can be addressed more professionally. There have been attempts by the Government to change the curriculum to suit the Ugandan situation. Unfortunately, this has not been a curriculum review. It has been a review of the curriculum menu – removing and adding some items. Professionally, the amendment or review of the curriculum –(Member timed out.) 

5.25
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to ask a few questions. 

The education policy of any nation must be aimed at addressing an identified objective. If there is any national planning for this nation, what are we educating our people to be? What is the objective of the so called education?

Getting to the discrepancy between grades, I have a living example. I left formal education in 1976. In 1998, I went to Makerere University and found boys from A level who had scored triple A but they could not construct a sentence in English. When I asked them how they made it to Makerere University, they would say, “I spotted” – (Interjections) - These are facts.

In my class, I sat with elderly teachers and headmistresses but they cheated in examinations. They would put things under their arms because they were big. Now, after completing the course, when you asked them what they intended to do in their life, they would say “anything”. Imagine, after 27 years of education, they did not know where they were going. So, what were they studying?

Madam Speaker, in some countries, there are two types of education. In America, if you are an African, the highest you can go as an educated person is either to be a lawyer or a pastor. That is where they end. In America, the blacks are all reverends and lawyers –(Interruption)

MR ATKINS KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a national Parliament. It is an open global story that the best cardiologist in the whole world, Dr Ben Carson, is an African-American and the list is endless. Therefore, is Maj. Gen. Kuteesa, my senior brother, in order to not only mislead the country but also the world by giving something that is not backed up by empirical evidence? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kuteesa, can you substantiate?

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: I can substantiate, but that was beside the point because what I was saying is that even in South Africa, there was education during apartheid for whites and blacks. The point I am raising is: what is our education system geared towards? 

Going back to the people who scored triple 1, I am sorry if I will be quoted but I would like anyone here to tell me where the alumni of Green Hill Academy, who always score aggregate four, end up? I do not know how old the school is but as you may be aware, most pupils there score 4, 4, 4 every time but where do they end up?

The other thing is that education is becoming an economic venture. My children were taken to Green Hill Academy but they ran away because they said they could not sit in class –(Interjection)– I am about to finish –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, we are all educated and we should be honest in whatever we say in Parliament. The honourable member is emphasising that there were students admitted to Makerere University with 4,4,4. I have failed to understand the level of education the Member is talking about.

In primary schools, you can score distinction 1 in all the four subjects and you get aggregate four. I have not seen anything in the Ugandan education system where an individual scores 4, 4, 4; so, is he in order to mislead this country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue we are discussing is very serious. Let us focus on the motion and the prayers. What do you say about the prayers made by the honourable member?

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: Prayer for what, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Prayers in the motion.

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: About the prayer in the motion, I say that the whole education system should be overhauled. We are just trying to beautify a defiled thing. When you allow Oxford and Manchester universities to design a curriculum for Uganda, where do we fit? Where is our stand in the entire thing? 

5.29
MR HENRY	KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform our ministers that we are very disappointed. Those days, we used to have one Minister of Education and Sports. However, we now have four ministers in the education sector and they are all qualified and experienced teachers but the state of education in Uganda has remained very disappointing.

Madam Speaker, I have watched stories on television about children crossing lakes in canoes to go to school. In some areas, we saw stories about floods cutting off schools for a whole week. Unfortunately, the ministers in the education sector also just watch these stories like us and they end up like movies. 

Madam Speaker, sometime back, I shared with the ministry that we had schools that needed to be coded and maybe when they are coded and given centres, children can be sure of sitting their exams. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports said they were even about to close some schools with centres that are performing poorly. How shall we promote education if instead of coming up with a comprehensive plan, we are only closing schools that are performing poorly?

Madam Speaker, if I may ask: how many of the four schools in Kamuli District have been visited by inspectors in the last two years? In some schools, some teachers first go to ride boda bodas in the morning, pass via the schools at 10.00a.m. for breakfast, if it is there, and then go back. Some first go to the garden or wherever they want to. It is such a laissez faire situation. Here they may get scared and some kids may easily go to school.  However, in areas where a girl can refuse to go to school because she has to fetch water so that she meets a boyfriend, there is no incentive to make girls get interested in going to school.

Therefore, we must revise the whole structure. We must wake up. If there is a problem in Government or in Ministry of Education and Sports, let people be bold and say - (Interruption)

MR SONGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that whereas we encourage investment, we now have very many schools that have been opened by our teachers and these teachers transfer the pupils from their private schools to Government schools to do exams. This sugar coats some of the performance that we see in some of these primary schools. The children will have been tutored in their private schools and then they are just taken to do exams in the Government school. 

Therefore, as we come up with resolutions, the ministry should seriously look into that and find out which schools are responsible for which pupils and how it can sort out that camouflage. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two days ago, I shared some information with a primary two teacher from the area. She told me the headmistress of her school had asked her to teach primary six because the teacher for that class had gone away for studies. Now, she is going to teach a semi candidate class. That is what is going on in the education sector of Uganda.

5.33
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice to what the mover of this motion has said by saying this has been long overdue. 

Surely, I know Katakwi would have previously been on that list until two or three years back when the district ceased being among the worst performing districts in the country. That has been because of personal initiatives, which I believe are not sustainable. As Members of Parliament of the district, we took it upon ourselves to run monthly assessments for the candidate classes. So, the question is: for how long shall we continue running these assessments and how sustainable will this be? Even if the schools are performing well, the minister has to take it upon herself to do something. 

My district has 79 primary schools but all the deputy head teachers in those schools are caretakers. More than a half of the head teachers in those schools are caretaking. Yes, we have talked about motivation of the teachers, but how do you expect the teachers who are not fully established in the system to help our pupils to pass examinations? I think there is a big problem in the ministry. When you ask why those teachers are caretaking, the ministry will tell you it is because of the wage bill. That means until the wage bill is increased, there is no way they will be recruited as substantive teachers. There is a problem there.

On the issue of inspections, the school inspectors call the head teachers to bring visitors books to their offices for them to sign. At the end of the day, can you call that inspection? Inspection has not taken place but the inspector has signed the visitors book that they visited the school when, in actual sense, they did not go to the school. I really urge the ministry to do something. There is a lot to be done if we have to improve school performance.   

For so many years, eastern and northern Uganda were experiencing conflict and most of the schools were in IDP camps. Children were studying while staying in camps but at the end of the day, they were doing the same national examinations. There was no specific intervention. 

Honourable minister, just go by the prayer that has been put before us; we need affirmative action. These children had to compete with others without any specific consideration of their situation yet the others had electricity and were not in IDP camps. We need affirmative action for such regions if we have to be on equal footing. Otherwise, if we need to improve our education system, like the rest of the Members have said, we need an overhaul.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to see whether we cannot bring a motion to end the thematic education because it is not working; it does not prepare the children. Think about it.

5.37
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alex Burundo for coming up with this touchy motion. 

As we urge the Government to improve the standards of education in this country, we need to also analyse the complementary factors, which cause poor performance in these schools. What are these complementary factors? For a school to be a school, to me as a teacher I think it needs four factors including teachers, parents, pupils and Government. All these four factors play a role and a failure in one factor to play its role will lead to a failure of the entire system. 

Government has a role to play, for example, but with today’s policy of automatic promotion, you cannot expect a pupil to be ready for PLE when he or she was just being promoted from P1 to P6 without considering whether that pupil passed or not. 

The money that Government spends on each pupil every year in these rural schools is also a problem. Also, as the honourable colleagues have mentioned, the inspections in schools are not there. Therefore, the Government and parents should play their roles - (Interruption)

MR DULU: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give is that by the time our children sit PLE, they are actually still supposed to be in P5. We carried out some thorough investigation and discovered that the only time our pupils observe diligently is the time of going back home for holidays. When we say schools will open on Monday, the learners will report after two weeks. Therefore, if you calculate that time, you realise that by the time they sit for their PLE, they are actually supposed to be in P5. That makes it very difficult. 

The other information I would like to give is about the upbringing of these children. The first education begins at home. Sometime back, we used to have communal responsibilities for these children but because of a change in laws and politics, if a child defeats their parents, there is no safety net that can groom this child so that when he or she joins primary school, they are okay. Thank you.

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, hon. Dulu, for that information. I think the information I was given by - (Member timed out.)

5.41
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Alex Burundo for moving this motion. I support the prayer, particularly the one that concerns the Minister of Education and Sports coming up with a policy and where possible an overhaul of the education system. I am saying this because education system is a process just like the way things are done in a factory; we look at the processes and the inputs. 

When you look at the education inputs today, you realise Government spends Shs 10,000 a year, in terms of grants, per child. If we are to convert that in dollars, it would be less than three dollars a year and that is one dollar per term or thereabout. That money cannot enable us to realise quality education that we are talking about. 

As far as education is concerned, we have also noted that many times the quota for the second term does not come in time. The reason is that money is sent when a financial year is ending while another is beginning; there is usually a lot of confusion. 

I am a board member in one of the primary schools in Kampala and what I have noted is that in the end, each child ends up getting Shs 7,000. Even when the Government increased the amount- we should remember that UPE started in 1997 and 20 years down the road, we are still grappling with the money that we are putting in. we cannot expect much out of that. 

The other issue is the high dropout rate. I chair the forum for quality education. Recently, after we read in the newspapers a story about how the District Educational Officer of Luuka District was lamenting that the dropout rate there stands at 30 per cent, we visited two schools - Bukendi and Kiwalazi primary schools. In one school we got to realise that at the time it was opened, the population was 520 learners but by the time we went there in second term, it had dropped to 300. 

In another, out of a population of 720 by second term, when we went there, it had dropped to about 420. We even met the parents and pupils of those two schools; they said that Government had not helped them and there was a lot of poverty and –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Generally we got to realise that even the parents had also allowed the children to drop out. It is true that we have the Children’s Act, 1997, that gives the local governments the mandate to look after the welfare of the children but when we talked to the leadership in the districts, they told us that they had never heard about that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just to wait on - there is a group from Mbarara Rwizi Community for Conservation for Development. They are represented by hon. Mwine Mpaka, hon. Michael Tusiime and hon. Christine Kajungu. They are from Mbarara. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Madam Speaker, we have the Education White Paper, which was authored 25 years ago but up to today, it has never been revised. That is why we are suffering because there are no policies; the Government just decides one day to scrap a subject and have it replaced with the other or none at all. That is why today they are talking about removing physics, chemistry and biology or the practical subjects. What do we do? I think we need to revamp the education system so that we can grab something better. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is also the practice of parents changing their children’s school every term. At the end of year, you find that the child has gone to three different schools. 

5.45
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those fortunate people in the field of education simply because I started teaching as a licensed teacher before I qualified as a Grade III teacher till I got to where I am. 

Therefore, I can tell the difference between input and output in the education very well. While I was a licensed teacher, the kind of output in terms of training given to teachers by Government would make us, the licence teachers, work out the pupils to pass. By the way, Madam Speaker, I am representing the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports here because normally I do not sit on the front row – (Laughter). The reason as to why today, in many parts of our constituencies, many private schools are cropping up without trained teachers but they perform it is because of the input in those schools. 

People have talked about inspections - we have persistently requested the Ministry of Education and Sports to procure motorcycles for inspectors of schools in districts. When you have a motorcycle for an inspector, you are sure that this person will be able to go to all the schools in the districts. What is happening – (Interjections) - I pray to be protected, Madam Speaker – is that school inspectors  will only inspect schools around the district offices because they cannot move further than that. 

Secondly, she has talked about capitation grants. A primary kid is supposed to attend school for nine months. When you divide Shs 10,000 by nine months, you get Shs 1,000. The Ministry of Education and Sports even refused to provide reports to children in schools and it is the parents who pay Shs 1,000 for reports. If they do not pay for a report, they do not get it. 

Then you have exams - for a P7 child to perform well, they must have at least seen a minimum of 20 papers of examinations in a year. However imagine the children in our areas who spend a whole year without doing exams because they have been asked to pay Shs 5,000 at school and they have not done so.

Members, you are misleading yourselves when you say that some of these schools are doing well. There are districts in Uganda that shunned the UPE policy. They have taken their own direction. In Mbarara and in most of western Uganda, the RDCs recommended to parents to spend money on their children; they are not following the UPE system. 

Two, there is no parent in Uganda, Madam Speaker - let me say that I was a teacher in Shimon Demonstration School. I taught in the military police primary school here in Kampala; I taught the late Basoga Nsadhu’s children and I can tell you that there is nobody in this country who can opt to pay Shs 1,000,000 at Greenhill Academy when Buganda Road Primary School is charging only Shs 30,000 and they are getting first grades. Everybody will rush to a school where there is little pay but with good performance. What is causing all this is because education is free. 

Today, when you talk about - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the teacher. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we also need to look at our Constitution - now I am speaking as a lawyer – (Interjections) – yes because I am a lawyer by –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you already completed the course?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, when one reads the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy – see Objective XVIII; the education objective - when you go to a country like Kenya, you realise they have put something that compels Government to put money in education, not just talking the way we see our articles here talk. When you read Article 30 of the Constitution, which talks about all persons having a right to education, you realise it is so redundant; we must amend. How would we have quality education? 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports has good ministers who know what is taking place in education sector - hon. John Muyingo and hon. Rosemary Sseninde are professional teachers like I. They know what is required by students for the schools to perform; it is not late to improve our education system. The moment we correct our mistakes, we can make our children perform well and improve our education. I think if we do that, we shall achieve what we want.

Finally, the Committee of Education must take interest in this motion, and I wish you direct it so, Madam Speaker, so that we take more time to find out – because as you all know UPE came to exist politically, never run away from that fact. At the time, while presidential candidate Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere said two children would access free education, the President said all children would and the winner took it all and the next day parents took children to UPE schools even those with three years. I was a teacher at the time and I can testify to the fact that there were children who started primary school when they were only four years, and it took Government over 15 years to discourage children from entering primary one at age of four. Go to Buganda Road or Nakasero primary school, you will see a UPE school and a nursery school at the same campus. At Nakasero Nursery School, parents pay Shs 1,000,000 million, in UPE schools parents are paying Shs 10,000 per child for same purpose but with the schools running. We must look at these mistakes.

We have talked about establishing nursery schools in Government school at lower levels but there are no funds and Parliament must come in to pronounce itself on funding for UPE schools because we might be grooming iron-bar wielding men, day by day. There is no child that is stupid; it is the teacher that is stupid because even the deaf go to school, taught by same teachers and they perform; once one fails to teach then they do not know how to teach. That is why we love teaching and we shall continue fighting for that. Children can perform, they can learn and we can save money by improving our education system. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion by hon. Alex Burundo. The motion stated that Kasese is one of the districts that performed well but I want to say that some schools in that district especially those from the rural areas have, in the recent years, produced some of the last pupils in 2015 and one of those school is Nganji Primary School, which is located in my sub county.

I tried to find out why some of those schools performed poorly. I realised that one of the weaknesses that some people in Government have not realised, is in the way they post teachers to the different schools. In that school, I discovered that there were seven male teachers with no female yet the number of girls in that school was more than that of the boys yet the teachers there were all male.

I also found out that at the time these young girls begin their menstrual periods no body attends to them and so, they are forced to leave school for at least three to four days. If that trend continues monthly, it means that kid will continue losing lessons; it will become hard for that kid to catch up.

When you go to urban schools like Muhokya Primary School, which is in the urban area, you will find that out of 14 teachers 12 are female. Therefore, the posting system of teachers also affects the education system.

In other areas while I do agree that Government has failed to provide certain facilities, like accommodation for teachers, where the facilities have been provided, the teachers do not utilize them. One of them is Mbunga Primary School, which is in my village. When I visited this school, which has two staff houses each with four bedrooms, I got to realize that none of them was occupied. The best I found in that school was that the roof to one of the blocks had become a beehive.


5.56
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. There is no country that can grow beyond its education and education is one of the tools that can develop the nation and its people.

However, when you look at the budget allocation, you realise that the money allocated to the education sector is still very low; we need to increase on the budgetary allocation to the education sector.

Secondly, the incentives given to the teachers –(Interjections)– the Masaka schools you are talking about to be doing well, it is only private schools that are performing that well. When you go to places like Kyanamukaka where the Vice President comes from or places like Tukyesiiga, there are no first grades in those schools. For us in private schools, we give incentives to teachers; we give them accommodation, transport, food but there is no such a thing in Government schools. All the key stakeholders must be put on board.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, Parliament should be blamed for poor performance in the education sector - (Interjection) - yes. The vetting committee of education comes from Parliament. How can you give such a sensitive ministry to somebody who is not available or somebody who is not accessible and not experienced?

Yes, the ministers of state are there but –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, colleague. Madam Speaker, I happen to sit on the Committee of Education –(Interruption)

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the leadership of the Ministry of Education and Sports has been seated since we started and we are available almost 24 hours and seven days in a week. Is the honourable member in order to continue telling this House that the leadership is not available and that the ministry was put in charge of people, who are not accessible? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the problem we are dealing with has been on for many years, we have had many ministers - hon. Namirembe Bitamazire was there, hon. Jesca Alupo, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, a man with a first class degree, the hon. Amanya Mushega - I think let us address the problems and leave the issue of the individuals.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Education and Sports but getting the substantive minster of education is a hustle. You need many correspondences between Clerk and the ministry - in fact, the last time the committee interacted with the substantive minister is about several months back. That is the information I wanted to give. It is like meeting the Pope. The Pope these days is more available than the Minister of Education Sports is. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabanda, I think you have finished, you are very generous. I think the time is gone; we close with hon. Woboya and then hon. Rama. Ministers, if you could respond very briefly because 32 Members have contributed so far.

6.01
Ms HELLEN ADDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. There were some things that were itching me. Just like hon. Osegge said, let us treat this for the whole country and not just some few districts because there are very many things happening down there that are causing a lot of poor performance in our schools. 

Just as one honourable said, both the child and parent play a part but my concern is also on the school management committees. For secondary education, the board of governors is approved by the ministry and you have to possess some qualifications. However, for most of our primary schools the school management committee members sometimes do not even possess O’Level certificates and for the majority of them, when some money is given to these schools they want to benefit from it. 

You find that it makes very many issues happening down there including our district education officers or questions of which head teacher is put where and every year, teachers are taken to different schools and it causes a lot of problems. 

I remember some time back, we had a problem in Soroti where some of the female teachers almost took over all the municipality schools. There is also this issue of thinking that private schools are performing better than Government schools and sometimes, there is an assumption that municipality schools have better buildings than Government schools that are in the villages and yet, I have seen very good structures and latrines deep in the villages and there is still a problem. 

There is a need to overhaul and set a committee to find out why. For example, I have three primary schools and one secondary school. In all my primary schools, I do not have any accommodation for a teacher. However, by 6.30 a.m. teachers are in the school. At the beginning of this term, I went around Serere inspecting some of the schools and I was shocked to find out that at 8.00 a.m. some of the teachers who reside within the school were not even in the class –(Member timed out.)

6.04
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about three points here. The first is that colleagues have spoken a lot but they have not spoken about the issue of feeding in schools. We come here and debate a lot up to this hour because, Madam Speaker, you have provided us with lunch and we are able to speak and have that energy to go this long. 

However, look at these poor children in the villages. They trek long distances, sit in class and even if you teach a child –I do not know whatever example you will give – they will not catch up as long as you have not fed them. Therefore, school feeding should inform part of the policies we are discussing here.

The other issue is about phasing out the Teachers Training Colleges (TTCs). I grew up knowing many teachers training institutions in my district but now, they are not there yet those TTCs would train the teachers who are able to live and work within those areas. Now, we are not training these teachers. This is a challenge and I think it should be part of the policy we are trying to focus on.

My last point is the issue of market days, which are affecting learning in those schools. Where I come from, we have several market days such as Fridays and Tuesdays. When you go to classes on those days, you hardly find pupils. Even the teachers are disrupted by those market days. It is something, which looks simple but is a factor in those village schools. 

Those are the points I would like to raise. Thank you.

6.06
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to applaud the movers of this motion because we know that the future of this country lies in the education of the youngsters. The issue that I want to put across is this. First of all, we also need to applaud the owners and proprietors of the private schools. When you look at the population and compare to the universal primary education, many times the teacher-pupil ratio cannot be contained. That much we have to acknowledge.

I worked with the personnel teachers in the education department of Nebbi District and there were several times that we had interfaces with the LC V chairman and the other stakeholders and one time he asked, “Why do you think performance levels are very low in Nebbi?” I do not see Nebbi in this particular list but I know we share the same problem. 

One problem is the qualification of the teachers and I think the ministry should take note. Many of our people go into the teaching profession as a last resort. Even a person who has only two passes can become a teacher. Now, how do you really teach when you are also not educated? We need to look into these things across all divides and I ask the ministry to take note of that. 

What type of teachers are we recruiting? Notwithstanding the issue of motivation, we also need to learn that motivation comes from within oneself and we need to learn to educate our people. As MPs, we know our roles. Why don’t we play them? Why do we always want to look on the other side and leave the other? Why don’t we learn to look at both sides of the coin? That is my submission.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 32 Members have contributed. No one has objected but people are not addressing the prayers. Therefore, I do not know what we shall do. Maybe we ask the minister to say something and we decide what to do because Members are not addressing the prayers. They are raising all the problems.

6.09
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I am here to say something on the prayers. Whereas honourable colleagues talked about Government putting in place measures to uplift education standards in those districts that are consistently performing poorly and that the Parliament committee investigates why there is consistent poor performance, I would like to raise something about the scope of how we should delve into this matter. 

Even if we address issues of primary education, there is an element to do with the curriculum design, review and management. (Applause) As you might know - I have had the privilege of hearing your view on this matter, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education and Sports decided that 20 subjects that are of a practical and skilling nature be scrapped from the Ugandan curriculum including among others, music. Madam Speaker, in this august House, we have hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. He is probably one of those people who live a comfortable life in terms of transforming lives and welfare. 

We are talking about skilling Uganda and yet, we have scrapped metal work, wood work, office practice. We know the quality of Ugandan people in offices. These things are going off the syllabus. Something should be told to this Parliament about the running of the curriculum.

As I conclude, hon. Guma Gumisiriza, Member of Parliament of Ibanda District and hon. Abbas Agaba here mentioned that there is an under-doze in terms of these prayers. Therefore, I would like to request that we expound the last prayer to mean “The Committee responsible for Education and Sports, investigates matters to do with management of the education sector including, performance in primary schools and curriculum review, development and design.” I thank you, Madam Speaker.  (Mr Okupa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You are now the shadow minister?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not the substantive shadow minister. I would like to request the Minister of State for Higher Education to clarify on some of the issues because by the time we approved him for appointment, we had hope in him. We know he is a businessman who runs a number of schools and their performance is excellent. We thought we would be able to transfer that to the public schools. Could he tell us why it has not been replicated in the Government schools? Your schools are doing well. Otherwise, we thought you were going to transfer that to the public schools, also aware that you hold a PhD. We thought with all that package, you would have transformed the education sector.

On the issue of quality of education, I remember those days when we were in primary schools; student teachers that came for school practice were only those that scored first and second grade. However, today, even those in fourth grade also teach our pupils. Couldn’t that be a problem? Honourable minister, I am giving your school as an example because I know they do not recruit those who scored fourth grade. You employ diploma and degree holders. I think the biggest problem could be the quality of teachers. Can we improve the entry requirements to the teaching profession?

Otherwise, if we recruit those who failed – there is a saying, “Garbage in garbage out”. Please, can you help us on that? Thank you.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports to appreciate our dear colleague who has moved this motion and all the Members who have supported the motion and spoken passionately about issues that affect the quality of education in Uganda. I honestly thank you very much, colleagues. You are aware that for this country to develop, we must provide quality education. Therefore, we should work together to ensure that our children get quality education. 

I would like to remind you colleagues that the target of Ministry of Education and Sports is to provide quality education and sports for all children without discrimination for purposes of national integration, individual and national development. Therefore, our emphasis this year is about quality education.

I would like to inform you colleagues that because of this poor performance we have seen after results are released, the Ministry of Education and Sports carried out a research through UNEB to find out exactly the factors behind this. Colleagues, I would like to assure you that in our findings, we discovered issues of abseentism, lack of feeding in schools, accommodation for teachers, attitude of the parents and the stakeholders, high levels of poverty, child labour, and lack of supervision among others. Having discovered all these, we constituted a committee to look into the causes and the recommendations in order to help us come up with a strategic plan.

I would like to assure you that it is not true that Government has not come up with interventions. We have interventions in place. Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table our strategic plan, which has all the interventions. I am actually going to point out a few of them but everything is here. I beg to inform this House that we launched the Education Strategic Plan 2017/2018-2019/2020 recently. We even invited Members of Parliament to be part of it. I beg to lay this on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure this House that on the issue of inspection, we are not seated. We are doing inspections to ensure that we improve and scale up inspection in schools. In the strategic plan, we have made it categorically clear that at least every school must be inspected at least three times a year, which is once a term. (Interjections) Members, I am coming –

THE SPEAKER: Order members.

MS SENINDE: I would like to also inform this House that we have also designed two inspection tools. One of them is the head teacher’s internal schools inspection. Colleagues, you will agree with me that a head teacher is the first inspector. We have provided this tool. The second is that we have come up with a tool for inspectors to guide the inspection. We have met inspectors of schools and District Education Officers (DEOs) to make sure that we work with time to improve inspection. We are very serious on this.

I also want to add that we have intensified our monitoring and sensitisation of the stakeholders to appreciate education of their children. Colleagues, you will agree with me that – my brother has just read a list of districts that are performing very well like Mbarara, Bushenyi among others. However, I would like to – (Interjections) – I was trying to develop a point. Can you give me a chance to develop the point?

Madam Speaker, we have also noted that involvement of key stakeholders especially, parents, is very crucial. A colleague has pointed out an issue where children - this is a common issue that children absent themselves from schools because they are involved in other work, markets and others. If the parents are involved in the education of their children, some of these things will be curbed down.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also add that as far as absenteeism is concerned, we have come up with strategies. I would like to inform you that we are planning to construct houses for almost all schools. (Interjections) It is our target. However, our priority is going to be with the hard-to-reach areas and also the poor performing districts.

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable minister, I do not know whether you are objecting to - you are saying you have already done this work and we do not need to do it? Are you saying you have already addressed the prayers in your strategic plans? Are you already doing what hon. Burundo asked for? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way. It is true there is a strategic plan but in education, there are things that cannot wait; for example, feeding school going children.  

You directed this House and we sat as the Committee on Education and Sports and asked the Ministry of Education and Sports to make a clear circular how children must be fed in schools. Ministry of Education and Sports fears to tell parents that they can maybe- We told them that they can pay shs 5,000 in first term, buy two saucepans and reduce the money in second term to shs 3,000 in second term to buy firewood and posho to feed children. They have failed to give that but they only give a policy.

Secondly, the other clarification I am seeking is; how would you stop the dropout of children and absenteeism when there is no life in schools?  We are saying you have not budgeted for instruments of music and balls for other co-curricular activities. It is only Members of Parliament and other people buying balls for schools. Therefore, how will you stop that when you have not planned on how to stop it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Santa had an issue.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the minister. She has, first of all, laid before the House some interventions and strategic plan and yet, I know we are in the budget cycle. Therefore, I would like to know whether that specific intervention is being backed by the budget which is coming. 

It is because, Madam Speaker, there is a clear difference between the urban and rural schools. Secondly, there is also a clear difference between the municipalities and some of the town councils. Thirdly, many problems have been mentioned here, which require money. I would like to know whether you already have money for the interventions of the problems you mentioned here. I would like to thank you.

MS SENINDE: Honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that the issues we are raising today, sincerely, are not new issues. Whatever we have indicated in our strategic plan definitely is what is going to be –(Interjections)– No, colleagues. I would like to assure you that everything is catered for. 

Allow me, honourable colleagues to complete - Madam Speaker, unless I am given chance to give some elaboration but If they keep - (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Some districts have moved away from UPE. We would like the minister to respond how do they, as the parent ministry, allow that kind of segregation in this country. Others are forced to continue with UPE while other regions are allowed to get out of it and nothing is done about it.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we allow the minister to first answer?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion was brought and colleagues contributed to it. The honourable minister was trying to wind up her response and then she said she has a strategic plan. You did ask whether the strategic plan answers all the questions but she is not answering that issue because the procedural issue would be for her to say the strategic plan has answered the question or she could ask for time to extract the interventions in the strategic plan that answers your question.

Then, on the issue of the committee, she has no authority because the committee can still go ahead and interrogate to find out whether there are other issues, whether they are answered in the strategic plan or not. Therefore, we should be guided. It is not a matter of defence. We all mean well just as the minister does too. We would like to find out the mischief so that we sort it out. 

Therefore, it is not a matter of whether they have done well or not. We would like to find out whether in her wisdom she thinks the circular has answered the issues. She may not respond now because she may not have the time to extract the interventions but she can be able to tell us if she thinks so. She can try to answer the question we have raised as simple as that instead of trying to defend the matter, which is not the right way.

What would be the right procedure, Madam Speaker, in terms of the guidance and questions we have asked? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is what I asked the minister whether, after she said she had a strategic plan, we now do not need to respond to the prayers of hon. Burundo. Honourable minister, does your strategic plan answer his issue?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is true the strategic plan covers all the issues the Member -

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have had a chance to look at the strategic plan the minister laid on the Table and is now referring to. What it basically has is unfulfilled presidential pledges in as far as education is concerned. It is written very perfectly on top of some page. It begins from page 68 and goes past page 100. It says the list of pending presidential pledges: for example, Mucwini Technical Institute, BTVET sub-sector, Kitgum District and the facility is to be located at Mucwini Sub-county in memory of the LRA victims.

The minister is lamenting on what we have also talked about. She is confessing that they are necessities. What Parliament would like to hear from the minister is how far these issues have been addressed. We all know strategic plans; they cannot be a list of pledges. 

Is she in order to lay on the Table a document covering 2017/2018 Financial Year, which is ending and she is referring to it as a strategic plan for the year ending? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have not looked at the document. However, honourable minister, on a very serious note, have you addressed the issues prayed for by hon. Burundo? You saw the debate has taken so much time because it is critical and urgent. Have you addressed the prayers of hon. Mungoma? 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you because all the issues in the motion raised by both you and my colleagues have been addressed in all our interventions and part of it is in that document. 

However, I want to add that as a ministry, we have done all it takes to work on these interventions. Therefore, I do not agree with the statement that the Government has not done anything as far as interventions are concerned. We are trying but our biggest challenge is resources. I am, therefore, calling upon you colleagues to support us as the Ministry Education and Sports. 

As the Ministry of Education and Sports, I request you to support our budget as you have always done and not let our resources be cut. Let me conclude by saying that with the presence of laws, policies and guidelines, the Vision 2040 and the many reports, the truth is we, as the ministry, are reviewing the education policy and the white paper. I am sure that we shall be in position to achieve the objectives of quality education, if we work together as Parliament and as all stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, we are calling upon Parliament to work together with us and support out budget - (Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. I am getting disturbed by the presentation of the honourable minister. She heard all our debates as well as the motion that the honourable member brought seeking Government intervention. 

However, the honourable minister has come here to give us contrary information. She even knows that recently in this current budget, while the ministry was looking at building some schools that it is supposed to build, the list does not add up. Honourable minister, if we are to bring out that list of schools that the ministry is supposed to build, you will not find schools in Busoga but you will be helped. 

THE SPEAKER: There are none. 

MR KIBALAYA: They will be ashamed when that list comes out-

THE SPEAKER: Neither primary nor secondary. 

MR KIBALYA: You want to prompt us to bring out some of these things. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the honourable minister is in order to take the House to another direction, when the motion seeks something very different from what she is presenting. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is urgent and critical. It has tremendous support but this is what is being prayed for:

    a) That Government puts in place measures to uplift education standards in districts that consistently perform poorly in national examinations. 
    b) That the Committee on Education and Sports investigates persistent under performance of schools in the poorly performing districts of Uganda. 

Therefore, one leg is to the ministry and the other to the House. Honourable minister, the prayers are very clear, straight forward and critical. 

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At an appropriate time in the future, you will allow me to say something about the notice of revocation of the provisional license of Busoga University and the suspension of semester exams in Gulu University.

I join my colleagues to thank you for the many concerns you have raised. We have taken note of everything you have put across and we would like to thank you very much for that. Also, the ministry is in the process of reviewing the education policy; what you have been referring to as a white paper. We shall present it to Cabinet and to you, Madam Speaker, very soon. In this new policy, we shall address almost everything that is being raised here. 

As my colleague said, we have got to work together. If the Committee on Education and Sports in Parliament is also handling it from another angle, I do not think there is any problem with that. I wanted to make some comments about what was said. Of course, there are certain statements which were made and are not correct. May I use this opportunity to make some corrections? 

One, Members have said that the Ministry of Education and Sports has been moving alone. If I listened to my colleague very well, we need to move together with you. That is why even sometime back, the Minister of Education and Sports came here and took you through the challenges faced by the ministry. Some of these are what you have raised such as funding. Hon. Ssewungu pointed out the issue of terrible underfunding that we are facing in the ministry. 

We also have quite a number of challenges with staffing and infrastructure. These are the things the minister came here and took us through. The idea behind was to call on your support. I remember in her statement, she said we cannot achieve the ministry’s objectives without Parliament. We shall be presenting our request with a lot of financial implications very soon. So, it is not true that we are moving alone, instead we want to move with you. 

The other one is that Members here have been saying that –(Interruption)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the circumstances and the problems there, I think the prayer of the Ministry of Education and Sports would be to request this House that this ministry is given priority funding so that all these other things be addressed. Everything there needs round funding. 

Then after that, they could request for the strengthening of other institutions like the technical institutions for skills. Therefore, without funding, these interventions are difficult.  Thank you.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. I think we are clear with what we want and the minister did well to tell us that they are reviewing the policy. However, we are also not happy because with whatever we try to discuss, he simply says that they are reviewing or amending the policy. 

When is this policy coming out?  At least, we were happy when we saw a document being tabled calling it a “strategic plan” which has turned out not to be a strategic plan. Therefore, we would like to know when this policy you are reviewing will be concluded so that we are on the same footing. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About the policy, I think in a week’s time, we will present it to Cabinet. I do not know how long it will take for Cabinet to consider it but if it does so, then we will be in position to come here and present it to you. However, our problems have to do with funding and that is where we need your support. We are really calling on you to move with us. 

My brother here wanted to know something about what we are doing in private schools: It is not true that private schools are performing better. I want to use the example of my brother here. The best school in his constituency, Rubaga, is Mengo Senior Secondary School. It is a government-aided school- (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am at pains to raise a point of order to this senior teacher of mine. When we talk about schools that have caused this motion to come across, the category of St Mary’s College Kisubi, Mengo, Makerere College, Buddo do not come at play.

The honourable minister knows very well that these schools are actually charging even higher than some of the private schools and in our committee of education, we have complained about this issue in those schools. 

So, coming up here to insinuate or to defend one single school against many cannot arise. Therefore, is the honourable minister really in order to bring comparison of schools’ performance by bringing schools that have managed to sustain their stay in that category because of wrong policies within the ministry?

Recently, there is a university in Entebbe for the Brothers of Christian Instruction. These Brothers of Christian Instruction -I am a Catholic - are very rich; they started the university with money but they are given money when Busoga University has no money. Now the Catholics in Kisubi are saying, “Ssewungu is a very bad man because he is fighting the money we are getting.”

In Kalungu, there is s a school called St Charles Lwanga Kasasa Senior Secondary School; it is private but it got Shs 76 million from government and the district has no money to run government schools. Therefore, is he in order to give that kind of defence in front of this House when people are at pains after this good motion?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the motion was about poorly performing schools. Let us focus on the poorly performing schools and give us a solution. Honourable minister, please give us a solution. Mengo is a well performing school and is not part of our motion.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable minister. It is true Mengo S.S. is one of the best schools in the country. We have three categories of schools: two categories belong to government and the third is purely private. There are actually private schools, government schools and government-aided schools.

Mengo S.S. is a government-aided school; it is actually owned by the Church of Uganda. However, that said, in my constituency it can be both the worst and the best because it is the only secondary school there. Therefore, you cannot say that it is one of the best; you could as well say it is one of the worst because it cannot be compared with any other.

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening very attentively. In the last two days, we had a retreat of head teachers of both private, government schools – there were 3,000 of them, and indeed most of the issues we discussed were similar to what the members have raised. 

Our request is that you give us time; we go and harmonise with the technical people having noted each and everything that has been raised for the good of developing our education system together so that we forge a way forward with the committee of education. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, that means that you agree with our motion. We are giving you instructions then you will come back with an answer. However, let hon. Ariko amend then we take a vote.

6.47
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, just from listening to the Government side, we are on the same page on the issues but we differ on action points; that is where they do not get us right. They have appreciated the issue and we have as well. Our action points are two: urging them to do something and our committee should also do something. When we arrive at the same point, then that is good for the country. 

My only concern – as hon. Ariko is going to rise to amend – is that if the amendment goes so much general, then we are going to lose the specific concerns on the disparity on the performance, especially between the districts which have been traditionally affected in terms of performance – (Interjection) – like your own district, Zombo; I do not know whether they mentioned it – and some many other districts.

Therefore, my prayer would be: Let us keep the prayers of the motion as they are so that when we now go into investigating why probably the performance levels in our schools are not up to date; equally uniform throughout the country, then the question of the national concern can come out of what the committee will bring for us as their recommendations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I will also not encourage enlarging the focus; let us concentrate on the issues that were brought in the motion. If you put them all together they will disappear, then you have Mengo and this -

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, some technical amendment: On page 1, I am amazed; I have been following the debate and I am very disappointed that the ministry instead of taking advantage of the serious concern of the House, they have remained on the defensive. You should take advantage, come forward and ask Parliament what you want to be done and that is what is required.

However, my concern, Madam Speaker, is that the districts that are persistently doing poorly, I do not know why the movers of this motion forgot about Lango sub-region. Even Dokolo where I come from, they forgot that the children are doing badly both in primary and secondary, Oyam, Alebtong - they have forgotten us.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I stood up to let the movers of the motion and the House to know that we should be fair to particularly the north and the east. While others are doing well generally, the north and the east are really performing poorly. I think you know this one. Therefore, in the investigation, we should be naturally focused and be able to identify those areas and prescribe.

Madam Speaker, I scanned through this document; let me tell you the truth. If we are going to use the current policy to address this problem as a cure we are wasting our time. 

We are aware of the policy and the challenges. In fact, I have been told that the First Lady has come here to guide us through the challenges. We know the challenges more than the minister because we are there living with the rural people; we know those schools. For you to come here and address challenges – to me – is an insult. 

What I am asking the ministry to do is to come to us with practical solutions to these problems. I have just looked at this document you have tabled here; it is nonsensical. You are talking about opening a constituent university in Karamoja; to cure what here? 

Madam Speaker, I am just saying I appreciate but at the same time I would like you to remember that Lango is also part of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we really have to end. Hon. Ariko, please move.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the previous submission that I made here, I had made proposals of how we can make the prayers made by the honourable colleagues that moved the motion a bit more encompassing. 

However, in the response of the Ministry of Education and Sports there was some discussion that the House has gone into that raises the matter regarding the strategic plan of the ministry. As a result, we seek to introduce further amendment to that. Why? Hon. Okupa has just informed us that there is a funding gap of 57 per cent of that strategic plan. 

Madam Speaker, one of the challenges the ministry has in implementing this strategic plan is sometimes about addressing presidential pledges. In Soroti, the release of last financial year –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ariko, you are now moving to the strategic plan and we have not studied it. No, please. Concentrate on the prayers.

MR ARIKO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. The first prayer is that Parliament investigates the procedure, process and practice of curriculum review, design and development in both primary and secondary schools in Uganda with specific emphasis on the practical subjects that are being dropped in the secondary school syllabus, as an additional one –

THE SPEAKER: No, it only came up in debate but was not part of the motion.

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, we are now going to make a decision on the motion. We are on the prayers. We are not going into the body of the motion. However, we would like to make the motion richer in output at the end of it.

THE SPEAKER: Is removal of those subjects part of reasons for poor performance? It is a problem but I do not think it should be here. Let us not dilute this motion.

MR ARIKO: The second one addresses part two; that the Committee on Education and Sports investigates the persistent poor education standards and performance in both primary and secondary schools and recommend causes of action to Parliament.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, the honourable member had risen to amend the prayers and you guided that we leave the two without touching them. I think the only way we should have done it was to add an additional point which could sort of bring the scope. I think that would be the best way to move.

THE SPEAKER: I am thinking the ministry must inform the country. You know children are going to new classes next year. I think the minister should come and tell us; are these children going to take these subjects or are they ending? That is a separate issue – woodwork, technical drawing, metal work, typing have all gone. Let me put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is work which we gave to the Committee on Public Accounts and they have been on the Order Paper for some time. The report is not long. I do not know whether we cannot receive it.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, before we get here – I wish the ministers could listen – for this document which was laid here I wish you would be able to provide copies to all the members so that by the time we get here for debate we have this document. We have scanned through the other issue of finance which you raised where you need help from us. It is very critical when we have this document. We have also seen some issues which we would need to raise. 

Therefore, I would appreciate if you directed the ministry to provide these copies to Members of Parliament. The document is from the Minister of Education and Sports and it is titled, “The Education and Sports Sector Strategic Plan 2017/2018-2019/2020.” 

If you could provide hard copies, we would appreciate because I have seen St Elizabeth Girls’ Secondary School, which has been pledged, is not here yet this is a pledge which has been running for the last 10 years. Even when the President came to hon. Adoa’s function, he reinstated it. I do not see it here in this three-year strategic plan, which means St Elizabeth Girls’ Secondary School can only get what was pledged after 2020.

MR MUNGOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact, it is from the bottom of my heart. Being from the background of education and having analysed that a sizable number of honourable members are from the education background, I had to come up with this boiling point. From the bottom of my heart, I am happy that all the sides – both Opposition and the ruling party – have supported this document. Please, thank you very much. May God bless you as we make our prayers go through in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, looking at the Order Paper, the matter of public accounts is a very critical report and we have seen challenges because if today it is allowed and presented – of course we won’t be able to have the debate and that would mean next week we shall end up finding that when the debate opens maybe one or two people will get up. I would plead with you and pray that possibly this matter is deferred and it becomes a fresh item next week. 

There are very critical issues in the Committee on Public Accounts which need when people are fresh in mind and when it has been freshly presented so that people can debate. We would be able to handle it. I have also seen that the minister is not here.

I would like to plead with colleagues that we defer this matter to next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable chair, I think you need more attention. I know it has been on the Order Paper for some time but –

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I have also not seen any Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here and yet the issues that we are talking about concern the finance ministry. Therefore, for purposes of giving it the due attention it deserves, I would like to go with the proposal of hon. Okupa, if the House could consider it as one of the first items on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, we should give this matter priority and it should be a standalone. We shall let you know because it is a priority. We need to get it out of the way.

Honourable members, House adjourned to 9 o’clock on Monday.

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 18 December at 9.00 a.m.) 

