Thursday, 5 December 2013 

Parliament met at 3.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and apologise for the delay in starting. Today, we also had the funeral service for our former member of staff, Ms Merab Tugezye and I want to thank those who were able to come and attend. 

In the public gallery, we have district councillors from Otuke, represented by hon. Nyakecho Okwenye and Jacinto Ogwal. You are welcome. (Applause) 

I have also received information that within Parliament, there is a new initiative, which has been formed to promote the tourism sector; so, there is a new Parliamentary Forum on Tourism led by hon. Baliddawa, hon. Kwizera, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Kabakumba. So far, there are 45 Members who have signed up expressing interest. You are invited to participate in this forum. Thank you. 

Hon. Members, as a result of the strenuous training for the practice for the contest we are going to have this weekend, I have a small injury on my foot, so, I am not wearing proper shoes. I do not want anyone to raise a point of order. So, I am letting you know that I got injured in practice. Otherwise, I am fine.
LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) MAKERERE UNIVERSITY SUPPORT TO RESEARCH ACTIVITIES AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY FUNDED BY THE SWEDISH INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA) PHASE III, PROGRAMME NUMBER 75007369 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee? Is there no Member of Public Accounts Committee prepared to lay papers for the Public Accounts Committee?

3.41
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table Makerere University support to research activities at Makerere University. I beg to lay.

    II) REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF BUSITEMA UNIVERSITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Busitema University for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

III) 	POST BANK UGANDA LIMITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR- GENERAL

3.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative, Serere):  Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General entitled “Post Bank Uganda Limited financial statements for the year ended 31st December 2012.” I beg to lay.

    IV) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA BROADCASTING CORPORATION FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.44
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Limited for the year ended 30th June 2012.

V) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE JUSTICE, LAW AND ORDER SECTOR (JLOS) SWAP DEVELOPMENT FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Justice, Law and Order Sector SWAP Development Fund for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay. 

VI) NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.46
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the audited financial statements of the National Council for Disability for the year ended 30th June 2012, together with the report and opinion of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

VII) REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

3.47
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Ministry of Public Service for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

VIII) UGANDA HIGH COMMISSION, BUJUMBURA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR- GENERAL

3.48
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda High Commission Bujumbura for the year ended 30th June 2012. I beg to lay.

IX) THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT (EATTFP) – UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY COMPONENT – IDA CREDIT NO. 4147 UG URA COMPONENT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.49
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the audited financial statements by Auditor-General of the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project IDA credit No. 4147 UG URA component. I beg to lay. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Public Accounts is required to examine all those accounts and report back to this House expeditiously. 

Maybe, hon. Members, I do not know whether this mistake is from the Clerk; we do not have a Uganda High Commission Bujumbura. We have a Uganda Mission. High Commission is from the Commonwealth and Burundi is not part of the Commonwealth. So, either you say “Uganda Mission” or you say the “Uganda Embassy”.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.47
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for granting me the opportunity to make a personal statement pursuant to Rule 45(1) of our Rules of Procedure. 

On Monday 25 November 2013, hon. Latif Ssebagala and hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba and I, walked to the KCCA building to attend a special session of KCCA, which was going to debate the KCCA tribunal report on the fate of the Lord Mayor, Erias Lukwago, in fulfilment of our duties as ex-officio members of the said authority. 

We were later joined by our colleague, hon. Moses Kasibante. On reaching the main gate, we identified ourselves and we were granted entry to the KCCA premises. We saw for ourselves the brutality mounted on Mr Abdullah Kiwanuka, the lawyer who brought the Court Order from the Registrar of the High Court restraining the KCCA from going on with the emergency authority meeting. 

We saw for ourselves the torture and the beating mounted on Mr Kiwanuka by Police in broad daylight. Police tortured Mr Kiwanuka, the Lord Mayor’s lawyer and beat him up as if he was a log, as he attempted to serve a Court Order to the chairperson of the sitting authority meeting. 

Madam Speaker, my two colleagues and I were refused entry to the KCCA meeting by Police on the express orders of hon. Tumwebaze and the KCCA Executive Director, Madam Jennifer Musisi. 

I spotted the men who assaulted and battered hon. Ssebaggala and I, that man was tall, lean and was dressed in civilian clothes. He is called Jimmy and he once lived in Nansana area. He tortured me with police protection. Police knows that man. I was roughed up by that person and banged against the metallic fence in open disregard of my life. 

That odd act was not only directed to us as KCC MPs on duty but it also eroded the dignity of Parliament and Parliament should get an official apology because we were on duty. 

What happened to me is exactly what happened to my colleague hon. Latif Ssebagala MP for Kawempe North. Hon. Ssebaggala and I were assaulted and battered in open defiance of Article 24 of the Constitution of Uganda, which I beg to read verbatim: “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” 

I was humiliated publically before my voters because many of them work in Kampala. I am the representative of the Lord Mayor in Parliament. 

I wish to report that Police have now vacated the Lord Mayor’s residence. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for directing so yesterday. The police officers who beat up and tortured the Lord Mayor’s lawyer should be brought to book. They should be arrested and charged in the court of law. 

Similarly, Madam Speaker, the person who tortured and roughed me along with hon. Latif Ssebagala should be brought to book. That particular fellow whom I have already described should be arrested and charged with assault and battery pursuance to section 235 and section 236 of the Penal Code. The two offences are criminal and torturous. I am saying this for the good of my country and, therefore, I should be taken seriously. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, thank you very much for granting me this opportunity. I never expected it because I knew that things were not going very well. But the role you have played as Speaker of this House encourages us because you have accorded me the opportunity to narrate the ordeal as it occurred. Thank you very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, yesterday, we stood over four clauses of the Bill. I hope the minister is now ready.

Clause 7

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the committee amendment to Clause 7 was presented and stood over due to concerns raised by Members concerning the governing body of the authority. In the Bill, there is a proposal that Uganda Investment Authority Board should be the governing body but the committee proposed that it should be Uganda Free Zones Authority Board and not the other way round. 

There was also concern about composition of the Board. Issues were raised about the need to include the workers’ representative on the Board and a representative from Immigration Department and this will raise a number of Board members to nine from seven. This was not resolved. 

Another concern also came whether URA should be part of the Board members due to the need to distinguish between the main function of the Board, which is policy vis-à-vis the day to day running of the authority. 

There were concerns that Members raised and I think this is the appropriate time for us to resolve those concerns and then proceed. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think there was a general agreement that we have a body other than the Uganda Investment Authority. I think that was already resolved. What was not resolved is the composition.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. In the consultative meeting we had with the committee, we agreed that the composition of the Board should be retained as it was originally given by the committee. So, any other should not be contained. 

There was a proposal to bring on Board the representative from Immigrations and the Commissioner Immigration is a member of the Uganda Investment Authority Board. So, whatever they would want, they could be able to handle that through the Uganda Investment Authority.

The amendment that was brought by the representative of the workers that is contained under Clause 77 would cater for the interest of the workers. So, we retained the composition as follows:
”
    a) Chairperson
    b) The Vice Chairperson
    c) Representative from the Ministry responsible for Finance
    d) Representative from the Ministry responsible for Trade
    e) Representative from the Uganda Investment Authority
    f) Representative from the Uganda Revenue Authority
    g) Representative from the Uganda Land Commission.” 
I beg to move.

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, thank you very much. Yesterday, I gave a precise exposition why it was necessary for us to consider issues of workers. We basically had two points. The first point was about the issues of incentives, rights and all that was resolved by what the honourable minister has alluded to where we provided for an amendment in Clause 71.

But this particular matter should not be mixed up with that because we clearly presented the need for this Board to have a representation of workers. This is because in all the free zones that are operational right now, the biggest issues that stuck out are about the rights of the workers. To the extent that because of the nature of operations in these free zones, it becomes difficult even for workers’ leaders and other people to scrutinise the rights of workers.

Therefore, we thought that by having a representation on the Board, it will be easier to handle even the provision of the rights of the workers in the law, in terms of regulations and others. If we do not get representation, it will be difficult for us to pursue this matter. I am saying this because we have seen what happens. We have even come out with proposals internationally on what should be the best way forward for us to resolve issues relating to labour in these free zones. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, I would like to request my colleagues that having representation of workers is very important.

Yesterday, there was an argument that the representatives from Ministry of Finance, Trade, Investment and others are all workers. But I think this was misplaced because workers’ representation is different from these. These are Government bodies. And that is why when it comes to the chairperson and the vice chairperson the provision is that they should come from the private sector. This is because the private sector is formed of employers and others. Therefore, we would think that for us to have a situation where we cater for all interests, we should have workers’ representatives.

On the issue of gender, I think that was sorted out yesterday. But we also think that if we have representatives of workers, all these factors will be solved as they arise in these free zones.

Most of the workers who are brought to these free zones are women. And there are a lot of labour related issues that affect these women. For us to come out with a formulation that leaves out workers will be to subject female workers to violation of their rights. I am saying this from a worker’s experience; from an experience that I witnessed and from my mandate in this area. So, I request my colleagues to really re-examine this situation and allow representation of workers on this Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Minister and the chairperson of the committee, apart from the machinery, the other component of the free zones is the human resource, which hon. Dr Lyomoki is talking about. How do we cater for those because all these are government officials – look at Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Trade, Uganda Revenue Authority – except for the chair and the vice chair. So, who will take the interests of the human resource? Does it really do any harm if we got someone from the workers? Does the minister have any serious objections?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, yesterday, we agreed that under Article 77, we would clearly indicate, which we have, what will come out of the regulations and a copy of which will – (Interruption)

DR BAYIGA: I would like to request the minister to consider this  - because the explanation he is trying to give does not seem to be convincing especially now that we do not seem to have a very big disparity in cost implications in respect of having more than seven representatives but particularly, catering for the workers. 

That Clause 77 he is talking about has not been exposed to us as a mechanism to convince us about having representation of the workers to cater for not only their rights per se, but also for the interests of the Ugandan people working within those free zones.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. However, I would like to inform you that if we have agreed with the committee position of seven members - if we are to add the one for workers, it means we have to add more two and that was the challenge – we had to have an odd number. So, if we are to admit one member for the workers, it means we have to admit another Board member.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t we trade off the representative of Finance? There is finance, URA and UIA – all these are related to finance. Surely, can’t we trade off one - No, URA is very key.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to move that we trade off URA because when you read that Act, you realise that URA is the key; yes, you need the Minister of Finance for policy and Cabinet issues. URA can still participate through the Commissioner Tax Department who is always engaged. Or the Board can even co-opt.

But also, Madam Chair, I want to plead with the minister that the issue that hon. Dr Lyomoki is talking about is good for the investor because when you look at labour productivity in Uganda, you realise that one of the factors that force investors to move from country to country is labour productivity and quality. That is why factories are moved from, for example, USA to China.

So, the quality and treatment of labour will attract the introduction of free zones in this country. So, this should be treated as a core issue in this project.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Chair. Trade off Trade –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying we trade off the official from the Ministry of Trade?

MR OMACH: Trade is also a member of the Uganda Investment Authority. So, anything that will be dealing with this law, they can handle it under the Uganda Investment Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you mind if maybe the vice chair came from the workers, so we can still have seven but we also have room for the workers?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I would have agreed with my colleague, hon. Lyomoki, but the principles of this Board in a free zone – we must go its core values because if you talk about only workers, how about people with disabilities? How about other interest groups? (Interjections) Yes, what is in the free zone? A free zone is about business people going to trade with Government. And the boards that are going to be formed will formulate policies about the people involved in those zones. Look at what other countries are doing. We benchmarked about this. The Board will be for the benefit of all the people in the country. It will not be about only a certain group; it will be for all people in Uganda. 

Anybody who will be on that Board – the policy within that free zone should benefit everyone whether they are workers, people with disability or others. So, you cannot legislate –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have a Ministry of Labour in this country but people still work 20 hours a day here in this country. People have no minimum wage yet, there is a full Ministry of Labour! What harm will it have to have someone to speak for the workers?

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the position that has been presented by hon. Lyomoki. URA is under the Ministry of Finance. Uganda Investment Authority is under the Ministry of Finance. In fact, a Board cannot have a composition of members from its own without considering the others. So, we need to have other members coming from outside so that they also can be party to the whole process. So, we better have workers’ representatives here.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. In the modern days of total quality management, there is no corporate organisation – the ones you call investors – that would want to be on any Board without the internal customer called a worker. It is very important that as we talk about free zones and on increasing investments in the country, we are also mindful of inclusive growth. I mean inclusive growth that does not only favour an investor to take what they want, but which talks about percolation  and trickledown effects for the Wanainchi and in this case Wanainchi is about protecting the workers’ interests. 

You have companies that are going to employ thousands of women and youths. Therefore, I would like to support the suggestion of trading off on the current composition, which is already dominated by finance-related organisations because when you talk about UIA, URA and Ministry of Finance – that is still the same family. 

The only missing stakeholders are the workers and it is okay to trade off one of those though I am not very sure whether we should trade off Ministry of Trade. I think URA has a responsibility to collect tax from all these people. I do not think they need to be on that Board to be able to take care of taxes. But trade is very important for regulation purposes; we need trade on the Board.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Whereas the arguments coming are good, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to look at the principle of forming these boards. One of the conditions you must look at, irrespective of the interests – the most fundamental thing, Madam Chair, is experience. What experience do you bring to serve on the Board? 

Madam Chair, we can have workers but it is not a mere representation. We need people with experience. We looked at these sectors and ministries and we were hopeful that these were areas where we would pick the relevant experience to serve the intended purpose of this Board. 

So, I believe that whoever will be tasked to chair this Board will take into consideration all the interests of all the parties or stakeholders that will be served by these free zones. Yes, politically, we may have workers to serve the interests of hon. Dr Lyomoki but –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, I have the mandate to talk for the workers in this country who are suffering. We know the experience internationally and what happens in those free zones. So, is it in order for my colleague to say this will be done in my interests, when I am talking about the interests of the people in Uganda and not workers alone, not my interests? So, is it in order for my colleague to refer to this as a “Dr Lyomoki interests”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not in order. Hon. Members, I want you to really think for the country. The AGOA girls brought a petition to this House yet, there was a Government with a full Ministry of Labour. But because of the conditions they were working under, they thought they should come to Parliament to sound their issues. They brought those issues here – Tri-Star – in the Seventh Parliament. The issue of workers is important. So, I want to appeal to you colleagues to let us find room for the workers’ interests.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I really want the minister to convince me why this Board is largely Government; I mean full of civil servants. I have never seen a board of this nature. Because these are representatives, they will send anybody any time and as and when want. The Board will have no serious business to transact. I have sat on boards where there were people from Government ministries and got to realise that those people do not just come for meetings. They would send their clerks.

These free zones are not yet operating and so, we need serious people who are going to devote time to set them up. So, if you just have these people from ministries – what is the rationale of having 90 percent a board full of representatives from ministries? Why can’t we get serious Ugandans outside there to come and offer services and set up this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the proposal came from the committee and not from the minister.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, but the Board composition is from the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it was from the committee.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Okay, sorry, then it should be the chairperson of the committee to answer this question.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, let me give you information. Why members considered the structure they have proposed is because they looked at stakeholder entities that would help this public/private partnership. That is why we went for stakeholder representation.

So, in order for us to get out of this quagmire, I would like to propose that we trade off UIA or else, we increase the number to nine. We put workers and increase the number to nine as we bring in people from immigration as proposed yesterday by the Ministry of Internal Affairs because of immigration issues in the free zones.

MS NAGGAYI: I want to thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to support the issue of workers. However, I notice that we seem to have a problem on the defining where workers will come from. I am saying this because who is a worker? Does someone have to belong to a trade union to be a worker?

Madam Chair, I am saying this because when you presided over the conference for women workers from different institutions at the Conference Centre, the women workers who are employed in banks asked me as their MP “hon. Nabilah, we vote you as workers” – I am very disturbed by that fact that while workers are being talked about, some of them do not know where to go when they have issues. This issue is very vague, Madam Chair. That is why they usually bring their issues to Parliament.

So, as we talk about that, we need to clarify – as we target these workers, are we only talking about the unionised ones and if so, how many are they? That is where the issue is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not a very big issue because we have an interpretation section where we can include what we mean by “a worker.” For now, let us first agree on the principle.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before I submit my support for the workers, I have a problem with the composition of the Board. When you read down on tenure and removal of members of the Board, “A member of the Board shall serve three years” and et cetera. Now, when you go to the composition, I agree with the submission of the chairperson that these entities, the ministries mentioned, should be represented on the Board. 

However, I have a problem where you have government agencies becoming major members to compose the Board. Why don’t we make them ex-officio because they are stakeholders so that we make a composition of a board to have members - because now, when you look at the subsequent sections of the Bill and recommendations, it has several implications because they are saying that a member of the Board can only be on the Board for three years and reappointed once and yet, these are institutions.

I would propose that we do an amendment so that we can make a composition of the Board and these agencies, which are Government and are mentioned including workers, can only make a representation as ex-officio.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, help us so that we can move.

MR OMACH: We concede to have the representative of the workers on this Board. (Applause) But we pray that the number of the members of the Board does not exceed seven. We have said that we are ready to concede to the dropping of any of those but not the Ministry of Finance under which this authority will be based. So, that is our only prayer.

But if in the wisdom of Parliament we would want to remove some of the members who are said to be ex-officio, we have no problem with that but not all of them. So, we can have URA as ex-officio and then we have the workers take that position. [Hon. Members: “Which workers now?]

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can define the “workers” when we come to interpretation. Let us agree on the principles first. 

There was also an issue on the matter on sanctions on Page 11. I do not know where hon. Mutekanga is. He wanted deletion of “dishonest without the option of a fine.” I do not know whether you have had time to look at it, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEBUNYA: We did not interrogate the matter further away from Parliament but the Attorney-General had given the reason. The Attorney-General said that if you are going to be imprisoned – to be put in the cell without an option of a fine, the Attorney-General said that everybody shall be a candidate. That tells you that if the gravity involves anybody going to the cell, then we are all guilty to the extent that even if it is a traffic offence and you do not have an option of paying Shs 30,000 or something and you go to prison, that means that  - so it was a gravity of the sentence. 

So, I think the Attorney-General had directed well and we as a committee have no option but to agree on the suggestion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know there are two legs to this (d). One is that, if you are convicted to more than three months imprisonment. The second one is, if you are convicted of an offence involving fraud and dishonesty where there is no option of a fine – there are two legs.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, hon. Lwanga was looking at the case of dishonesty and fraud and he was proposing that if you are convicted, whatever sentence that emanates from that, it is grievous enough for you not to be eligible to be a member of the Board. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, he was proposing that we stop at the word, “dishonesty”?

MR SSEBUNYA: He was proposing that we stop at the word, “dishonesty” and we do not put the other words of a fine or something like that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any problem with that? Can we agree to that?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: No problem with that, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we delete the words, “without the option of a fine” and stop at “dishonesty”. I think those are the areas that were outstanding under 7. 

Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, benefiting from your guidance yesterday and following consultations between the Committee of Finance and the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties) on clauses 44 and 67, we are making the following proposals on Clause 44.

On the first line of Clause 44, delete the phrase of a “business enterprise” and insert “or an operator”. The statement would now read, “A developer or an operator shall be granted exemptions from taxes and duties on all export processing zone imported inputs that are for the exclusive use in the development and production output of the business enterprise including machinery and equipment, spare parts, raw materials and intermediate goods, subject to the limitation on goods specified in the East African Customs Management Act.” 

The justification is that the exemptions provided for under this clause are intended to apply to operators and developers. They are those ones who operate business enterprises and it is them to get the exemption.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that is the new formulation. That is the new amendment and you are abandoning the rest of the – okay, I put the question that Clause 44, be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: On Clause 67, replace Clause 67 with the following: “(a) A business enterprise in a free zone shall qualify for incentives as provided for in the relevant laws.
(b) The authority shall ensure that relevant facilities are available to operators and developers to ensure faster project start-up and efficient operation.” 

The justification is for (a) is to ensure that operators and developers access all incentives in the relevant laws; and (b) to facilitate operators and developers by placing obligations on Government to avail facilities to enable expeditious and efficient implementation of projects.

MR EKANYA: I just want to seek clarification because I see that you are inter-changing the words. On 44, we deleted the word, “business enterprise,” and now on 67 you are bringing “business enterprise.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we did not delete the phrase but we moved it from the first line to somewhere in the middle. It left the top and went to the middle. 

MR EKANYA: But, Madam Chair, on 44, first line, “delete the expression of ‘business enterprise’ and insert ‘an operator’”. The justification is that it is operators and the developer to benefit from exemption. 

Coming to 67, now, we replace clause 67 with the words, “A business enterprise in a free zone shall qualify for incentives as provided for in the relevant laws.” It is this exemption now that we are bringing these enterprises. We need to clarify and either we use the word, “operator” or “business enterprise.” Otherwise, we are making the operator benefit and the business enterprise benefit double.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, what I want my chairperson to say is that, instead of using the words “business enterprise” we say that “a developer or an operator” is free so that we are consistent with what we are trying to amend. 

Okay. I propose to amend the amendment by putting “a developer or an operator in a free zone shall qualify...” and it goes like that. 

MR KAKOOZA: I think hon. Ekanya is correct because any business enterprise, which is exempted must be in conformity with the relevant laws. Let us say that you are a business enterprise with VAT – manufacturing – the exercise is exempted after re-export if it is a business enterprise. 

But the meaning of “an operator” or “a developer” is the person who is coming in and intended to be exempted as he starts his business. So, Clause 67 should read, “as an operator in a free zone,” just as it is in Clause 44 to be consistent.

MR EKANYA: I think there is consensus. Then the issue of clarification – “The authority shall ensure that relevant facilities are available to the operator and developer to ensure faster start-up of a project…” here, we are tying the hands of Government. I know that Government policy is to have water, electricity and health centres in every constituency. But if you make it like this, it makes it mandatory and I really do not know how Government thinks and this company or operator is getting exemption for everything that he is bringing but you are making it a condition; we shall appropriate money here to put a road or power. 

Why don’t we leave it to be Government policy as it is required so that even when you are putting a school or health centre, it is Government policy to provide this facility instead of tying the Government’s hands with Clause 2. So, we delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Pardon?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, the head note in the Bill is reading “incentives and facilities” and we had not talked about facilities in the original composition in the Bill. So, in order for us to conform to the head note, which is incentives and facilities – that is why No. 2 is coming in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to encourage that we retain No. 2 because if the authority goes to Koboko and identifies 10 square miles as a free zone and in order to entice people to come there, they will want to make sure that there is power and roads. Otherwise, you can go there and hang by yourself. You wait for a road and it does not come but you are there and stuck.

Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 67 be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.)

The Schedule

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam, Chair, in that new Schedule 2, “To guide functionality of the Board as follows: 
1. 	Meetings of the Board
(i) 	The Chairperson shall convene every meeting of the Board at times and places as the Board may determine and the Board shall meet for the discharge of business at least four times in every year.
(ii)	The Chairperson may at any time convene a special meeting of the Board and shall also call a meeting within 14 days if requested to do so in writing by at least four members of the Board.
(iii)	Notice of a board meeting shall be given in writing to each member at least 14 working days before the day of the meeting.
(iv)	The Chairperson shall preside at every meeting of the Board and in the absence of the Chairperson the members present shall appoint a member from amongst themselves to preside at the meeting.

2. 	Quorum
    (i) The quorum for a meeting of the Board is five members
    (ii) All decisions at a meeting of the Board shall be by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, in case of an inequality of votes, the person presiding at the meetings shall have a casting vote in addition to his or her deliberative vote.

3. 	Minutes of meetings
    (i) The Board shall cause to be recorded and kept minutes of all meetings of the Board in a form approved by the Board.
    (ii) The minutes recorded under this paragraph shall be submitted to the Board for confirmation at its next meeting following that to which the minutes relate and when so confirmed, shall be signed by the Chairperson and the Secretary to the Board in the presence of the members present at the later meeting.

4. Power to co-opt
    (i) The Board may invite any person who in the opinion of the Board has expert knowledge concerning the functions of the Board to attend and take part in the proceedings of the Board.
    (ii) A person attending a meeting of the Board under this section may take part in any discussions at the meeting on which his or her advice is required but shall not have any right to vote at the meeting.

5. Validity of proceedings not affected by vacancy
The validity of any proceedings of the Board shall not be affected by a vacancy in its membership or by any defect in the appointment or qualification of a member or by reason that a person not entitled took part in its proceedings.

6. Disclosure of interest of members
(i) A member of the Board who is in any way directly or indirectly interested in a contract made or proposed to be made by the Board or in any other matter, which falls to be considered by the Board, shall disclose the nature of his or her interests at a meeting of the Board.
(ii)	A disclosure made under sub-paragraph (i) shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting.
    (iii) A member who makes a disclosure under sub-paragraph (i) shall not -
(a) 	be present during any deliberation of the Board with respect to that matter; or
(b) 	take part in any decision of the Board with respect to that matter.
    (iv) For purposes of determining whether there is quorum, a member withdrawing from a meeting or who is not taking part in a meeting under sub-paragraph (iii), shall be treated as being present.

7. Board may regulate its procedure
Subject to this Act, the Board may regulate its own procedure or any other matter relating to its meeting.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that is the proposed Schedule 2 -

MR KABAJO: Thank you. Generally, I do not have any big issue but under part 1, “Meetings of the Board” sub-clause (iv), it says that “The Chairperson shall preside at every meeting and in the absence of the Chairperson, the members shall appoint a member from among themselves to preside.”

My proposal there would be that in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson would preside. It would only be if both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson are absent that the members would appoint from among themselves another person to preside.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is true because in the composition, we had a Vice-Chairperson substantively.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that the proposed schedule be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, Clause 2 is about definitions and the committee is proposing that we replace definition of the Board as follows, “’Board’ means the Uganda Free Zone Authority Board.” And “’Business enterprise’ means an operator licensed under Section 34”. 

The justification is that this is in line with the amendment we have had in Clause 7 to the effect that we have adopted the establishment of Uganda Free Zones Authority Board. And there is also need to clearly define the above words for purposes of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we have proposals for the definition of a “worker”?

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, my view is that we do not need to define workers here because the definition of “a worker” is clearly known in the various relevant laws. We are here as workers’ representatives and it is known. We also have representatives in other bodies like the NSSF Board. Now, if we attempt to define it here, we can have sort of a contradiction with the various provisions. Unless we say that the definition of “a worker” is like it is in relevant labour laws. 

MR SSEBUNYA: We can also define by relating to the relevant law. So, if they say the definition by some relevant laws, then we can refer to that law and that will be the definition in this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there no law that defines “a worker”?

DR LYOMOKI: The Labour Unions Act defines “a worker”. But we would say, “...the relevant labour laws” because there are many like the Workers’ Compensation Act, the Labour Unions Act and the Employment Act. All have the definition of “a worker.”

THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, we say, “’A worker’ means a worker as defined in the relevant labour laws”?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, Madam Chair.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I still have a problem. Yesterday, I remember hon. Lyomoki saying that there should be a body – maybe the workers’ federation to nominate that worker. Wouldn’t that be specified here – that the worker representing the workers would be the “person who has been nominated by the workers’ federation”? Maybe he can clarify on that.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Chair, I think since the workers’ representative is here, he still brings up the plight of workers who are not unionised. What is the percentage of unionised workers? This will enable us know that we are not opening up for our workers who we look at as workers to still be narrowed down and yet, we will not even be solving a problem. 

So, I think behind the scenes, the hon. workers’ representative should be able to say that maybe, they are not closing in but they are opening up. This will help us – 

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chair, I think there is a bit of mix-up here. The Constitution is very clear; we amended Article 40 of the Constitution and it provides for the right of workers to representation. It also provides for the right of workers to join and form trade unions and others. And we amended the 2006 laws that opened up all these restrictions. 

So, in terms of workers’ representation - either belonging or all that – I think we have the best law in the region that talks about representation of workers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one is that? You are sending us on a fishing expedition. You are going to send the minister to start thinking about this worker and the other worker. Where do you want to go with this worker?

DR LYOMOKI: The standard, which is established, when we are talking about workers’ representatives in this country – whether ILO or what – we are talking about workers nominated by federations of labour unions. That is the standard; you cannot, for instance, talk of a worker and then pick from somewhere else. It is a very clear thing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then let us say that so that the minister is assisted. Otherwise, he will go to the tea planters and look for workers; from there, he will go to the airlines and look for workers – 

DR LYOMOKI: We can provide and say that, “The workers’ representative shall be nominated by the federations of labour unions.” That is, if you want to be very specific. But even if you left it general, it would go to the same point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Or “appointed from the federations of labour unions”? 

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, the umbrella organisation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, make that arrangement. Any other change in Clause 2? Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPEMNT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Free Zones Bill, 2012” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE FREE ZONES BILL, 2012

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Free Zones Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FREE ZONES ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) So, we congratulate the minister.

MR OMACH: I can only say Dominus vobiscum.

THE SPEAKER: That is a relieved minister who has been following up this Bill. Congratulations! I thank you hon. Members; the whips and the Leader of the Opposition for mobilising for this work.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BILL, 2013

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek some guidance.

THE SPEAKER: On this Bill?

MR MUKITALE: Yes. Madam Speaker, I have a conflict right now. Yesterday, you informed us that we have the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda and that we should prepare to receive him for the Holy Communion Service. I have just come back from out and the Archbishop is already walking in. This is a very important Bill, which is very close to my heart. I do not know how we can proceed because my spirit is at the venue of the prayers while the body is here. I need you guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my spirit is also in many places now – (Laughter) - but let us receive the report.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of Defence and the Government Chief Whip.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you will recall that this Bill was presented and read for the first time sometime back in August this year and the whole idea is to help us increase access to higher education.

The object behind this Bill is to- 
    • establish a scheme to finance the students to pursue higher education in Uganda; 
    • establish the higher education students financing board; 
    • establish a fund to finance the scheme; and also to provide for the management and administration of the scheme and the fund. 

The scheme is intended to provide financing to Ugandan students who have qualified for higher education in recognised institutions of higher learning but are unable to support themselves, thereby meeting the sector policy objective of increasing access to quality higher education, in view of the large number of bright students who are not among the 4,000 students sponsored by Government and they cannot raise the fees for self-sponsorship.

At present, there is no law providing for financing of students to pursue higher education in Uganda. With improved access to basic education through the introduction of Universal Primary and Secondary Education, there has been an increased demand for higher education as over 65,000 students qualify for higher education every year. As a result of the lacuna created through the existing Government interventions, there is a dire need to have a loan scheme to enable students pursue higher education in recognised institutions of higher learning.

Already, Government has given us Shs6 billion to finance this Bill and we are just waiting for this Bill to come out. Already, very many students have been admitted and they are unable to access higher education because this Bill has not been passed. 

That is why, Madam Speaker, I beg that this Bill be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Please, hon. Chair.

4.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Sylivia Ssinabulya): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013 was read for the first time on 20 August 2013. It was referred to the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports in accordance with Rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure.

“Higher education” in this Bill refers to post-secondary course of study or programme leading to the award of a certificate, diploma or degree. 

The Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to establish a scheme in Uganda to finance students to pursue higher education; to establish the higher education students financing board; to establish a fund to finance the scheme; to provide for the management of the scheme and the fund; ensure a sustainable revolving fund and for related matters.

The Higher Education Students Financing Bill, 2013 aims at streamlining financing of higher education through a scheme that will see the establishment of a fund and a board. The law will, therefore, enable Ugandan students to access funding to pursue higher education in accredited and recognised institutions of higher education.

The committee used the following methodology as outlined on page 2 and page 3. I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee. 

The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

Article 30 of the Constitution of Uganda states that “All persons have a right to education.” This makes the Bill necessary and imperative. 

At present, Uganda has no law providing for financing students to pursue higher education. Government subvention and support to public institutions are by way of policies, which have increased access to higher education but only to a small extent. The scheme will help increase equitable access to higher education.

The committee noted that many other countries other than those benchmarked have implemented cost-sharing at higher education by operating student loan schemes. There are so many examples given as outlined on page 3.

Despite Government support to public institutions, which has greatly subsidised the cost of education for private students in public institutions, the cost of higher education still remains very high. This has led to inability by some qualifying students to pay for the cost of higher education. This scheme will, therefore, enable students to finance their education through borrowing from the fund. 

Due to improved access to basic education through the introduction of Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education, there is currently an upsurge in the number of school-going children. This has, therefore, led to an increase in the number of students qualifying for higher education to over 65,000 students per year. However, there is no legal framework for financing students in public universities and tertiary institutions.

Due to the increasing demand for higher education in the county as mentioned above, there is great need to ensure a reliable source of financing, which needs to be supported by a law. Higher education needs to be extensively funded in order to support the growing demand for the expanding secondary education. The scheme will, therefore, support illegible students to pursue higher education in accredited and recognised institutions of higher learning.

The scheme is intended to provide financing to Ugandan students who have qualified for higher education in recognised and accredited institutions but are unable to raise fees for self-sponsorship. In this regard, Clauses 15 to 21 provide for the establishment of a higher education students financing scheme consisting of loans and scholarships provided by the board to eligible students to pursue higher education. This will increase equitable access to higher education in Uganda, and also address the problem of dropouts due to inability to meet the cost of funding of education by many Ugandan citizens. 

The committee also observed that there is inadequate infrastructure in institutions of higher learning compared to the increasing number of enrolling students. We recommended that the ministry and Government look into the issue of expanding infrastructure if the scheme is to be successful. 

We also noted that the Bill is silent about the existing Government subvention funding mechanisms. The subvention mechanisms should be maintained in addition to the proposed student loan scholarship scheme.

The committee observed that currently, each university carries out its own admission for private students, which has led to multiple and sub-standard admissions. A national clearing house for admissions to higher education institutions should be developed if the proposed scheme is to be successful.

Although it is common practice for loans to have a guarantor, the committee is against inclusion of a guarantor in the Bill because some students may fail to get guarantors, thus failing to access the loan. The beneficiaries should be held accountable for the loans themselves.

There is need for the Bill to provide for a transitional clause to cater for the bilateral scholarships: the 400 scholarships currently under the quota system, State House scholarships and other scholarships under the Ministry of Education and Sports in the higher education institutions. 

The committee has proposed a transitional clause for all the scholarships to be managed under the Higher Education Financing Act.  


The Bill does not provide a detailed eligibility criterion for accessing the loan. The committee has, therefore, provided for it in its proposed amendments. The criteria should take into consideration critical courses for national development and a mechanism should be put in place for determining and reviewing of critical courses. 

Further, the criteria should consider social equity, manpower needs of the country, gender, special needs and are all to be decided upon by the board. 

The committee observed that in some countries, student loan schemes have exhibited diverse records of performance with successes and failures. The most failed loan schemes have failed for one or more of the following reasons that need to be put into consideration while implementing the scheme:

i) Insufficient funding by the government

The committee observed that not enough funds have been provided to be lent at reasonable interest rates. The minister has talked about the Shs6 billion that has been provided. Much as this is a good kick-start, it is not sufficient. 

ii. Inefficient and ineffective loan collection infrastructure. The committee notes that this can happen as a result of weak communications systems, which are all inexistent public records that can be used in tracking former borrowers, lack of appropriate software and well-managed database that can be utilised to make the loan disbursement and recovery operations quick and accurate. 

iii. Very high default rates
The committee notes that most extreme default problems are closely linked to the usually strong mentality that the government has to solely meet the cost of education for all its citizens and hence, the cause of resistance of the population to cost-sharing at higher education.  

iv. Absence or less political will and support
Without political will and support from the government, the students’ loan scheme is prone to fail. Student loan schemes should be strongly supported by the government as they rely on Government support in order for them to achieve the desired objective. The loan scheme should be one of the priority Government policies for development. 

Very high levels of unemployment and low incomes coupled with highly mobile population and a large informal and private sector can also lead to the failure of the loan scheme. And lack of a strong and relevant legal framework.

The committee notes that for the student loan scheme to be fully operational, it has to be backed by a strong and relevant legal framework accepted by the government and binding to the public. This will minimise the cost of recovering the loans and also help to reduce the default rates.

Madam Speaker, the committee made the following recommendations:
That the Minister of Education and Sports should plan for infrastructure development in learning institutions. Government should provide substantial capital investment for higher institutions of learning in order to make them modern and technologically conducive for research and teaching.

The Shs 5 billion provided in the current budget for the loan scheme is too little. The committee recommends that more funding should be gradually provided as other prior financing programmes are progressively phased out. This can be done by Government scrapping Government State House scholarships so that the funds are channelled to the proposed student loan schemes. 

The committee recommends that all scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships existing before the commencement of this law, should be vested in the Board. The Board shall, in consultation with the minister, continue to award scholarships to existing beneficiaries and in so doing it shall also determine the number of beneficiaries. The committee proposes that bilateral scholarships shall be awarded subject to the conditions as agreed with the donor country/agency. 

Though the Bill proposes that the scheme should be restricted to Ugandans, the country at the moment lacks a comprehensive database system and national identification system, which could be used for tracking and tracing beneficiaries within the country and without the country. The committee, therefore, recommends that the process of issuance of national identity cards should be expedited because this is a follow up and also ensure that only Ugandans benefit from the scheme.

Though part 5 of the Bill makes a provision for the repayment of student loans, a mechanism should be put in place to ensure proper loan recovery bearing in mind the tendency for people to take repayment of Government loans less seriously. A system of involving respective local governments in the follow-up of beneficiaries should be developed. 

The Bill provided for both loans and scholarships. The committee proposes that students already on scholarships should continue to be assisted until they complete their courses. However, upon the coming into force of this law, the scholarship scheme should be scaled down significantly to provide money for the loan scheme. 

The committee recommends that the Central Scholarships Committee of the Ministry of Education and Sports existing before the commencement of this Act, should cease to exist and the Board will assume its duties. 

The committee recommends that the Higher Education Scheme Financing Bill, 2013 be passed into law subject to the following proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chairperson and your committee. I thank you for attempting to do it as quickly as we had requested because of the urgency and the need in the country. I understand the Archbishop is still on the way; so, if there are Members who are ready to make some – we still have a report to receive; I think we can have some interventions. 

5.04
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Committee on Education for these very spot-on observations you have made. I want to start again from the policy question. I think this report informs us that we need to review a lot of things in the education policy. As realised, there are many proposals they are making outside the current policy framework. 

Secondly, I thank Government for finally coming up with a loan scheme but remember - I would prefer a loan scheme for skilling Ugandans before even this one of university because we needed that expertise, that labour, like yesterday and very few of our children go beyond Senior Six and are going for this university education. We are now dealing with a problem we have caused after USE but we have forgotten the drop-outs, the innocent citizens who dropped out at Senior Four and did not make it for university level. So, I hope we shall find an intervention at that level. 

But also, what this report is bringing out is the unit cost study we asked for over six years ago, because what Government is currently calling sponsorship is not sponsorship; it is partial and we did not come up with a policy to address cost-sharing as an issue. So, I am for bursaries so that we look at whoever Government is sponsoring. Those who compute - if you have got the final cost, it is okay to say, “The following on merit have passed to get Government sponsorship” but when you know the cost, then you can say such a category is on a district quota; then the other category is now for the new loan schemes. But if we do not do that, we are the ones responsible for the many strikes in the universities because we have not addressed the issue of the cost of university education in this country, and we give partial sponsorship and we call it sponsorship, causing administrative problems in these universities. 

I also want to agree entirely with this clearing house of admissions. Why should JAB concentrate on Government sponsored students and then my son gets three admissions from three universities. This kills chances for other citizens who would have wanted those admissions. So, it is important that that clearing house does not end with only JAB but also for the others.

On recovery, I would like to propose, in agreement with the committee, that the national ID will help us. But what if a young man you have given a university loan does not get a job? Let me propose some community service. These jobs we are giving to people who are already privileged when the very poor needy students who get these loans have no uncles to help them get jobs. These are the people who should do community service. They should be recruited as cadets and given Government jobs. We should have affirmative action of not just calling them indebted – we would want to have a bonding; that if you have benefited from this loan, you have to serve your country. In some countries, it is five years and in others, it is three years. 

But I want affirmative action such that these loans go to the most needy Ugandans; the privileged of this country should be disqualified from this loan scheme. There are very many brilliant young people in this country in the remote areas who have no uncles in Kampala who deserve university education. If we do not put in that restriction, we are going to end up with our own children getting these loans, yet we have other means of financing our children. 

Remember, already Government is sponsoring the best performing students from Budo, Gayaza and Kisubi who are our children; I mean the privileged class. So, we should not add insult to injury by creating another loan scheme for ourselves. Let us put a loan scheme for the very poor. Let this loan scheme care for the very poor and needy; that is the kind of loan scheme I want to support but not one for the rich and privileged. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR AMODING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill that we are considering now is a very important one, which affects all Members of Parliament. I think, noting from the previous comments from Members, there was high need for most Members to debate this issue. But by the look of things, I think the House is not well constituted. I would, therefore, want to beg your indulgence to push this Bill into the next sitting when the House is better constituted so that Members can give this particular issue more attention. That is my prayer, following what hon. Mukitale mentioned earlier.
 
THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I invited all the Members to be here today. Let us have a few more contributions so that we reduce on those who will speak next week. 

5.10
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. This is a good Bill and we need to support it. What we are going through now in terms of helping needy students as Members of Parliament is not easy. 

The Bill talks about high default rates; I do not know what mechanism Government can put in place to ensure that this rate goes down. Right now, even the economy is not good; many people are failing to honour their obligations with financial institutions.

But I suggest that we get some courses to tag to unemployment like developed countries are doing; where a person gets a loan on condition that they will get employment. Otherwise, if I get the money and study, but I fail to get a job, where would I get the money to pay back? That is the challenge. If that is not done, this could end up as a grant to those students. 

Secondly, as hon. Mukitale alluded, the course units are very costly. I do not understand what is happening in this country. Like in Makerere, I have not seen any new structures yet, the charges are becoming outrageous. So, we have to consider the unit costs especially in these Government institutions because they are using the same facilities. If they study in the morning, they use the same lecture rooms and so on. So, we need to look at the unit cost of these institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I have been here for the last six or seven years, but I have never seen any report of appropriation of aid from these universities because they are allowed to use money at source. But I have never seen such reports; maybe, they came when I was not in the House, but we need to consider such reports. How much they collect from private students and how much they utilise in terms of accountability in order to ensure that there is value for money. 

Government of Uganda has been losing a lot of money from non-Ugandans. I come from the East near the Kenya border. Most of those schools like Nabumali are occupied by Kenyans, and they are benefiting from our grants. I wonder whether Government has realised this. When they are submitting lists for quotas they include foreigners, yet they are not supposed to benefit.

We ask the Ministry of Education to be keen and audit that so that we can see how much Government has lost in terms of such investments. We are looking at school dropout rates – what if one takes a loan and drops out; what will happen? Otherwise, I support the loan. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon.  Members, I understand that the Archbishop has come. He will think I am impudent if I do not go and receive him. But I have noted hon. Okot, hon. Anite, hon. Lyomoki, hon. Musasizi, hon. Kasamba, hon. Aol, hon. Kyanjo – let me write down those names so that we start with you on Tuesday. 

Okay, also hon. Oponya, hon. Mawanda, hon. Lubega, hon. Nabilah, hon. Wafula and hon. Kyekwelo. Those will take priority when we meet next week. 

Hon. Members, this morning, we distributed the iPads and I said that from next week, I am not going to issue any paper reports so that you can learn how to use them. Parliament is going to conduct some training in case Members want to perfect their skills in groups of about 30. So, you will be notified on when you can do that. But start learning today so that next week, we are all dot com. 

Otherwise, I want to thank you very much. House adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00p.m. 
The Clerk will tell you where the iPads are, in the I.T Department because you have to sign for it personally.

Hon. Members, I forgot but there are children from Kaleirwe Primary School, Nakasongola, represented by hon. Komuhangi and hon. Peter Nyombi. You are welcome. (Applause)

(The House rose at 5.17 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 10 December 2013 at 2.00p.m.) 
