Tuesday, 27 December 2005

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you from the Christmas recess. I hope you enjoyed it. On a personal note, I want to thank you for the messages and cards that you sent me wishing me a happy Christmas and New Year. I hope you have not had any incidents that have affected you. 

However, this morning I received a call from hon. Oulanyah. As he was coming to Kampala he had an accident. He did not get injured personally but his vehicle was greatly damaged. He has also told me that there were some problems in his constituency especially in the camps, but we shall know the details from him. This is the information I wanted to give you.

I also want to appeal to you honourable members to mobilise your friends so that tomorrow they can come here and deal with that very important business that affects a number of us here, that is to decide on the special interest groups representation which we must do because the Constitution commands us to.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We appreciate your communication but I have a suggestion to make. I have heard that in the past announcements were made from the Clerk’s Office, calling upon Members of Parliament to come for special session like the one we are talking about tomorrow. Is it possible for your Office or that of the Clerk’s, I do not know which protocol to follow here, to put announcements inviting Members of Parliament to come and resolve the issue which is supposed to be resolved tomorrow?  

Mr Speaker, the issue of special interest groups in this Parliament is very critical for the life of Parliament and mainly for the representation of the people in this country. Special groups constitute women who I understand and are 51 percent of the population of this country. Then, we have the youth who are the most critical group in the life of this country plus people with disabilities and others. If this Parliament fails to solve the constitutional issue pertaining to these groups, I think the life of this Parliament will be paralysed. 

You have urged us individually to contact our friends and colleagues and urge them to come tomorrow, but I am also suggesting that some specialised strong announcements be put through your Office or through the appropriate office calling our colleagues to come. We realize and appreciate that this is a busy time politically, and people are busy either joining ongoing rallies or mobilising the population but it is equally important that they come and resolve this issue. So, I beg to ask for some formal announcement appealing and calling upon everybody to come and attend the session tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, over the Christmas weekend I rang the Clerk and discussed this issue with him and I requested him to put several announcements on radio calling upon Members to come and attend Parliament. I hope he has done it because he promised he would. Hon. Kabwegyere also contacted me over the same issue and I assured him that I was going to handle it and I did. I will find out from the Clerk whether that was done, and if it was not, then we shall do it as a crash programme.

2.49
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Supplementary to my honourable colleague’s contribution, I am equally concerned about certain bills, which need to be cleared by this august House before the next general elections. I was just wondering, Mr Speaker, whether from your Office or the Office of the Clerk or the Business Committee we could go through the number of pending bills and prioritise those which are time-pegged, such as the one the honourable Minister of Education has just mentioned. 

That particular one is time-pegged and unless it is cleared by certain period, we may suffer the drastic consequences of not being able to have elections for special interest groups. Likewise, I note with great concern that another bill, that is the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, which is time-pegged has been listed as “Business to Follow” after the 16 others. I think we need to look into that one which already affects 75 Members of Parliament who have been eliminated internally by their political parties. We need to look after their interests by having this bill cleared before the next Parliament. Similarly, even those of us who intend to be here for a long time need to be taken care of.

THE SPEAKER: I expected that particular bill to come today for its first reading, but I do not know what has happened. As soon as copies are available we shall have the first reading of that particular bill. As you see, the other bills are listed here. However, let me comment on item 4. I have seen something in the papers raising the issue of subjudice, I think in the Daily Monitor. 

There are certain institutions that do not want us to deal with this particular bill because of the subjudice rule. I must say that I think there is a misunderstanding of that particular rule and the way it was raised in that report. This Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was gazetted on 8 April 2005 and it is Bill No. 7. Therefore, it has been with us for quite sometime and it even received the first reading. 

I have undertaken some research and found out that there are two miscellaneous applications, which were filed in September 2005. That means that this business was with us before somebody run to court to protect his or her interests. I think it is not a good practice for somebody to think that he or she can stop Parliament’s work by going to court and getting a file number.  

This cannot be accepted by Parliament. We shall deal with this business while at the same time be cautious of Rule 53, which stops us from discussing matters that are pending in court in such a way that we may prejudice what is in court. However, let me add that I do not see any prejudice that can arise by dealing with amending a law that Parliament thinks should be amended. 

In any case, should we repeal anything that will not affect the course of action that arose before the law was changed? The court will proceed to pronounce itself on the dispute, as the law was, not as the law that will be changed. If the Committee on Social Services has completed its work and has the report, we shall definitely proceed with this bill.

Furthermore, I want to give a warning that people should not run to court in an attempt to stop Parliament’s operations. They should go there for a good cause and the courts shall definitely protect them. 

Concerning the other bills, when they are brought here we shall definitely handle them.  

2.54
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Order Papers of last week stated that there was a constitutional amendment bill regarding the period required for civil servants to resign. However, I do not see it now yet I would have thought that the information in that bill was necessary for our participation in politics as Members of Parliament. Can I get guidance on that?

THE SPEAKER: I am not so sure about the bill, but what I am certainly sure of is that Members of Parliament, ministers, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and President are not public officers. This is clear in the Constitution, as we are not employed by agencies of government. For instance, I am a Member of my constituency and my constituents are my employers. Their terms of employment are that I come to Parliament and transact business on their behalf. Do not be worried about this talk because you are not a public officer, and so you are not subject to that particular law which requires public officers to retire 90 days before nomination.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS (CODE OF CONDUCT) REGULATIONS, 2005 UNDER SECTIONS 19 AND 27 OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS ACT, 2005 (ACT NO. 18 OF 2005)

2.55
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I regret that I cannot proceed with this item because I have not been able to produce copies for honourable members. I will be in position to do so tomorrow.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I read in the press there is a case concerning this bill where the Prime Minister is being asked – I do not know whether you have knowledge of it.

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, we are aware of the subjudice rule. Actually this rule was developed by Parliament and it is upon the Speaker to decide whether a debate would prejudice facts that are being handled in court. I have ruled that this particular case is not subjudice. For instance, what would happen if say today we abolished capital punishment? Would the people who are facing similar charges in court object to us discussing that matter? So, this is not prejudice and if there is any case pending in court, it will be determined according to the circumstances that prevailed at the time the course of action arose.  

2.57
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and members of the House. I want to move that the bill entitled, “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005” be read for a second time. 

AN. HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, you referred to this bill earlier on but I would like to add that this bill is to amend the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 that came into force on 6 April 2001. One of the functions of the Uganda Management Institute under the statute, which was repealed by the principal bill, is to conduct examinations and grant certificates, diplomas, degrees and other awards of the institute and its affiliates.  

This Amendment Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the principal Act in order to provide for the establishment of the institutions that award degrees but which are not universities. You will realise that in this country degrees have been confined to universities only, and that there has been an expansion in the number of universities that are presently run in the country. 

There is increasing demand for higher education at university level and, therefore, there is need to award legal status to other institutions, which can award degrees. One of these is the Uganda Management Institute, which has been running for many years mainly to upgrade the standards and qualifications of public officers.  

This bill also seeks to, among other things, enhance the powers of supervision of the National Council for Higher Education over institutions of higher education. Upon realising that universities are multiplying in this country, there was need to put in place an Act which empowers the National Council for Higher Education to monitor, control, administer and look into the standards of universities in this country. The powers of the national council have been implemented over the last four or five years but we still think that they should have more powers to oversee these institutions at that level. 

The second objective of the bill is to make it mandatory for any university to which a provisional license has been issued to apply for a charter. A charter gives a university maximum status to award degrees and it indicates that, that university has met all the necessary requirements to run courses at that level. You will realise that some universities in this country have wanted to award degrees without meeting all the necessary requirements of the National Council for Higher Education.

The third objective is to empower the Minister of Education and Sports to issue directives of a policy nature to institutions of higher education. Currently the principal bill does not give the minister powers of a general nature to monitor universities or to regulate them. This was an omission because universities in the country are supposed to be under the government. Although there is legal status that gives them autonomy, the minister should have a say where policies are concerned especially over how, why or where to oversee these universities.

The final objective of the amendment is to streamline certain aspects of the academic, administrative and other relations between Makerere University, Kampala and Makerere University Business School, Nakawa. Mr Speaker and members of the House, you know very well or at least you have learnt from newspapers that relationships between these two institutions have not been the best. Therefore, this bill seeks to make sure that the wrangles between the two institutions are minimised so that they can focus on the purpose for which they exist. The bill, therefore, seeks to normalise that relationship. 

Mr Speaker, the committee had discussed this paper with the concerned universities, ministers and officers from the government and I believe their report will meet the objectives that I have outlined above. I think at this juncture, we can listen to the report by the committee. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.05
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr Avitus Tibarimbasa): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005.

The bill was tabled in the House for the first reading on 13 April 2005, and referred to the Committee on Social Services in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. The bill provides for the establishment of Uganda Management Institute as another degree awarding institution. 

The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 repealed the Uganda Management Institute Statute, 1992 that established Uganda Management Institute. Although the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 repealed the statute thereby effectively removing the statutory basis for the continued existence of the institute, the Act did not make any provision for the establishment of institutions of higher education that award degrees but are not universities such as the Uganda Management Institute. 

This bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 in order to provide for the establishment of institutions that award degrees but are not universities.  

Mr Speaker, the bill also seeks to among other things: 
a)	Enhance the powers of supervision of the National Council for Higher Education over institutions of higher education.  
b)	To make it mandatory for any university to which a provisional license has been issued to apply for a charter. 
c)	To empower the Minister of Education and Sports to issue directives of a policy nature to institutions of higher education.  
d)	To streamline certain aspects of the academic, administrative and other relations between Makerere University and Makerere University Business School.

The committee held discussions with major stakeholders in higher education in this country. These included: 
•	The Minister of Education and Sports 
•	National Council for Higher Education 
•	Vice chancellors of public universities that is Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Kyambogo University and Gulu University.  
•	Vice chancellors’ forum for private universities. 

One of the functions of Uganda Management Institute under the repealed statute of 1992 was to, “Conduct examinations and grant certificates, diplomas, degrees and other awards of the institute and its affiliates.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda Management Institute has continued to run programmes leading to awards of certificates, diplomas and masters degrees of the institute. Currently, the institute cannot graduate their candidates due to lack of a legal framework since the enactment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. 

With the passage of this amendment Bill, Uganda Management Institute will have its operations streamlined. Currently the institute receives little funding from central government, which cannot even cover its wage bill. Most of its operations are funded by money generated internally.

As noted earlier, the bill seeks to streamline certain aspects of the academic, administrative and other relations between Makerere University, Kampala and Makerere University Business School, Nakawa. In Clause 20 of this bill, proposals have been made by the ministry in an attempt to address the relations between Makerere University, Kampala and Makerere University Business School, Nakawa. 

Empowering the Minister of Education and Sports:  The bill in Clause 5 seeks to empower the Minister of Education and Sports to issue directives of a policy nature to institutions of higher education.  Interestingly, honourable members, all the stakeholders the committee interacted with were opposed to this proposal for the following reasons:

That this proposal would be taking the university back to the way Makerere University used to operate under the repealed Makerere University Act of 1970, which allowed too much interference by the government in academic and other activities of Makerere University. The universities need their autonomy and that in any case, the minister can still guide the institutions through the National Council for Higher Education in enhancing powers of the National Council for Higher Education.

Honourable members, in order to cope with the rapid domestic changes and developments in Higher Education in our country, and in further consideration of global developments in the education system, government must empower the National Council for Higher Education in terms of a strengthened legal framework to ensure quality higher education.

The functions of higher education worldwide are too critical to be left to ad hoc development and checked by a specialized agency.  

The rapid transformation taking place in higher education in Uganda needs a strong regulatory agency.

The committee supports amendments as proposed because it realizes that Ugandans need to receive and benefit from quality higher education. The quality of higher education in Uganda is declining and strong monitoring of higher education delivery is necessary. In this regard, amendments that are geared towards empowering the National Council for Higher Education should be supported to give it the ability to regulate higher education. 

Hon. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman of the Committee. But it seems you did not make comment on the reservation expressed by the people who came to you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, the report you have received, if you turn towards the end, there is what we call “Amendments to Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Amendment Bill, 2005” and those we shall consider when we are at the committee stage.

THE SPEAKER: Agreed. Now the problem is, interestingly, honourable members, all the stakeholders the committee interacted with were opposed. But we should have seen the reaction of the committee to this reservation; apparently you did not. Maybe you will express them in the amendment. Okay, it is alright - that is the report.

3.15
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee and the minister for bringing this amendment. As the chairman states, Uganda in the Great Lakes Region, among its comparative advantage is “education” because of the nature of the British based English education system we adopted. But in the recent times, the quality of education in this country is going down and yet we are having an influx of foreigners who would want to reap from this comparative advantage we have.  

Statistics indicates that a number of private secondary schools in this country are slightly more than government-aided. Since this bill seeks to amend the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, I would propose that the minister should come out clearly to tell us what is constituted in the training for one to be awarded a degree? It may sound as if I am asking for a syllabus, but I am not asking for that. Because what constitutes for one to be trained to be awarded a degree of Bachelor of Science in Education? 

For example, can X establish an institution to award a degree of a Bachelor of Science in Education, B also establishes the institution for award of a degree of Bachelor of Science in Education, D also establishes and yet we in government of the National Council for Higher Education that is supposed to monitor this institution do not have what a student who is interested to select an institution can match to and be given that this is what constitutes the training and finally for you to be awarded a degree of Bachelor of Science in Education.

We are experiencing a problem. You find that there are so many institutions that award diplomas, that award degrees, but the training, the classroom, the teaching, the technology and the equipment are quite totally different and, therefore, employers are finding a lot of difficult. You meet somebody, he/she says, “I have a degree from university X”.  You tell him or her to write an application, he cannot write! You meet somebody who finished senior six in the days of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, you tell him “You write a report” and he/she writes an excellent report. This is a fact. There are PhD holders who cannot really come up with professional studies in this country and, therefore, I would really urge the minister –(Interruptions)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Ekanya. I am getting worried that these sweeping statements are partly from the Committee Chairperson and now they are with the honourable member on the Floor. I really would want to have a clarification with evidence. 

One, that education standards in Uganda are declining and that there are people with PhDs - which university has awarded the PhDs, which hon. Ekanya is referring to? I get worried because we can stand here and undermine our own credibility without justification. So really, I would want to be assured that what we are talking about is based on evidence and I would like it adduced by the honourable Member on the Floor of this House.  Otherwise, I am not sure of what we are talking about. The institutions that exist as universities do have curriculum. You can go and see what is taught in a subject, the teachers are there and courses are outlined. What is this we are talking about?

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, also as an academic, that very recently the Law Development Centre (LDC) which trains lawyers, refused to accept degrees from a certain university in our locality on account of the low standard of their degree work content. That particular university had to go to court to sue LDC to force one of their students to be accepted at LDC. It was only upon the ruling of the judge that LDC accepted that student, but up to now LDC still maintains that that particular university’s degree programme is way below the award of a normal good law degree. 

So, that really establishes that here we have a government institution which says, among other things, that that one university cannot train people up to a certain level.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge the case he is talking about concerns Uganda Christian University, Mukono and –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Sorry to interrupt you, my honourable colleague, nothing could be further from the truth.

MR TIBARIMBASA: The Law Development Centre was not taking the graduates of Uganda Christian University, Mukono because the President had not granted them a charter.  

MR AWORI: I am a little bit taken aback to hear that from the Deputy Chairperson of this Committee.  Uganda Christian University, Mukono, maybe prior to your coming to this august House, was a different matter. It was definitely declared fit. We even amended that particular Act, which had restricted LDC from taking students other than those from –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think he is talking about a university in Fort Portal.

MR AWORI: That is the one I am talking about. Mr Speaker, thank you for informing our honourable colleague.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, let me answer the minister –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: You see, even that case that has been adduced is the case, which can prove the position I am holding; that there are regulations, that there are professional bodies, which establish what should be the quality of a degree. I know that the law council visits universities, which are attempting to teach law, and they are evaluated and given a go-ahead if they qualify on the basis of the books they have and the teachers they have.  

Equally, if you are going to teach health sciences there is a body, which handles that. All these bodies are in existence, and if they can come up and say you are not qualified, that already means there is a safety valve. You cannot just say, therefore, our education standards are declining when in fact there is a body or there are bodies, which say no to any that does not qualify.

THE SPEAKER: But I think this is going to be argued in the assessment because one may reply and say, “I think that body is not properly making the assessment” because this is a personal assessment.  There could be an official body, but it’s functioning, its assessment and grading is faulty according to him.  

MR ARUMADRI: Will the minister clarify to me the scenario where some individuals holding pilot licenses went to one university and presented those certificates as a basis for entry and were not allowed, and then a similar certificate was presented to another university and they were allowed? I think these are disparities, which cause a bit of disquiet.

MR EKANYA: I really urge the Ministry of Education and government to standardize the course content per award of these degrees and diplomas, so that if Ekanya is sent away from Makerere University seeking a degree in Business Administration, he cannot go to Nkumba University and get a degree in Business Administration.  

We have here members of Parliament who were rejected by Makerere University to pursue masters or degree in Business Administration. They went to other universities, they were admitted and awarded with first class, and we are in the same country.  So, this kind of lack of coordination and similarity dilutes what is supposed to be our comparative advantage in the region.  

There is a report by Ministry of Education, which was circulated to all government ministers on the quality, standard and future of education in this country. The report is so detailed; it is in your desk, hon. Prof. Kabwegyere, you go and read it. It is within your ministry. It discusses the challenge Universal Primary Education is facing, secondary education is facing, university and tertiary education is facing in this country and the report urges government to fund institutions that are supposed to monitor and coordinate these institutions. 

I am saying this because we have universities in this country that admit contrary to the regulations of two principal passes required for a degree, and one of these universities is Kampala International University. It admits you for associate degree. I do not know whether National Council for Higher Education is aware of the course content for associate degree. Is it an equivalent of Uganda National Examinations Board, because one fails to get the two required principal passes for admission to university, he/she gets one and is admitted for associate degree. What is the course content of this associate degree? 

Then you enrol for a degree. What is the profession of these teachers, what is the course content? We need these details otherwise, we are really in danger, and the professor talking here is a Chairman of this University. Kampala International University again was even rejected from teaching sciences.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the moment you go into liberalisation of education, you have got to face the challenges of what that means. When you go to Harvard School of Business, you go to a type of institution and you pay accordingly. When you go to a college of business in a state somewhere in the United States you get your diploma or your degree, it is the market which decides who is taken in for what job. This is the whole point.  

I want specifically here to talk about Kampala International University where I happen to be a Chairman of Council. The university has the catchments of the whole region and beyond East Africa. 

Now as you know, in Kenya people go to university after Form IV, they do not do the A’ levels and to cater for that programme in our university, we had to have a programme to update those students to A’ level. That programme was approved by UNEB and University Council of Higher Education, and if hon. Ekanya wants to go and check, he is free to go to Kansanga at the campus look at the content as outlined in the course outlines, check with the teachers who are there and so on and even go to the Council for Higher Education without having to talk with a sense of verification when there is no evidence.  

I am proud to be associated with that university and it is not a question of saying this because I am standing here, but anybody can go there and see whether the job being done there is below standard.  If you want to go further to medical school, that is developing in Bushenyi. 

I want you to know that the target is to have a regional medical school, which will out surpass all the training that we have had here. By April there should be a hospital of about 400 beds functioning, and that is not a sign that you are going to deal with substandard. Among the teachers, some have already arrived, we are going to have professors from Cuban University and I would want anybody to challenge the training of medicine in Cuba, whoever he is. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We as Ugandans are very worried about the falling standards of our education system, and we feel there is an urgent need to review all universities and educational institutions in Uganda. For example, Makerere, which used to be an international university, is having a problem of falling standard just because of numbers. You get surprised that during a lecture students fill say the main Hall and many of them sit outside. You cannot tell me that a student who sits outside to attend a lecture that is being delivered inside Makerere Main Hall is really up to standard. So, we are actually rolling out students who are half-baked, Makerere is no longer what it used to be. So, if Makerere has reached that stage then it must be terrible with other universities.  

Again, Mr Speaker, we are worried about these mushrooming universities some of them are just small room somewhere and they say that is a university. They just get one or two lecturers to go there over the weekend and they say these people are getting degrees. I have the same problem in my place in Gomba, there is a university there but you need to visit it and you see what is going on.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Finally, I would like to urge the minister - really the minister needs this policy directive to really work with National Council for Higher Education to ensure that even government can control the number of students being admitted, so that we really do not have what now days students in Makerere call attending lectures by rumours.  You sit outside and say, what have they taught, did you hear what the lecturer said? That is the terminology they use in Makerere University.  

THE SPEAKER: Let him wind up –(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: I think the honourable member is talking about history. When the university expanded the administration, it put in place a system of putting up buildings. Currently students attend lecture in lecture rooms, they no longer attend lectures by rumours. So, you must also thank government for having liberalized higher education because we had one university, the number of students at A’ level had tripled, where would all these students go if we did not devised means of accommodating them as we put facilities in place, Mr Speaker?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank government for liberalisation and I do agree. But one of the causes of a strike recently, was that the teaching capacity, the lecture theatre, is very inadequate. For example, can the chairperson tell us the lecture theatres, the size and the capacity?  

Two weeks ago, the Guild President of Makerere University was on radio and said that this is one of the causes of problems especially with private students, they pay money and they really feel cheated if they cannot have sitting facilities and listen to a lecturer direct.

Finally, the National Council for Higher Education should have power, really when you are giving provisional license or charters the courses to be taught must be listed. For example, the Islamic University in Mbale has been teaching law without approval of the Law Council, and I am one of the parents or guardians paying fees there. 

If it were not for the judge who ruled, you would find that most of the students who would be graduating from Islamic University in Uganda would find it very hard to be admitted for a diploma. So, you find that some of these universities will be teaching and then the products cannot fit the market. Therefore, I really urge Members that we should support this amendment that gives the minister power to really give policy directives to National Council for Higher Education.  

Also, Mr Speaker, the question of budget. National Council for Higher Education is really inadequately funded. I hope that in the coming budget cycle we shall really provide money for them. I thank you and I beg you to support the report.

3.38
MS SARAH KIYINGI NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the bill and I thank the committee for the report. I must say that I see a few spaces that I want to seek clarification on regarding this bill and regarding the report that the committee has presented to us. I do not have the bill, so I am just going by what the minister and the committee have just presented to us. 

This amendment talks of certain aspects of the academic, administrative and other related issues between Makerere University and the business school. The minister has mentioned something to do with the wrangles that we have been reading about now and then.  Now, this has left me wondering as to whether we are dealing with administrative issues that require an amendment or dealing with the leadership between the two institutions. Do we need to look at the details of the personalities we are dealing with?  What is it that MUBS has wrangles with Makerere and not any other university?  

Mr Speaker, just as you mentioned, the chairperson gave us information concerning all the people they interacted with. Nobody supported giving more powers to the ministers. However, the committee then was somewhat shy to say what their view was. Do they support this amendment, which seeks to give more powers? In the amendments they propose deletion. It would have been good for the committee to tell us that they do not support this amendment for this and that reason, other than saying that the people they interacted with said this or that way. What are you saying, as a committee? We need to have that in the report as well.

I personally would not support this amendment because I think when we bring in the ministry, then we are also going to contend with the personalities that will be sitting in the ministry. You are talking about giving directives and all that kind of thing. I will be reluctant to support this kind of amendment. You will have people sending all sorts of policy guidelines to the institutions, making it difficult for them to take decisions on their own. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MR HENRY KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the minister and the committee for this amendment. I support giving more powers to the National Council for Higher Education, for proper supervision of these mushrooming universities. Education has been highly commercialised and that is why a lecture room can accommodate 800 students. I do not think the drive is to educate those people who are coming but to get money out of them. I do not see a lecturer marking 800 course works on time and properly.  Therefore, I would like the National Council for High Education to be empowered.  

There is also a problem of the quality of education and of the graduates we get. Those of us who were in Makerere earlier before the 1970s, saw the nature of students in Makerere during Amin’s time who were putting on Rugabire (sandals made from car tyres). They never combed their hair, they dressed the way they wanted and many of those have found their way to higher positions of government. It is no wonder that sometimes you see an officer and he behaves as if he was not one. When you look back at the quality of education he got, then you say sorry for him. Therefore, it is important that the quality of education is highly supervised.

Mr Speaker, I also agree that we give more powers to the Minister of Education. Constitutionally, the minister is in charge of education and I think he/she has powers to supervise the whole of the education system in this country. He should have some way of guiding education in this country.  

However, I do not support Uganda Management Institute and any other institution awarding their own degrees. In most countries, such institutions attach themselves to recognised universities. They do the teaching and award degrees from those recognised institutions. I do not see why Uganda Management Institute does not award Makerere University degrees in the fields of their education. 

If you allow institutions to award their own degrees without the proposed supervision of the National Council for Higher Education, we shall lower the education standards. Uganda Management Institute (UMI) has students waiting to be awarded diplomas, masters, degrees and the rest. I advise the minister to let this UMI attach itself to Makerere and start to award Makerere University degrees. I think this should be the best way to do it. (Interruption) 

MR TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, granting Uganda Management Institute permission to award degrees will not be a new thing in the world. We have institutions like Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which award their own degrees.

MR KITYO MUTEBI: Thank you very much, for the information. East African Universities of Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam were awarding similar degrees until they graduated into individual universities.  I know Massachusetts and whatever you are talking about, but I think we should not allow any universities or institutions to award their degrees for purposes of keeping standards of education. The most unfortunate thing is that some institutions award degrees that are not recognised in higher institutions in case of further studies. We should not push this country to the level of where some qualifications are doubted. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. When we were at the university in the 1970s, one could easily say, “ I am at the campus” whenever he was asked where they were. People understood this to mean Makerere University. Now you cannot say, “I am at the campus” because people will not understand which of the many universities you are referring to.

Therefore, I would like to thank the Government of the National Resistance Movement for making it possible for so many universities to start in this country. (Applause) As I talk now, there are more than four public universities and this is a big achievement. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of the standards of these universities is the best. We must emphasise that the standard should remain high. Through you, I would like to let the minister know that during the colonial time, all districts in Uganda were named in vernacular. They were Acholi, Ankole, Teso and Toro districts. There was only one district named in English and that is West Nile. (Laughter) Therefore, it important that the minister knows that of the many public universities, one should be in the district that was named in English long time ago. 

Now we have a university, the Nile University in West Nile. The government should take over this university, which is doing extremely well. It should become one of the government- owned universities in this country. 

Mr Speaker, my second concern is the issue of Uganda Management Institute (UMI). This institute has been awarding postgraduate diplomas for many years. Most of the civil servants, who are now leaders in this country, have gone through this institute and the quality of education they give there is very good. Therefore, it is important that we recognise the degrees that this institute awards.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of empowering the minister to give certain policy directives as far as public universities and other universities are concerned, I would like to seek clarification: Aren’t the powers given to the National Council for Higher Education already enough to ensure that there is control of the tertiary institutions and universities? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disability, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the brief report. I feel the report is very brief. It should have covered more issues than it did. 

The original intention Of Uganda Management Institute was to provide management skills for people who were already working to improve their management skills. With time, it has started providing various types of degrees. The minister should explain whether UMI is still doing its original intended purpose of providing management skills. Out there, our personnel lack management skills. What type of degree courses is the institute providing? Otherwise, I do not mind it having its own degrees. Many students have gone through UMI. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of MUBS and Makerere University has been worrying me for a long time. I have been following the progress of their wrangles. One of the major problems is the issue of the courses. Before former Nakawa became MUBS, it was teaching its own courses independent of Makerere. When Makerere decided to move some of its courses to Nakawa, it became a university. Nakawa thought that by taking up those courses, they were now free to teach any of their courses in the names of Makerere University, including diplomas and certificates. Now Makerere University says, “please, do not use my name for other degrees.” I would like to know how this problem was solved because I have not seen it in the report. 

There was also the issue of the name. Are we still going to maintain the name MUBS or are you going to separate it so that Makerere remains with its name? I understand that that is one of the causes of the wrangle. They say their name should not be used. 

Lastly, I support the idea of giving the National Council for Higher Education more powers. However, I would like to know whether it has the capacity. When we were passing a certain bill here, we wanted the council to verify some qualifications. They said they did not have the capacity. Can the minister assure us that the National Council for Higher Education now has the capacity to verify all these and standardize universities, all of which are under its umbrella? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the amendment and the committee for the report although it has been very brief. I support that we allow Uganda Management Institute to award degrees and other postgraduate certificates in Uganda. I am one of the beneficiaries of the training of UMI. I had an opportunity of undertaking a postgraduate course in public administration. I can testify that what I got from that institute was excellent. I can compare the training I got there to that of Makerere University. I do not regret the nine months I spent at the UMI. 

Mr Speaker, I was one of the pioneers for their master’s programmes. I did a Masters in Management Studies. It was a good and competitive course. I would like this institution to continue awarding these master’s degrees and if possible even PhDs. UMI is professional in their training, unlike Makerere and other universities. In these other universities, a lecture room accommodates over 800 students. One wonders what type of training the students get out of this kind of environment. If it had not been for politics, I think I was one of the best in my career. Therefore, I support that we allow them to continue awarding postgraduate diplomas and degrees.

Mr Speaker, I also support the empowerment of the National Council for Higher Education. We have liberalised higher education and would need a strong institution to regulate, monitor and supervise these various institutions. Hon. Kalule Ssengo, mentioned a university in his constituency, which is below acceptable standards. We should ensure that this board supervises and closes down all institutions, which do not match defined standards.

Many of our parents right now are overstrained. They put all their savings in educating their children. They become poor, just as the children when they graduate and cannot find employment. This mainly results from the nature of education they got. This board will assist our parents to ensure that the students get quality education wherever they go. This board should also advise the parents regarding which institutions are registered with them. Otherwise, many parents have been cheated and that is why we end up getting many unemployed youth in this country.  

I do not support the idea of giving the minister more powers. I would rather we allowed these education institutions to develop their curriculum as long as what they are teaching is the right thing. Thank you.

4.04
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the idea of giving the national council more powers. My only fear is, who supervises this national council? 

Recently, there were some people who were cleared by UNEB to stand in Parliamentary Elections. These people went through. Their academic qualifications were questioned, after which they were thrown out by both the High Court and the Court of Appeal but UNEB later re-approved their academic certificates. Who vets these councils? You see, they also need to be supervised. The National Council for Higher Education will license universities and unless the minister has powers to supervise this council, it may end up having very many powers. I think we shall have a problem, Mr Speaker.  

Mr Speaker, my other observation is that some of these universities award executive masters. There is an executive degree in other countries called MBA. This degree is not academic as such. They gather experience from touring industries. They consider all that and award you an executive MBA. You come and say, ”I have a masters.” I see the same thing in some of these universities. I would like to appeal to the national council to streamline this programme. 

Mr Speaker, I think Government should sponsor some of these universities. Universities like Nkozi and Mukono are doing a good job. I remember there was a case in Nkozi where a course was almost suspended because of lack of funds. The chancellor had to go to Europe to look for funds. These universities help our citizens; it is the primary duty of the government to educate its citizens, so these universities should get grants. Some of these courses are very expensive and the parents are strained. We are missing good students whose parents cannot afford these millions. I suggest that government subsidies for private students. 

Mr Speaker, there was this issue of degrees. For instance, in London, there is an institution, which vets these degrees. You do not just open up a university and start awarding degrees. The vetting there is highly centralised, unlike in America where you just open a university and award degrees. Therefore, I think we should adopt the London system. Even this UMI, we are not sure that another will not come up tomorrow and say, “I want to award my degree”; so there must be a central institution to guard against that kind of thing.  

The last point is about these strikes, which are going on every now and then in Makerere; I think there should be a commission of inquiry. I remember there was a man in Nairobi who told me that he did his degree for six years because whenever they were going to sit for exams there would be a strike. Now it is coming to our university. Why are these strikes going on and on? It is becoming a cause for alarm.

For example, recently I heard that these people were increasing the fees for retakes because they wanted students to be serious. Students do not take coursework seriously, they miss exams, then they do retakes to punish them, so they had to increase the fees exorbitantly. I hear that was one of the reasons. So, Mr Speaker, I think –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you call it “punishing” or “encouraging” them; was it to punish them?

MR KAGIMU: To discourage them from doing retakes, they had to make sure that they become serious; that they do their course works and study to pass their exaMs You see, some of them are lousy, they do not take it seriously; they say, “I will do a retake after all.” So to punish them they had to increase the fees. I hear that was one of the reasons. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those of other members –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of retaking courses and so on was not resorted to because students were lazy, no. It was done because when a student retakes a course, that student has for example to carry out research, has to be taught and so on. So there are expenses of enabling that student to retake a course. So I would like to inform my colleague that the reason he is giving is false.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you, professor. However, we have a proverb in Luganda that “enkima tesala gwa kibira,” that in the forest, the monkey is always right. I do not imply that the professor is a monkey but it is a proverb. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, “enkima tesala gwa kibira,” does not mean that. It means that the monkey cannot condemn the forest because if it does then it has nowhere else to stay.   

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. I was not referring to the –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I thought that when we are here ministers are supposed to give us correct information. Is it in order for the honourable member to impute that the Rt hon. Prime Minister has a personal conflict and therefore is giving this House the wrong information? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he said that because he is the vice-chancellor; I think that is what he meant. His thinking was still correct in spite of what he has given. It was a question of assessment and I think we can proceed.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, you deserve another kisanja, you are very wise in that Chair. 

Lastly, this question of lecture rooms should be taken seriously. In these universities when students are attending lectures they attend from outside!  

Secondly, other lecture rooms, for example, in Nakawa are just too big, even students behind cannot hear the lecturer and in some universities, there are no microphones, they do not even use loud speakers. So, I think this National Council –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kagimu Maurice, you were given information by the chairperson. That is no longer the case.  

MR KAGIMU: No, it is true. I will take him to some universities. I would like to appeal to this National Council for Higher Education, if it is giving these powers, it should continually supervise the universities. You supervise for example as doctors do; they visit the clinics when they are renewing your licenses. For the lawyers, they visit your chambers to see whether they are still fit. They should continue to supervise them to see that these universities expand or at least hire other halls. For example, they can go to Lugogo. Nakawa is near Lugogo, there is that UMA hall, it could be used other than the small lecture halls in Nakawa. Thank you very much.

4.14
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this Bill for amendment and I would like to thank the committee for this report.  

I would like to make two observations on the way the committee has presented this report. One is that they have kind of departed from the way reports are presented, where we would come up with a number of observations on each of the points raised and then make recommendations so that quite often when we are debating, we are supporting their recommendations or improving on them.

Another comment is on the methodology used on page 2. When I look at the people that the committee consulted or had dialogue with, I do not know whether it was because of time, but it is quite limited. It is such a small group of people and it was kind of internal. It is the vice-chancellors of these universities and the Ministry of Education and it does not seem to have been open to the public. Even one of the colleges like Uganda Management Institute does not seem to have participated in this. So I feel that there was some kind of limitation.  

Mr Speaker, on page 3, I would like to talk about the Uganda Management Institute offering university degrees, diplomas and certificates. This institute is actually a very competent college. It is doing quite a good job because it has limited numbers of students and it has very strong course content. I really think that it is a college that is doing very well and it should be streamlined and recognized to give these documents and graduate their own people. It is one of the colleges that have been doing quite well and I would say that it should continue. 

But I would like to say that there is need to standardise these courses, especially in these mushrooming universities and colleges. With due respect, I appreciate that we should have many colleges and universities coming up. But if we just leave it to each college as it comes up to determine their own course content and work, then we might be sinking in the quality of education and graduates that we push out as a nation.  

I would like to comment on the relationship between Makerere University Kampala (MUK), and Makerere University Business School (MUBS). I am really concerned that the committee could come up with this very short report on this issue, because this issue has been very outstanding. They have had a glaringly poor relationship; some have even reached the extent of mobilizing students to strike and rumours have had it that some of the leaders are responsible for mobilizing students to go on strikes.  

The relationship between the Vice-Chancellors Makerere University Kampala and Makerere University Business School has been very bad. So when the committee comes up with such euphemism as in this kind of arrangement, it leaves me worried. They have been fighting over the name Makerere University. They say that, “If you want to be independent, drop our name, get your own name so that you do not use the name ‘Makerere University’.” The committee has not told us what they decided on that because it was crucially contentious. We would like to know, is MUBS going to continue using the name Makerere University Business School or not; we do not know what came up.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what they are trying to say is that with regard to the amendments, MUBS will be represented on the senate and so forth, that is why they think that that problem will be solved. I think it was a struggle because one of the institutions was not being represented but the decisions made by the other were affecting it. So they are agreeing that that will be a cure for the problem without really saying so many words.

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Another area of contention was the cost, the amount of money that is given by government to every student sponsored in either of the colleges. MUBS would say that, “The students sponsored by government in our college are given less money than government-sponsored students in Makerere University.”  And we did have that issue at the time I when I was still on the Social Services Committee. We asked a question, which was never answered. We asked, “How much does the government give per student, per course unit, so that we can know whether those in Makerere are getting less or not?” 

Even the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Education could answer that; the minister could not answer that either but until now we are still asking, “How much is paid for each government-sponsored student?” For those who are privately sponsored we know how much we pay per course unit per student because we are the people who pay, we are the parents - the guardians. But as for those of government, we do not get to know, so that we can help to sort out that problem. Therefore, we still want to know, honourable minister, how much is paid per student per course unit in these government universities?

I would like to talk about empowering the minister. On that issue I support the issue of strengthening the minister in addressing these issues of higher institutions and especially in the private institutions. In government institutions the system is already there and it is kind of working but where people just wake up and say, “We are making a university in this area”, very soon the universities will become a district issue. Each district is saying, “Oh yes, we need a university.” So if the minister does not come up with some policies and parameters, then it becomes difficult.

These private universities, and even some government universities, are becoming very expensive to the individual parents, especially the private students, and each university determines its fees. They do not seem to determine fees according to the cost of living that is pertaining to Uganda. Instead they determine fees basing on the nature of the course and the students who are in demand for it. That is why I say that the minister should have the powers to help in such areas.

Lastly, I would like to look at the enhancement of the powers of the National Council for Higher Education. I am not very certain about what this enhancement means. What do we want to do with this National Council for Higher Education? Do we want to give them more powers, or do we want to give them more staff; should we give them more money or build their capacity in training? 

What do we mean by saying that we would like to enhance the powers of the National Council for Higher Education? Because I would really think that the National Council for Higher Education needs enough powers to oversee and monitor what goes on in the institutions of higher education, and we possibly need to keep informed because there are many times, even here in this House, when we ask questions and nobody seems to give an answer. Otherwise, I thank the committee for the report, Mr Speaker, and I do support the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

4.20
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with my colleague who has just taken her seat and I think this report was written in a little bit of a hurry and the coverage of stakeholders who should have been consulted is very limited. When you read the report you do not understand what the committee wants you to do, whether they are recommending certain actions or not, they are not very - I know that people have been busy but I think it is important that we maintain the good standard of reporting to this House, which we have had in the past. 

This amendment Bill has two major things: one is to permit the Uganda Management Institute to award degrees, diplomas and certificates and the other is to sort out the perennial problem between Makerere University leadership and the offshoot known as MUBS. Again here, considering the kind of reports this House has received, one would have got a little bit of the analysis of the problem that bedevils the relationship between Makerere University and MUBS and this report does not try to help us because just giving ministers powers is not the solution in my view. 

I am glad that the committee is saying that that is not good enough because eventually giving ministers powers is giving him or her powers of interference and since the minister has the National Council for Higher Education, I do not know what other powers the minister would want, which the National Council for Higher Education cannot exercise.

But the Uganda Management Institute, formerly the Institute of Public Administration, was conceived to provide training and re-training of public servants as my colleague hon. Baba Diri observed, and today the level of the civil service is low in terms of performance and a colleague even mentioned the terms of their presentation as individuals. 

This institute was intended to train public servants in basic things, which we would take for granted, like report writing, because you may leave university without having the opportunity to actually understand what it means to present a good report, to enable high authorities to take action on given matters. Even today some of the letters written from government civil servants make you wonder whether these people have had the necessary training to be able to communicate, and this is very important.  

Unfortunately, because Government could not fund the Uganda Management Institute, the solution has been to allow them to conduct income generating courses: to allow them to give certificates, diplomas and so on so that everybody goes, even non-public servants. I do not know where our public servants should be going in order to acquire the necessary management skills, which they need, because when I first joined the civil service you would not begin working without having a proper induction programme in the Institute of Public Administration. I do not know what they do these days. You would not be promoted to higher positions in the civil service without covering a given area of knowledge and this is important; we still need that today. In fact we need it even more because management is becoming complex. New techniques are coming up.  

Now because we cannot maintain the Uganda Management Institute, which is intended to provide management skills for public servants, we say like everybody else that, “Charge fees so that you can maintain yourself”, and the committee is making that remark in this report that the money provided to this institute is peanuts. This is a problem but the problem is that government is solving it in a manner, which is denying the provision of a very essential service, that is, providing training and re-training to public servants; and that is a pity.  

It is the same with Makerere Business School. The Makerere Business School was originally a college established by government to provide basic training in fields of professional training in accounting, banking, forwarding and clearing and all these various important areas of doing commerce and business. Because again we could not maintain this college and give it the money it needs to provide that particular service. Makerere took it over and produced what is now Makerere Business School. 

So while I know that this MUBS continues to provide these training services, evening classes and part-time training, if you want to do accounting or this sort of thing, you also look at the core business of that institute. It was to provide this type of training. This country needs more and more accountants. We are very short of accountants and you do not see any plan on the ground to produce the number of accountants that we need. There are no people that are qualified in banking. Today you find many foreigners coming here to be bank managers when in fact many Ugandans would be doing this sort of job, which is again a very big pity.  

So I hope that one day the Government will provide adequate funding to the Uganda Management Institute and now the Makerere Business School so that probably these institutions will go back to those original roles, which are still necessary in society. This business of people getting more degrees, you know there are many other institutions, which are giving degrees. 

I am glad that we now have so many universities, which are giving degrees; but what is special about adding an extra government college to provide degrees when there are already so many universities all over the place? To me we are losing direction with regard to this particular matter.

Mr Speaker, I am concerned because many of us in this House feel extremely saddened by the fact that the Minister of Education is not pushing an agreed policy that we should have a university in Eastern Uganda. What is happening now by the back door, the minister is creating another –(Interruptions)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving me way to give this information. I am very happy to announce that work is soon beginning on a university in the Eastern region and money to start the preliminary activities has already been released to the ministry and the task force will soon start on the preparations for that university. So when the member says that the minister is not pushing hard enough, I want to inform him that I have pushed hard enough. I thank him.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister. But you see the minister is not even being committal. She is saying, “The work at the university is soon starting - some money has been provided.” The money, which we saw in the Budget the other time, was Shs 500 million. What kind of university are you going to start with Shs 500 million? 

We have been talking about this matter for a long time. The minister was supposed to set up a committee to do a feasibility study for this university but we do not have that information. If anybody were to have it, it would have been me since I have been one of the agitators for that university. So to me the word “soon” can mean anything, it may mean tomorrow or two years from now. I think this idea of having yet another university in the Central region by the name of Makerere University Business School (MUBS) and then have no university in Eastern Uganda is not acceptable.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I once again thank my colleague for giving way. This government is bent on being very systematic and thorough in planning for this country. You cannot just wake up and start a university like you are starting a kindergarten. Many universities in this country have been prepared for over time. I have evidence of Gulu University where we put a task force and worked out preliminary activities up to a time when the university was ready to start. And when you start preliminary activities, you do not start with Shs five billion; you start by putting a task force, working out the programme, recruiting skeleton staff and so on. 

So I want to inform my colleague that a university, which somebody will wake up tomorrow and start the next day, does not deserve the name of a university. The type of university we want in the East is not something just to come up abruptly. But I want to assure him that we started with little money, now I am proud to say we have over Shs 500 million on that programme. This is how we work when we plan well and systematically. I want my colleague to be patient and just watch - monitor to see the systematic planning and a good university will come out there. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I want once again to thank the minister for her statement and indeed she has confirmed my fears that things do not come abruptly as if this is coming abruptly. We have been talking about this university for the last three years and since the minister has got some experience in starting a new university - the Gulu University - one would expect that when it comes to another university she would have more experience and work faster. But now she is saying it is not abrupt, which means that we shall have to wait and one day we may have a university in Eastern Uganda. 

I have faith, I hope one day - but my interest was not in one day. We would like to have a specific programme and say, “Last time we gave you Shs 500 million, now in the next budget we are giving you Shs 2 billion” - or whatever the case may be - but she is not in a position to commit herself.

Mr Speaker, honourable members have talked about giving powers to the National Council for Higher Education and I quite agree. I think one of the issues the council should be concerned with is the huge numbers in these institutions because those huge numbers undermine the quality of education. It is a fact. There is a limit to what one single individual can do to teach 800 people - it is no longer a lecture, it is a rally. So in my view I would like to pray that the minister prevails on the council in their supervisory responsibility to ensure that these institutions have manageable numbers so that we can maintain a reasonable standard of education.  

My final point is to appreciate what a number of government institutions are doing as regards to affirmative action in favour of admission of disabled students. I am very grateful to Makerere University; I think Makerere University may be having the highest number of students with disabilities in the African region, and this is as a result of a deliberate policy of the university, which I want to appreciate very much.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker is the honourable member in order to condemn government for having large numbers in these universities, and yet he appreciates that people with disabilities have now increased in number in these universities? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think there is no contradiction in the submission because the other one is a component of the numbers; as to the control of how much, that is a different matter. I think he is in order. 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think hon. Kabwegyere needs a lesson or two on affirmative action. Makerere and Kyambogo Universities are doing a very good job although I have not been able to make contact with Gulu University –(Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much hon. Mwandha for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to give the honourable member this information: this last intake, public universities generally took 64 students with disabilities. Makerere took 34, Kyambogo 20, and Gulu 10. Unfortunately for Gulu University, they rejected the blind persons and reverted them to Makerere University. So that is the information. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: I appreciate the information and figures given by hon. Baba Diri, but like Oliver Twist said, we need some more.  

Mr Speaker, the problem we have is that whereas Makerere University and other universities take on students, particularly to do law on affirmative action, when it comes to admission at the Law Development Center, they insist on admitting students on the basis of affordability. If the Government does not sponsor you, the center does not know you and many disabled students with law degrees are having a lot of problems in going to the Law Development Center. 

As you know, if you do not go to the Law Development Center then chances of earning a reasonable living as a lawyer are almost non-existent. So, I would like to appeal to the National Council for Higher Education to look into the matter of the Law Development Center. But this principle of affirmative action should be carried wherever it can be done. Thank you.

4.43
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to amend this particular Act, in other words to give more powers to the Government to look into the management of higher education. Nevertheless, I would also like to put it to the Government that this matter of education should have a long-term vision. This short-term liberalisation of education without specific goals will not take us anywhere at all. Specifically, I believe that when we train people, it is not just a matter of them acquiring knowledge but also for their own benefit in society and in terms of development. 

Take for instance in this country we know there is no way we are going to move forward if we do not train scientists. We do not have enough scientists in this country; we are training more people in arts and humanities rather than the sciences and yet development can only come about through technology. We are not doing enough!  

Over and above that, in this particular respect for being a regulatory body for higher education, I am a bit taken aback with the National Council for Higher Education. I do not know what kind of yardstick they are applying in determining what institution can undertake higher education in the sciences. There must be a specific yardstick to be applied in the field of say health science or technology. I would like to know whether this is being done. Long term planning for science cannot be done on a five-year development plan basis. It has to be 25 years and beyond. To what extent have they put this in their planning?

Two, it is true we need regulatory bodies to manage a liberalised situation, but the most important thing is, it is not just for the National Council for Higher Education giving certification for somebody who has applied to have a university. There should be a regular follow-up to check whether those standards are being maintained or not. But this cannot be done unless the Government again gives a little bit more money to the National Council for Higher Education. They would need facilitation in order to carry out regular checks on these institutions of higher learning especially the tertiary institutions.  

Mr Speaker, again this question of checks on the institutions of higher learning. I know that most countries especially where I went for higher education such as the US, have the serious policy of “you either publish or perish,” for all the professors. If you do not publish, if you do not research for two years, you are out. Every two years you have to come up either with a book or a serious scientific research project. If you do not do it, you are no good for the university; you are not imparting any useful education to the students. 

I know it is the role of the senate to check on this but from time to time I also feel the National Council for Higher Education should check every two years with the universities or the senate and say, “Look, you have 20 professors what have they done the past two years? Prof. Awori is in the field of nuclear energy, what is he doing, what has he accomplished?” These are the checks I expect him to be doing. 

We do not want professors –(Interjection)- not this Awori. We want the National Council to keep checking on the universities to know what they are doing. If he is a law professor, what has he written in law in the last four years, what is he imparting to students? If nothing, he has to go. This is the kind of yardstick, which I think will enhance our levels of education. It is not just a question of giving a certificate to any institution - you can now start training people for degrees, no, there has to be a regular check. 

On research, again I do not know how well equipped the National Council for Higher Education is financially able to check on this kind of situation. They need to have people on that council with scientific background and they must be facilitated to do these regular checks. Otherwise, just giving certificates is nothing.  

Mr Speaker, at some stage I will expect the Rt hon. Prime Minister in his capacity as a chancellor to give us more light on what happened between him and MUBS. There was a lot of write-up in the media about him and MUBS. Could he tell this august House if there was anything to do with this kind of thing we are talking about or was it purely personal between the person of the Chancellor, and the Principal of MUBS?  We could be talking about powers to the minister and yet there are certain personal problems on the grounds that are not apparent to us. We need to know so that we can make an educated decision. What is the problem between MUBS and Makerere, is it a matter of law, is it a matter of personality clash? 

I am told among other things that one of the problems between Makerere and MUBS is not just a question of the use of the name, but that MUBS has got a very enterprising head. The man who is making money overnight has invested heavily in various ventures and as a result MUBS is moving forward in terms of generating resources while Makerere is almost stagnant and strictly dependant on donor funds and government grants. These are some of the things underlying the conflict between these universities. These are the things we need to know about. Maybe at the appropriate time the Rt hon. Prime Minister in his other capacity can inform the august House.

Many of my colleagues in the past have talked about the falling standards in terms of education at tertiary institutions. Yes, indeed the standards are going down and the students themselves can prove to you that the standards are going down. I do not know to what extent the National Council for Higher Education and these tertiary institutions have gone to Wandegeya to check who are these Wandegeya consultants that write dissertations and papers for students to get an A and yet that student is not even worth a C minus. 

Can we have a system whereby no paper shall be submitted for examination unless or until an oral examination has been carried out on that particular paper to prove that indeed that student is the author of that particular paper? It is a serious problem and we know it is happening, but nobody is handling it, nobody is talking about it. As a result we are getting PhDs out of either plagiarism or fraudulent academic pursuit. We need to know this.  

I note my colleague here has just informed me that those of us who got our degrees from abroad whether from Oxford, Harvard or Witwatersrand, have to go to this National Council for Education to prove that our degrees are worth and yet a university from Gomba with no known professors - they are not subjected to the same kind of test. These are very serious issues, a Harvard degree is being questioned but the University of Gomba in Bukandula is not subjected to this kind of checks! Really, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR SSENGO: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to allege that this university is in Bukandula when it is somewhere else? It is supposed to be in Kasaka and not Bukandula, so is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think the big umbrella is Gomba. Gomba is enough to cover Bukandula and Kasaka.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My geography is not very good but I am told the two are in close proximity geographically. If I made a mistake please, do forgive me but still I am questioning the National Council of Higher Education on why a university of the status of Yale where our Attorney-General was educated, has to be questioned and yet Bukandula cannot be questioned? These are serious issues, which need to be looked into and as I said, we definitely need some oral examinations of all students who have written papers for higher degrees, especially masters and PhDs.

Once again on research, there seems to be a tendency now for our people to be focusing on those few who are doing research on very local and basic things. While it is commendable that we should encourage local research, we should also start pairing up with other scientists abroad in established institutions. Maybe this will give us some kind of support.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, notwithstanding what my honourable colleague, Mwandha said about the university in Eastern Uganda, I am not satisfied with the answer given by my honourable colleague in charge of higher education saying you do not start a university overnight and that it needs long-term planning. How about these ones, which are being certified as universities, how long have they been in planning - the private ones, which were certified? 

If it is a question of a public university and you say it is a money factor, because it is a public university, then it should be a budgetary issue and not a planning issue. You just come up and say, “Next year we shall come up, we need Shs 4 billion for Gulu University”, instead of saying I will give half a million or half a billion shillings. Put it into account to warm the thought and the idea of setting up this university for an indefinite period. It is not warm, nobody is using it - really it is to warm an account. Traditionally, we used to put there one shilling, nowadays we have put it up to half a billion to keep an account going. Gulu had Shs 100 million on the account for almost four years and nothing happened.  

This preparation, if I look at Busitema for instance, I would like to inform my colleague in charge of higher education that the University of Florida came to Busitema in the year 1982 and carried out a research and they wanted to do the twining, they wanted to develop Busitema University as a Mechanical Agricultural University, twined to the University of Florida. And the flight school among others, really you cannot tell me it has not been pursued; there are documents on file where the University of Florida tried very hard to get Busitema off the ground. But unfortunately we were overtaken by the unfortunate events of 1986 when the Government – when the University of Florida was in the process. Because of the difficulties the Government was forced out by soldiers and then the soldiers were forced out by the former bandits and things kept moving like that until it came to -(Interruption)

CAPT BABU:  I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I just wanted him to clarify, who has got the file on this University of Florida? Did the minister then or somebody in his headquarters keep the file so that we can look at it, because it would help us if they would give us information on this one? Thank you.

MR AWORI: You see, when we left the Government we left everything intact. (Laughter) All the files were left in place but I know informally that one particular file they paid attention to and they are still keeping it, sometimes we call it the file of tricks in governance, which includes rigging in elections, disposing of the ones you do not like and things like that. That is the only file you kept, but the other files if we checked the Ministry of Education – not that one, the first one you took but the other ones you have ignored them.  

On a more serious note, Mr Speaker, this is not the only institution where outsiders have come to help us and nothing has happened. The Flying School for instance, we have been told that Soroti is supposed to be a center of excellence in terms of aviation training. To date our dear government has not responded to that particular challenge. We know that Busitema University is supposed to have a campus in every district in Eastern Uganda, we have got infrastructure in place, and we are not starting from scratch like other universities, no.  This infrastructure, which cost the Government a lot of money, is just being ignored. 

Arapai actually could be a university on Monday morning! It has got enough equipment on the ground. Busitema itself the other day we were given US $10 million worth of things fit a ginning school by the UN. A ginnery is there - the most advanced - training students from all over East and Central Africa; and that was the purpose of the World Bank giving us that money. This dear government has ignored it. 

The other day my very senior colleague, His Excellency the President, came touring. We challenged him – yes, he is my senior colleague, and we are in the same industry of politics. That is why I consider him my senior colleague because he handles matters at a much higher level than me. So he is senior to me but in the industry we are – however, when he came he promised people in my constituency that this university was going to take off. I said, “I hope Mr President this is not a political gimmick because within six months we shall be going for elections and, therefore, you are canvassing for ballot support.” And he said, “No, it is a commitment. I will pass it on to the relevant minister to see to it that it takes off before elections to prove that I am not doing this for the sake of campaigns.” We are only how many weeks away from elections? Nothing has happened.

I can assure you notwithstanding my very good respect for the minister and her senior colleague, the President, I am going to tell my people during the campaigns, “Look, you were promised and it is only eleven weeks to go, no university has come up. You can see, so vote wisely”. UPC delivered –(Laughter)- but I do not see how these people who have got 20 years of continuous support internationally –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is not there a difference between the Movement system and NRM as a party?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To most of us only those who are familiar with the Constitution know the difference. But the majority of us who are not familiar with various Articles of the Constitution, there is no difference between the Movement and NRM. They are one and the same. The same Chairman, same President, same Vice-President, same faces on the Front Bench for the last 20 years, so how can I tell the difference?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, wind up.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really do call upon my honourable colleague, indeed please do honour your pledge. This token of Shs 500 million on the account is not good enough. We want the cutting of the tape opening the university. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently debated this matter but there is a key stakeholder, the Chancellor, and then the minister will wind up. We have a lot on our Order Paper today.

5.04
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish also to support the report except in one respect namely that the Minister of Education may issue directives of a policy nature to all institutions of higher education whether public or private, and this institution shall give effect to those directives. 

As you know, when I was the Minister of Education and Sports, I played a key role in ensuring that universities are given more space to manage their affairs. But since we made those amendments, I have realised that public universities tend to bypass the Minister of Education and some of them, including Makerere University, tend to come to me when they have probleMs But I made it clear that we have a minister in charge of the policy. 

Even here in Parliament, whenever there are problems at Makerere, you tend to call upon me to answer. I am the Prime Minister of this country; I am not a Minister of Education and I have always persuaded you to refer these problems to the Minister of Education. I am happy to mention that the incumbent is doing a good job. (Applause)

With regard to the conflict between MUBS and Makerere University, we should not personalize these issues. Some papers have tried to personalize them and given an impression that probably I do not like Associate Prof. Balunywa, yet he is my academic son. 

Recently, when I went to preside over the graduation in MUBS, I made the same point. I asked, “How I can victimize my academic son?” People would like to manufacture conflicts where they do not exist. And some are saying, “Nsibambi is to blame”. This appeared again in the Daily Monitor that I am bulldozing this Bill here. It is not a Nsibambi Bill. This is a Bill of the Government and it is being spearheaded by the Minister of Education. And when the Daily Monitor reporter asked me why I should be bulldozing this Bill, I told him that is absolute nonsense. I said it is rubbish plus rubbish. You know, I do not fight secondary wars. Do you see what I mean? I do not fight secondary wars.

Most of the problems have been institutional. That is why you need to examine clause 20(4(a): “Makerere University Business School shall be represented directly in the Senate of Makerere University and the Makerere University Council shall be informed of the Senate decisions relating to Makerere Business School.” This is to ensure that MUBS is well represented in Senate and its affairs are not marginalized. 

Clause 4(b): “For as long as Makerere University Business School remains affiliated to Makerere University, Makerere University shall be represented on the governing council and academic board of Makerere University Business School to monitor the administration and policies of the business school for purposes of quality control.”
 
These are some of the amendments we have made, and we have had several meetings – well, I have been trying to resolve the conflicts between Makerere University and MUBS. Some may have been personal, but we have tried to mediate. I am a mediator. I am the academic father of those institutions and can only be a mediator. There was a time when the status of MUBS was not clear, again we wrote to the then Attorney-General and he clarified it. He said it is affiliated to Makerere University. That is my answer to hon. Aggrey Awori’s question and to other questions raised. 

Many honourable members have been saying that the quality of Makerere University has gone down, but they have not given us empirical indicators. When I stand here, I must make it clear that there are problems at Makerere. If I do not say this, I would not be honest. But when you talk about the quality of a university, you must indicate what area you are dealing with. There is the quality of teaching. Are those teachers teaching well? Are they appraised by students? In some institutions the academic staff is actually appraised by students. There was a time when my students appraised my teaching and they told me that sometimes I was using very hard words and I had to stop it. So, it is important to enable students to assess your teaching so that you can teach better. 

Then there is the whole question of research. What quality of research are we having in that place? I am happy to inform you that Prof. Miiro, working with other colleagues in a university in America, discovered a technique of reducing the chances of transmission of HIV from mother to child. This was a global achievement and many people do not mention these things. It was globally acknowledged. So, when you say the quality of Makerere is going down, what area are you talking about? 

You must also mention the books, which are being published. Prof. Oloka, for example, I do not agree with him politically but I acknowledge his publications. Dr Tibatemwa, the Deputy Vice Chancellor has also published, I have also published. I have not gone into academic oblivion. I wrote an article concerning the role of the three arms of the state and it appeared in the Journal of Law. That journal is also a commendable journal. That is the issue of research and publications.

Regarding the teachers, the minimum qualification now required for a person to teach at Makerere is a doctorate and many have gone abroad and have got excellent doctorates from Oxford, Cambridge, Chicago and so on. Is the quality of our students low? You have to be careful.

However, I want to admit that we have not been having adequate space for teaching; that is a fact. We have agreed not to increase the number of students and recently the Vice-Chancellor made it clear that they are now decreasing. We are taking appropriate steps to ensure that there is adequate space. That is extremely important. 

If you also consider the contribution of many academic staff when you were amending the Constitution, I think they made an excellent contribution. This university is not dying, it has a few problems and they have to be addressed. I have requested the visitor to the university, that is the President, to institute a visitation committee on all public universities including a few sampled private universities so that all these matters may be assessed. The quality of the university, the quality of research, the relevance of the subject, all must be considered. When this visitation committee has done its work, we should be able to know what is happening.

Recently, some one was alleged to have sat examinations when he was not a student at Makerere. I did ask the IGG to investigate this matter and she is on the brink of giving out the outcome of her investigations. These are some of the issues we should discuss. I am a man of few words; I support the report. I am delighted and I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to wind up briefly?

5.15
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the good ideas they have brought forward in support of these amendments. Probably I should repeat what I said earlier on and in another meeting that the principal Act came into being just five years back and we are going to continue amending it to make it suit the conditions we are in, but most importantly to make sure that the standards at university and other tertiary institutions meet the expectations of the people.  So, when we get such input, it will help us to implement that Act and make sure that the high standards expected are maintained. 

Mr Speaker, quite a number of honourable members have contributed and I will just make a few summaries here and there. I will start with making comments on what hon. Ekanya was talking about standardizing courses or course contents in all universities so that the products of these universities do not find problems in seeking employment or employers do not turn out some and recruit others. That is exactly what this Bill is all about just to make sure that the National Council for Higher Education can regulate the course content. 

There has been some resistance from some universities, which did not think the council should go that far. The limitation of the authority to just licensing an institution is not good enough. So, this amendment is to make the council go beyond licensing an institution, but look at the programmes, which are offered at those universities in detail. I just want to clarify that that is one of the major objectives of this amendment. I thank the people who brought up ideas towards that but that is exactly why we are here discussing this.
  
Hon. Kalule Ssengo talked about the West Central Buganda University in Gomba and I want to inform him and other members that that university had been advised to get in touch with the National Council for Higher Education to streamline the processes, which will verify its status. Very soon that university might become worth awarding the certificate. As a Member of Parliament from Gomba, I urge him to help the authorities at that university to make sure that they meet the expected minimum requirements.

Mr Speaker, hon. Sarah Kiyingi I hope has had her question answered by the Rt hon. Prime Minister on whether we were talking about administrating issues or leadership and personality issues. I think that has been well covered by the Prime Minister.

Hon. Mutebi Kityo was asking why they did not support UMI to get powers to award degrees, but I want to inform the members that this institution does not award first degrees. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Patrick Mwondha that the institution is still pursuing its original objectives except that in 2001 when the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act was enacted, it repealed the original statute of 1992, which gave this university the same powers. So, the amendment is returning the powers to that institution to tackle exactly the issues or handle degrees, which it was handling. It is not giving first degrees. 

The idea of probably picking on new courses to earn money actually is not the objective, but that are there any other areas where that institution can be of use to the civil and public officers? I am very happy to say, as hon. Idah Mehangye said, that it is one of the outstanding first class institutions in this country in what we call professional training. It is not taking on just A’ Level straight leavers; it is only catering for private sector and public sector workers.

Hon. Fred Omach was talking about the need for a university in West Nile, the only region which had a European name. I think the idea is very good, but with university education, the Government should go systematically and carefully. While we have tried to expand university education from one to four during the last 15 years, I think we should be warned to go carefully lest we start mushrooming universities, which finally will lose. But let us work out together as Parliament and government to make sure that university education is improved and expanded.

I still want to inform hon. Margaret Baba Diri that the institute for management is giving post- graduate and other training courses, and not first degrees.  

The issue of wrangles again has been clarified on by the Prime Minister. I do not think we should go through that but I think the amendment is very clear on this. After ascertaining the legal status of MUBS Vs Makerere, I still think we shall have a good atmosphere between the two working relationships.

I am happy hon. Anthony Yiga is praising the institute for management and I want to inform this House that the New Vision and other papers have on a number of occasions given out the critical courses and courses on high demand for our national development. Probably on another occasion I should bring up those press releases to show those courses, which are critical for our development so that we can all encourage young people to pursue such courses.

But we are advising the universities to make sure they do not just offer university education per se, but university education with selected disciplines for our development as a country.

Hon. Maurice Kagimu came up with a number of ideas like grant-aiding or subsidizing the private universities. The macro policy of liberalisation covers such institutions in the sense that those who can run those institutions can do so while the Government also runs what is within their capacity. Of course it is a good idea but let us also put the public universities in order and then we see how much we can go to grant aid or subsidize private universities.  

I think the lesson from the honourable member here is that those universities should look at their resources before they expand the courses which they offer so that they can run small but effective institutions instead of starting on large scale and then they look to government which is also trying to make sure that the resources in the public universities can meet the expectations of the people there.  

I am glad the Prime Minister clarified on the increase on fees but I will repeat with the permission of the Prime Minister that so many young people at universities repeat and re-sit papers but they fail simply because somebody walks out of his or her office to go and sit a paper, which he or she failed the other time. So, the idea of the university at Makerere especially was that you come back and you go over what you did not internalize so that when you re-sit the paper you are better than when you sat and failed. But probably we needed a lot of sensitisation on this issue.

We thank hon. Idah Mehangye for singling out the institute as a good institution but I want to assure her that the National Council, if this Bill is amended, will have more powers to standardize and make sure that the course contents at universities are good.

The question was, “what is enhancing the National Council for Higher Education?” What does it mean? Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to clarify that what we are looking for are powers for that council to improve the quality of education in both private and public universities in this country. We are looking at the powers of the National Council to look at the courses to make sure that the course content is the correct one. 

We are looking at the powers of that council to appoint a visitation committee of their own without waiting for one from the chancellor of the university, as the Prime Minister has said. You know that power was loose in the principal Act and that is why the amendment is seeking to strengthen those powers. This is because some universities were grumbling and complaining when the National Council was putting a lot of questions to them to improve their quality.

Let us give legal powers so that this council can really go into the details, which will improve the quality of education at universities.

Mr Speaker, I think I have already explained that the courses at UMI are tailor-made and, therefore, that institution deserves power to continue giving what they are giving now.

About the powers to the minister, it is unfortunate I am the incumbent and probably one would think there is vested interest now. But I will give you one example, early this year I stood here for two hours after three consecutive days, when this august House was discussing the issue of science and technology as criteria for admission to public universities. 

That was a policy nature, which did not originate from the university but which originated from the Government through the Ministry of Education. Therefore, if we can give general policies like that one - which is a very good case - there should be legal backing to that type of action so that the minister can, after realizing government commitment to a certain direction, give the university some direction as to what exactly will help us as a country and the Government to achieve what we want.

I am very happy that hon. Awori supported this move of science and technology, because we are far behind. Mr Speaker, the general level in the countries below the Sahara is 36 percent of students taking sciences; that is the average. In Uganda, it is 15 percent. Out of all the students in universities and tertiary institutions, only 15 percent take courses oriented to science and technology. So, if there was that move, the Government was right to move through the minister who should have powers of that nature to give direction to universities.

The other good example is what hon. Baba Diri gave about the figures. Again that was not the initiative of universities to increase the numbers of persons with disabilities. It was the general direction from the Government through the minister. That is the type of general nature policies for which the minister is seeking power to give to universities.

Mr Speaker, the last one is about the university in the East. I gave information to my colleague but probably I should conclude by saying, it is not the buildings - many arguments have come talking about buildings being available - it is what goes on in those buildings. There may be centers and wonderful campuses there but that is not the issue. The issue is when we start, how do we start? I still re-emphasize and repeat that it is not an empty promise that the university in the East is starting, but I want to appeal to the House to give chance to the Government with a vision to plan for the people of this country at that level so that we do not hurry into taking steps. And when we take them we should be firm on the ground.

I will end up by saying that if the twinning project came during the UPC Government in 1982 and by 1986 they had not taken action, then they have the chance when they win the elections this time to start where they stopped. Otherwise, we are in control and this process of expanding university education under the powers we are seeking under this amendment will take effect to the benefit of this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I now put the question that the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

THE CHAIRMAN: Now that the Bill has reached the Committee Stage, I propose that we deal with this early tomorrow morning before the other matters and, therefore, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 10.00 a.m. tomorrow for the Committee Stage.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 December 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)







