

Wednesday, 20 December 2017

Parliament met at 10.07 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting and look forward to fruitful deliberations and orderly conduct in the House. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 2017

10.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Environment Bill, 2017” be read for the first time.

I hereby lay on the Table, the National Environment Bill, 2017 and its Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? It is seconded and sent to the Committee of Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157(2) AND 183(1) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

10.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Watongola Rehema, MP Kamuli Municipality, as a member of the standing Committee on Local Government Accounts and on the sectoral Committee on East African Affairs. I beg to designate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the honourable member be designated as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2018/19 – 2022/23

10.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2018/2019 to 2022/2023 as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the National Budget Framework Paper has been received. The committees will be expected to study it and report back during the course of next year. Therefore, it is committed to the committees of the House. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

(Debate continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had gone part of the way. Therefore, let me invite hon. Hellen Kahunde, hon. Bigirwa, hon. Byarugaba and hon. Ngabirano. Let us start there.

10.13
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I held 50 consultative meetings in Kiryandongo District and I beg to report to the House that in all those consultative meetings that I carried throughout the district - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order. Honourable members, you are wasting time. What is it, honourable?

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I have a complaint. There are some Members who have not been attending plenary every day, especially the ministers. Why should you give them a chance to speak when they have not been attending? Some of us have been attending every day but you cannot give us time to tell Ugandans what is happening. This should be the chance for those who have been attending regularly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not the Speaker. Take your seat.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was still on the Floor before I was interrupted. I held 50 consultative meetings throughout the district and I beg to report to the House that in all those meetings held in different parishes, the proposal on the amendment of Article 102(b) was greatly opposed. In addition, more than 90 per cent of the people who turned up for the meetings instructed me not to “touch” Article 102(b).

Madam Speaker, most of them gave different reasons. Allow me to highlight a few. Some of them said that there was need for the Government to constitute a constitution review commission to comprehensively look at every amendment in the Constitution and most importantly, to include the Maragoli community in the Third Schedule of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as one of the indigenous tribes in Uganda.

These people petitioned Parliament; you are aware about their case and they have always been advised that the constitution review commission was going to be constituted soon.

Most of the retired civil servants objected to the proposal of lifting the presidential age limit saying that it is not only the life expectancy of persons who wish to contest as president that has gone up but also that of civil servants, especially the ones who retire at 60 years. They added that this Parliament should be fair so that if we wish to amend Article 102(b), we should also consider removing the retirement age to allow them to work until the Almighty God calls them.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of discrimination, they said that positive discrimination was avoidable and that if we want to do away with discrimination, we should remove the requirements on education and also the Shs 20 million payable as nomination fees for presidential candidates.

Madam Speaker, they said every game has got its rules and that the rules should be respected. They said that those below the age of 35 years will have time and they are free to contest for other leadership positions as they prepare and gain experience to take over the number one seat in the country. They said, you do not just go to contest but you go to win. They said that those beyond 35 years of age have already had the chance to participate in all the offices, including contesting for president. 

Some of them requested this honourable House to consider enacting a law to give immunity to any person who will have served as the president of this country so that they feel comfortable to step aside freely to allow for the peaceful transition of power from one person to another without fear.

Madam Speaker, on the extension of the tenure of Parliament to seven years, Article 1(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda says that power belongs to the people. I pray that you give us time to go and consult with our voters like we did in the constitutional amendment –(Member timed out.)

10.19
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate you very much for having availed us the opportunity to go back and consult our people. I am very delighted that this morning, I am going to exercise one of the cardinal roles of representing my people of Buliisa who entrusted me with the responsibility of representing them and gave me the mandate in 2016.

I consulted the entire Buliisa on the amendment Bill that is in the House this morning; on Article 61, Article 102, Article 104 and Article 183. As Members of Parliament, we moved as a team in the entire district. The planned meetings or rallies were 13 but one did not take place because we were denied the opportunity to speak to the people. Out of the 12 consultative meetings that we held jointly with my colleagues, below was the outcome.

I am here to relay the position of the people that I represent. The majority of people in four consultative meetings allowed us to amend these Articles but in the eight meetings, we were told not to amend. (Applause) 

Fellow Ugandans, as an elected leader and as the people’s representative, I am duty-bound to effectively represent the views of my people. (Applause) The people of Buliisa are saying that they look forward to seeing us, as a country, adhering to what is embedded in the Constitution of Uganda. They requested me to go ahead and restore the term limits and entrench them within the Constitution because they feel that these are some of the things that will help us to run this country.

In as much as we appreciate what is being done currently, they say that they are not very sure of what will happen tomorrow. We need to come up with laws that are going to stand the test of time. The people of Buliisa are also saying that they look forward to seeing the elderly in Buliisa being catered for on the issue of SAGE (Social Assistance Grant Empowerment). This issue was very pronounced during the consultations.

Madam Speaker, right now as a country, the majority of our youth are not employed and they said that they look forward to a time when we, the legislators, will come up with ways and means of making sure that there is placement for our educated youth in gainful employment to be able to run this country to better levels as a nation. 

I would like to thank you very much for enabling the duty of representing the views of the people that entrusted me. Thank you very much. For God and my country.

10.24
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving each one of us an opportunity to express the views of our constituents. I take the honour and opportunity to share with you the views of the people of Isingiro South. 

I was privileged to participate in the constitution-making exercise and I am one of the very few people remaining. I take it as a privilege and honour. I am very cognisant of the time we took, especially on Article 1. Let me tell you, honourable colleagues, that Article 1 took us much more time to formulate, construct and put it the way it is. It was very instructive and clear and it took us a lot of effort and lobbying to put in place. I respect it because it is very instructive. 

It was on that basis that I took my consultative meetings to the five sub-counties in my constituency with a population of about 220,000 people. I traversed all the sub-counties and collected the following: yes, sometime in the Parliament, term limits were removed. My people instructed me to come back and share with you that we must keep this country together and that term limits must be reinstated and entrenched.

Secondly, they said that we should go ahead, reconstruct and amend Article 102(b) and they gave me their reasons. In Nyakitunda sub-county, one young man who was actually supporting me and who I also supported because I wanted him to become the chairman LC III, went to the registration desk, we were told – and I had forgotten about this.

Do not look only at the presidential level; we are affecting people at that local level. If you are less than 30 years, you cannot be a chairperson LC III. If you want to contest for chairman LC V, you will not make it if you are less than 35 years. 

Remember that the majority of our people today are the youth. Look at hon. Adeke who has been making fantastic contributions. Why do we want to deny such people an opportunity to participate in the leadership of this country at LC III, LC V and even at the presidential level? 

I am the first born of my father and he is over 85 years old. My father drives a vehicle and has four wives. For goodness sake –(Interjections)- How do you say he is now useless? He runs his family of about 60 children and still commands fantastic respect. We need everyone on board. We do not have an excess of talented leaders. This is the reason I think we should bring everybody on board.

Finally, I would like to speak to my honourable colleagues who are saying, “We will secede if this motion fails.” At Makerere, I was in Livingston Hall and I had friends in Lumumba. Whenever we had sports activities, those guys from Lumumba would try to bully us and they would go around singing, “We either win or they lose.” For goodness sake, are you going in for that kind of contest? That is not correct. We need Uganda. Professor, I respect you very much, I respect everybody –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to reduce the time to three minutes so that we get more Members.

10.29
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity that you have given me. I would like to inform this House that I consulted my people in Rwampara effectively and got their responses.

Madam Speaker, I also took time to read some literature, especially that concerning the Constituent Assembly, about the amendment of Article 102(b). I looked at the very good views of our great leaders then and found that this Bill is entrenching the Constitution amidst some serious opposition. Therefore, this is the time to rectify that anomaly. 

My constituents were very clear on this. They were not using the word “discrimination” but were using the words, “denying people their rights.” At LC V and LC III levels, we have very many people who would like to contest but are below 35 years and above 75 years. This has denied them their right as Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, we all vote and I think that all the legally voting people of Uganda should be allowed to contest for all offices. Therefore, the majority of the people in Rwampara allowed me to come here and amend. They supported the entire Bill that was presented to them. In that regard, I will unequivocally go by that and clearly vote a “Yes” and support the majority report without any fear or favour. I will support the amendments because I was instructed to do so.

Madam Speaker, I have a few people who did not support the motion and I would like their views to be listened to. The minority, who did not want us to amend, were mainly looking at issues of development. They were using this chance to tell us that we are doing too much politicking. They told me that we must concentrate on development, fight poverty and unemployment. 

Like my people told me, we are doing too much politicking in this country. Let us finalise with all the amendments and concentrate on development. The time for politics is over. They are not bothered about who rules them as every person who is legally mature to vote in this country should be allowed to contest. However, we should focus on the politics of production, employment, wealth creation and prosperity.

Therefore, I would like to urge my colleagues that we should amend the Constitution and then concentrate on development. It is a shame that as a country with good climate, we are not productive. We are languishing in poverty; we do not have enough food.

Therefore, let us finish the issue of the amendments and focus on allocating our resources and efforts to developing this country. This country is great for us. The issue is not about who rules us, the age of the President, the Speaker or the LCV chairman. The issues are those of development. 

Madam Speaker, I do not have the tendency of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot all speak at the same time. Please take your seats. Even in Cabinet, you do not all speak at the same time.

10.33
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring you greetings from Kassanda County North. Majority of our people are members of the NRM party. During my consultations, the majority told me that they have no problem with amending the Constitution. However, they told me that I should never support the amendment of Article 102(b). (Applause)

Madam Speaker, our consultations were held at parish level and I held meetings in 21 parishes. None of the parishes supported the amendment. I went ahead to consult the sub-county leadership and the NRM structures where I even invited the woman Member of Parliament for Mubende to come and do the popularisation of the amendment. However, people still said, “No” to the amendment of Article 102(b).

Madam Speaker, I hereby report that the people of Kassanda County North are against amending Article 102(b). I would like to thank the Members of the NRM who have stood up to represent the views of the people that they represent. (Applause)

The sacrifices you are making are nearing those of Ugandans who chose to sacrifice five years in the bush for the sake of Uganda. How I wish those sacrifices were rewarded with sustainable peace and good governance.

Madam Speaker, I do not subscribe to the view that my party; NRM, is under resourced in terms of leaders. There is a lie that no other person within the party can take the country forward.  I still believe that within the NRM party, over the years, we have nurtured leaders who can perform even better than the person we are trying to amend this Constitution for.

Madam Speaker, hon. Magyezi and the team did not only rob this country of a debate on transition but curtailed the same within the NRM party. They have misinformed the country that the only viable transition is from President Museveni to President Museveni –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR NSAMBA: Members of NRM, especially those whose constituencies have said you should not amend the Constitution, I call upon you not to succumb to fear. In any case, as the bush war veterans made sacrifices, we must also make sacrifices today when this country needs us. (Applause) This decision is not about how much you fear the regime or about safeguarding your constituency. It is rather about how much you love this country and think about its future.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, religious and cultural leaders like the Kabaka of Buganda have spoken against this amendment. Senior citizens have aired their views. Members of Parliament, we must listen to these voices otherwise we will regret this decision.

Madam Speaker, this process has proved to us –(Member timed out.)

10.39
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Each Parliament has its mission and I know that the climax of the Tenth Parliament is this Bill. Whether you like it or not, the definition of the Tenth Parliament is going to be about how it handled the Constitutional (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 introduced by hon. Raphael Magyezi. This is the time. 

When you look at our past, as ably put by our Constitution, how do we want this country to be? I come from the NRM side and I would like to be challenged by any Member here. I have been here for a while and I have seen Members come and go. I have heard promises of there being many rooms in the father’s house. Whether those have materialised or not is a different matter. However, we now have a mission to discharge as the Tenth Parliament.

Uganda has had a checkered past but was probably not as brutalised as some other countries like South Africa. Whereas we had to fight a liberation war, South Africa had to contend with apartheid. However, the apartheid icon, Nelson Mandela, just had one term and passed on power to subsequent leaders and South Africa has not been dented by that apartheid past. How about Uganda? Why are we hostages of a good leader like President Yoweri Museveni who did his part? It reaches a point when the country must move on and that is the reality I would like to call my colleagues on the NRM side to take in and understand.

Madam Speaker, I know it is not easy and I am calling on colleagues - yesterday, I was dumbfounded when hon. Adolf Mwesige insinuated that in developed democracies, they do not have age limits. This is true but he does not tell the country that those countries like the USA have term limits - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, yesterday when I saw Lt Gen. (Rtd) Tumukunde, he had his past in Parliament here. When he opposed the lifting of the term limits, he was hounded off this Parliament. What has happened overnight for him to preach extended and unlimited years? 

I would like to put it on record that the people of Lwemiyaga and indeed the people of Uganda - Once you are a Member of Parliament, you speak for Ugandans. They have an emphatic sentiment that the President must retire and that there should be no amendment of Article 102 of the Constitution. Let peace prevail. 

I know they will come for you, Members. In our case they say they will come for us and take away our lands and impoverish us. At a point in time, we must sacrifice. I am ready to pay that price but the people of Uganda must move on. We love the President so much and I should be the first one to lie on his shoes - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Kabaziguruka has a problem standing.

10.44
MR MICHAEL KABAZIGURUKA (FDC, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my submission, I will ask that you give me more time. I have been indisposed for quite long and I have not said much in this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, you sent us out to consult our constituencies and indeed, I managed to consult my people despite my current condition. I consulted the people of Nakawa, largely in all the parishes. We have 23 parishes and the majority of the people of Nakawa asked me not to support the amendment of Article 102(b).

Madam Speaker, I literally stand to oppose the amendment and the report thereof because the report and the amendment are both premised on very frivolous grounds. The issue of discrimination is ably handled by the Constitution but age is not one of the areas of discrimination. On the issue of the court ruling, we have had several elections in this country that have been challenged in the Supreme Court, right from 2001. The Justices of the Supreme Court made recommendations that we make amendments to the electoral laws to enable the Electoral Commission deliver a free and fair election. It is unfortunate that at the time, the Parliament then chose to amend Article 105 as the only amendment that would cause a free and fair election in this country.

In 2006, the election was challenged. In 2016, the presidential election was challenged again and the Justices of the Supreme Court called upon Parliament to amend the electoral laws that will enable this country have a free and fair election. 

It is unfortunate that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General have chosen to abdicate their responsibilities. It is those two who should have been in front of us here, presenting amendments for the purpose of holding free, fair and credible elections in this country. Instead of discharging their mandate, the two gentlemen have simply jumped onto the bandwagon of an honourable member who chooses to pick one item; lifting of the age limit as the only way we can have free and fair elections in Uganda.

It is very unfortunate that to date, the contribution of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to this debate was to defend himself against an accusation of sleeping in Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

10.48
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Thank you also for giving us the opportunity to go and consult with our constituencies. 

I consulted with my people - Lira District has got three constituencies: Erute South, Erute North and Lira Municipality. In Lira Municipality alone, I had over 6,000 people in one gathering but it was unfortunate that we were dispersed by with teargas and that was the circumstance where you heard that hon. Cecilia Ogwal was beaten. 

The voters gave me their information and my people said, “No” to the amendment of Article 102(b). They said I should not touch it. They further said that term limits were scraped off before they were ever tested. They said that age limits are the only safeguard that we have in this Constitution if you want it to remain genuine but again, it is going to be scraped and they are not happy about that.

The promoters of this age limit are saying that Article 102(b) is discriminative. I would like to assure this House that what we are about to do, as a House, is what is too discriminative. If we visited Articles 143 and 144 of the Constitution where the civil servants have got to retire at 60 years, where the judges and justices have got to resign between 65 and 70 years, who are we to promote the Office of the President to 75 years and above? This is unrealistic.

Above all, we are saying that lowering the age from 35 years to 18 years is unrealistic. We are calling somebody of 18 years to come and contest with the president who is an incumbent and who is in charge of the Police, the Army, Electoral Commission and Bank of Uganda. Furthermore, can a person of 18 years pay Shs 50 million to register to be a candidate for the presidency?

I would like to assure the youth of this country that you are being duped. You had the position of youth councillors and youth MPs but the moment we remove the age limit of 35 years, I would like to assure you that somebody of 70 years will stand as a youth councillor. Somebody of 70 years will stand as a youth MP because now there are no boundaries defining youth.                 
 
Lastly, concerning the issue of seven years, honourable members of Parliament, let us have our conscience. We have been given this mandate; let us stop being selfish. The image of Parliament has been tarnished beyond correction. We have been given this mandate and I know we have the power to make any law but any law that we are making should be –(Member timed out.)

10.53
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Kasilo County and I am privileged to represent them for the last 17 years. I am here today to present the views of the people of Kasilo once again, just like I did in 2005.

Madam Speaker, I will speak the truth and nothing but the truth about the people of Kasilo County. I consulted the people of Kasilo County in the areas of Kabulabula, Kadungu trading centre, Ogelak, Agule, Kamodi, Arapo, Labong and Tingiri among others. If I had the time, I would show you the videos of the people I consulted. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because you gave us this opportunity. It was as if I was campaigning for 2021; going around and talking with the people and that was the good part of it. People were concerned about the amendments and I would like to start with the issue of amending the age limit. Madam Speaker, there is one place, which I had thought would have some votes to support but I was surprised. They said in no uncertain terms, “Young man – (Laughter) – Can you give me time, honourable colleagues? She said “young man” because this was said by an old woman of 77 years. She said, “Please, go and inform the country that we do not support the amendment. Look at my age.” This challenged me. 

Yesterday, hon. Matia Kasaija, was challenging everyone here. Dr Baryomunsi is here. I will not feel ashamed to mention because she said it in public to the young man. She said, “My husband is 78 years old. There is no way you people in Parliament will go ahead and say that at that age, you have the stamina. Even at our age, my husband has no fire anymore because he is 77 years. Therefore, what are you going to do?” I am reporting verbatim –(Member timed out.)               

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to conclude. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Most of the people I represent are also very religious and they gave me a verse to read because they said that even in the Bible, the issue of the age limit is there. Let me read the New International Version, the book of Numbers 8:23-26: “The Lord said to Moses, this applies to the Levites. Men 25 years old or more shall come to take part in the work at the tent of meeting but at the age of 50, they must retire from their regular service and work no longer. They may assist their brothers in performing their duties at the tent of meeting but they themselves must not do the work. This, then, is how you are to assign the responsibilities of the Levites.” Brothers and sisters, this is the word of God. If you are a Christian, you should be able to take it seriously. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the lower age limit –(Member timed out.) 

10.58
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the alternative report, also called the minority report. Whereas we may call it a minority report, it is the majority in the eyes of the public. 

Madam Speaker, I carried out consultations and addressed 14 rallies in my constituency in Buhweju County, Buhweju District, Ankole sub-region. While there, the people of Buhweju told me to come to the Parliament of Uganda and tell you that they are interested in peace and development and therefore, we should not amend the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, I am a Christian and a Catholic at that. More so, I got an opportunity this year to go to the Vatican and meet the Pope. Therefore, I would like to speak like a Catholic –(Interjections) - Well, you can shout at me but I will speak as a Catholic. The religious leaders have spoken. What happened yesterday was very annoying. I have heard the Bishops of Kanungu, Rwenzori, Fort Portal, Gulu and of Kampala saying that what we are doing is anti-Ugandan and it is a bad amendment. 

On the idea of extending our term, I made a contract with the people of Buhweju to be in Parliament for five years. I cannot change that contract unless I go and consult them first. I do not want to be greedy and selfish as a Ugandan and as a leader. Without consulting the people of Buhweju, I cannot change my contract. I am here for five years and after five years, I will still go and consult them.

Madam Speaker, this idea that we have projects that are not yet completed - those are not our projects but Government projects. We can only come here and legislate and give the country money. However, we cannot say that those are projects of Members of Parliament because they are not. Therefore, whether you are there as a Member of Parliament or not, the projects will continue. 
Madam Speaker, if the presidency was a vehicle, it had been given two limits: the front brake and the rear one. In (2) and (5), the front brakes were removed because the driver was said to be good, the car was in good mechanical condition and the road was also good. 

This time round, we are saying because the vehicle is still in good condition, the driver can still drive and the road is still good, we should also remove the rear brakes. This is dangerous because we shall have a driver that is driving without brakes. 

Madam Speaker, this is not time for excitement –(Member timed out.) 

11.02
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It hurts so much when the public refers to us as “bill-ists” because we are here cutting Bills ranging from a price of Shs 40 million to Shs 300 million. Even when you are not guilty, there is no way you can say so.

Honourable colleagues, God created us above animals and He gave us the power to reason, the ability to choose and to be responsible for the choices that we make. Today, as Members of Parliament, this is one choice that we have to make using our reason over the responsibility that has been given to us. 

We swore to defend this Constitution and represent our people. It actually pains to see Members coming here to tell lies. The people told them something else but they are coming here to say different things for different reasons. What will it benefit a man if he gains the whole world and loses his own soul? You are trading your souls by coming here to tell lies. 

Madam Speaker, in Uganda, we should get out of the thinking of strong men or strong women. We should instead think about institutions. In Soroti District where there are 10 sub-counties and three constituencies including Dakabela, Soroti and the Municipality, in no meeting that I called did anybody rise up to say that they support the amendment of Article 102(b) of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, there are women in Soroti District that earn a living by cracking Katine Rock. When I went to have a meeting with them, they told me to come and tell you that if you think they have forgotten what they did some years ago, they have not. They said that they are going to abandon producing children and focus on Uganda. That is a very deep statement from a village woman that you cannot take for granted. What does it show? They take it as unfair. There is no amount of washing or laundering that will make this amendment look clean. The intentions are evil, wicked and it is driven by lust, greed and selfishness. How far can we go? 

Madam Speaker, there is a story in the Bible of a man called Saul. When he came to be king of Israel, he had the spirit of God. After some time, the spirit left him and the Bible says an evil spirit took over – (Member timed out.) 

11.06
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present the views of the people of Kasese Municipality and to associate myself with the minority report. 

In the first place, the main report talks about discrimination and I find this far-fetched and deceitful. Parliament has a Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) programme and I went into the mathematics of this programme, which rewards an old person with Shs 25,000 per month. That means in a year, that person earns Shs 300,000. Literally, it means that for him to raise the Shs 20 million nomination fees, he will take 66.6 months without soliciting for signatures. 

Look at an 18 year old candidate competing with an incumbent who has access to full presidential privileges, who appoints the Electoral Commission and the judges and who will determine that the complainant in an election dispute be locked in his home until the mandatory period of petitioning elapses like it was in Dr Kiiza Besigye’s case. You expect these people to favourably compete with the incumbent? Is there any form of discrimination that is worse than this?

My sister, the Member of Parliament for PWDs, talked about discrimination but she forgot that Article 107(c) actually discriminates them on the basis of mental and physical incapacity as one of the ripe grounds for removing a president. I would implore her to push that, that Article be amended also because it represents the wishes and aspirations of the constituents who sent her here instead of serving a different master. (Applause)

My brother-in-law, hon. Musa Ecweru - Actually, I remember he went into an armed struggle indicating that change should have taken place yesterday. However, I was surprised yesterday at his submission but let me not delve into that. 

The point I am trying to make is that there is a moral question that we need to answer. The spirit behind this Bill is comparable to a pharmacist who rebrands expired drugs and puts them back on the counter because there is high demand for them. (Applause) 

We have traffic laws and we drive cars. Some of them have 300km/hr speeds. Why is it that they give us tickets for driving beyond 80km/hr per hour? That is the safe guard we are looking for in this Constitution that we are trying to defend.

At the moment, when we have a human resource crisis: doctors, judicial officers, civil servants - (Member timed out.)

11.09
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I rise on the floor of this Parliament to raise issues that my people have told me to raise. When you sent us for consultation, I conducted consultations in Kapelebyong County and I received people from other constituencies in Teso who are resettling there.

I was able to consult 8,073 people in five sub-counties and the people of Kapelebyong told me, “Go and tell the people of Uganda never to touch and tamper with the Constitution of Republic of Uganda.” Only 15 people associated with that move.

During that consultation in Kapelabyong, the people of Teso also told me, “If the team here proceeds to amend Article 102(b), we are going to start pushing for seceding from this country.”  (Interjections) This is the view of my people not your people.

The reasons why the people of Kapelebyong are advancing these views is because when President Museveni and the group were fighting a legitimate regime of the Uganda People’s Congress, they were saying that laws had been violated. Where are they now?

Madam Speaker, even when you are sitting in that Chair and presiding over the Parliament, know that there are people who are not happy with you and they want to damage you. They are here.

Madam Speaker, it is money and the rule of guns, which is destroying this country. People are intimidated. We cannot take this country called Uganda. If you go ahead to amend this Constitution today, this country will go to another stage that we will all live to regret.

Madam Speaker, I am an entitled legitimate elected leader in this Parliament and I would like to say this - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude your sentence.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, the warning that the people of Kapelebyong and the entire Teso region are sending to the regime in power is enshrined in Isaiah 10:1-4. I call upon the UPDF, the security agencies in this country and all peace loving Ugandans never to be silenced. You must all stand up, rise and confront the evil that has taken charge of our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.14
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Rujumbura Constituency in Rukungiri district. I would like to thank you for the opportunity to consult our people on the proposed amendment in our Constitution. 
I went through five sub-counties staring with Ruhinda where I come from, Bugangari, Bwambara, Nyakagyeme and Buhunga. I also have two town councils of Bukurungu and Rwere.
 
In all the areas I visited and the rallies I addressed, people overwhelmingly rejected the proposed amendment of Article 102(b) of our Constitution. They want the Constitution to remain as it is and they made a number of observations.

First, they questioned the rationale behind leaving all other officers to retire and leave only the presidential office not to retire. We were very privileged to be addressed by young people, middle-aged people and people as old as 77 years who attested that they had no energy left in them to carry out strenuous work. They wondered who else could come and do it at that age.

Madam Speaker, they actually appreciated that most of the work that President Museveni has done was done when he came to the presidency at the age of 42 years. Therefore, they were questioning why people of that age - and I was listening to hon. Frank Tumwebaze when he was calculating his age when he came to Parliament at 42 years. People of that age should be aspiring to become the president so that by the time you become 70 or 75 years, we have seen the good that you have done instead of taking us beyond 75 years in the world of uncertainty.

They also highlighted young leaders of this world like Obama in the United States of America, who apparently is my age, and what he has achieved and yet has left the presidency at that age.

Madam Speaker, yesterday I heard one of our colleagues; a minister, alluding to western countries that have no age limits. He conveniently forgot to inform the House of the young people who have led those countries like the 39-year-old president in France, the 47-year-old in America, the former British Prime Minister Cameron and others. They said, “We have enough potential in the country and we can go ahead with young people who are less than 75 years to lead this country.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to protest, in the strongest terms, the statement made by – (Member timed out.)

11.18
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present the views of the people of Bungokho County North in Mbale District. I held six mass consultative rallies and I was overwhelmingly told by the people of Bungokho North to come and tell this Parliament and the nation that they are not in favour of lifting the age limit. The people of Bungokho North are predominantly NRM and I was surprised that none of them came to me and said, “Go and touch Article 102(b).”

Madam Speaker, I note with concern that the two amendments regarding the removal of limitations on presidential power have all come to fit the interests of the incumbent president. That is a big concern because we are required to legislate in the national interest of our people. We have gone through all this trouble to lift the age limit because our incumbent is threatening to clock 75 years. This is very bad for our country. 

President Museveni is a dignified person. He is a respectable person by the Opposition, by NRM and all the people of Uganda. I would request that in that light, all of us who are here should grant President Museveni a dignified retirement and now is the time. Now is the time to consider showing President Museveni that when he retires, he will remain a dignified personality and a consultant –(Member timed out.)

11.21
MS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first want to make a confession that last night, I slept very well because since yesterday afternoon, we went into civilised debate. Both sides have been debating and Parliament has regained its respect. I thank both sides.

Madam Speaker, there are 54 countries in Africa and out of those, it is only Uganda, Mauritania and Djibouti that have upper age limits. Ivory Coast removed the 75-year cap on 30 October 2016. As we speak, even the other countries are debating how to remove the upper age cap. Why? It is because they have realised that democracy is not only premised on putting limitations on the upper and lower age limits. Rather, it is premised on other parameters, for instance, freedom of speech and association, which is abundant in this country – (Interjections) - but we are here talking freely. Democracy is also premised on media freedom and so on.

Therefore, the people of Bushenyi District, whom I consulted, said they are agreeable to amending this Article. What they are insisting on is that we in Government should make sure that we have got improved services. That is their point and this is what we want. Otherwise, they are agreeable.

Madam Speaker, I am a lay canon of the Church so I cannot go without quoting the Bible. The Bible tells us that everything can change. It is only the word of God that does not change. Therefore, I ask Members here to look beyond their parties –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just complete your sentence.

MS KAROORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kasibante is saying I should go to the chapel. Thank you, I will do that eventually.  As we debate this, let us remember that it is only people who have gone to be with the Lord that do not change their minds. Please, let us see what is good for the country and I implore you - If you belong to FDC, UPC or NRM, you can only tell your party which candidate you should front but you cannot come to NRM, when you belong to another party, and start saying, “You should not bring President Museveni.” It is up to the party members to decide. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.26
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that you gave us an opportunity to go and consult in our constituencies. I have nine sub-counties and I consulted all of them. I held nine rallies and in all of them, it was evident that I had two groups of people: those who were opposed and those in support of the amendment of Article 102(b). However, the biggest number supported the amendment of this Article. (Applause)

It is our duty, as Parliament, to make laws and there is no way we can run away from this responsibility. Of course, we are saying that all power belongs to the people but we should also emphasise that they must exercise this power in accordance with the Constitution.

I also support the committee’s recommendation of establishing the Constitution Review Commission. We have a number of serious issues that must be incorporated and this Commission will help us to bring all these warring parties and Uganda to a better consensus.

I am also in support of reinstating term limits. This was paramount in my constituency. The people said, it is true that President Yoweri Museveni has done great work and the only way out is to give an opportunity to those against the NRM Party - it is give and take. If we give the NRM party the amendment of Article 102(b), we should also give the Opposition the opportunity to also have term limits.

When I moved in the different constituencies, it was paramount that the issue of age should be looked at in terms of the population we have. More than 75 per cent –(Member timed out.)

11.30
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On whatever we touch, we leave finger prints. As we touch the Constitution of Uganda, we leave our identity. Life is better when you are happy but life is at its best when others are happy as a result of your deeds.

Madam Speaker, I am here with express instructions not to have any moment of delay but to strongly support the amendment of Article 102(b). My people will be very happy when we lift the presidential upper age limit.

My people told me that failure of this Parliament to remove the upper age limit will seriously offend them. For purposes of national guidance and given the rapid demographic trend in this country, and given that the democracy of Uganda is just growing, we still need elders in this country to continue guiding Uganda. Any restriction that bars any person from serving Uganda will not be supported by the people of Luuka South County.

Therefore, I would like to request honourable members in this House that we should all support this amendment and help the people of Luuka continue enjoying the current Government.

Nothing in nature lives for itself. Rivers do not drink their own water. Trees do not eat their own fruits. The sun does not shine for itself. With or without me in this Parliament, whether I benefit or not from the amendment, I would like to put it on record that I completely support the extension of the tenure of the President and the Parliament of Uganda to have enough time for the people in office to serve adequately and provide the adequate services required –(Member timed out.)

11.33
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue we are dealing with is a matter of supremacy. We are all aware that the Constitution is the supreme law of this country. It is not a will that when you buy a plot of land, you go and change your will. 

I have a general observation from the constituency that we scrutinise and understand the Constitution better. Therefore, we should do whatever is possible to amend the Constitution but we should give it a timeframe, say 20 years without any amendment.

Madam Speaker, the issue of age limits is articulated very well in the minority report when they highlighted Article 32. It is reported that there is no Ugandan below the age of 35 years and above 75 years that has ever contested. This is true. Ugandans are law abiding and this actually justifies that Article 102(b) should have been amended earlier than today.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of term limits, it was raised at Kabira sub-county, by a lay canon, that it should be reinstated to address the issue of transition that all Ugandans have been yearning for.

Lastly, on the issue of tenure, it was raised in our third rally at Kashenshero sub-county, where we had Kashenshero Town Council and Kashenshero sub-county, that people are tired of elections. After every two years, people start engaging them in meetings and consultations for elections. Actually, the recommendation from Kashenshero and Ruhinda constituency was actually 10 years. I am in total support of the majority report that the tenure should be increased.

There is a great writer, William Shakespeare, who wrote these words: Never play with the feelings of others because you may win the game but the fact is that you will surely lose the person for your life time – (Member timed out.)

11.37
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the members of the committee for this report. I would also like to thank the minority members who made a report. Looking at their report, they are not in agreement with other Articles. They are only refusing 102(b).

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to Article 21 of the Constitution. A number of Members have contributed while making reference to that Article but referring to Article 21 (3) in isolation. When one reads Article 21(4), it says: “Nothing in this Article shall prevent Parliament from enacting laws that are necessary for- 
    a) Implementing policies and programmes aimed at redressing social, economic, educational or other imbalance in society…” Members can read the remaining part.

Madam Speaker, this clause under Article 21 nullifies all that some Members have continued to refer to while quoting clause 3, which only defines the word “discrimination.” 
Madam Speaker, I would like to support the Bill moved especially to remove lower age cap because we should allow the young generation to come up and take these positions. Members may say otherwise but a number of people here yesterday said they came to Parliament when they were young - hon. Odonga Otto, who I got to know through Parliament, was mentioned and I know he has the capacity to also run this country.

Madam Speaker, this House should recommend that Government puts in place the Constitutional Review Commission to cater for other interests. Personally, I represent workers and there are so many discriminatory Articles in this Constitution. When the Constitutional Review Commission is established, we shall present our views to it. 

I, therefore, call upon Members to support the Bill as the committee has prayed. Thank you so much.

11.40
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first of all thank the committee for presenting an elaborate, well-thought out and well-researched report. I strongly support the main report. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of the age, especially the upper age limit does not in any way affect service delivery in any country. Allow me have a reflection on some distinguished personalities here in Uganda. We had the late Prof. Sebastian Kyalwazi and the late Prof. Odong who served our health sector until they retired. The Appointment Committee of Makerere University considered them on contract and they served until they passed on at the age of 87; they had very outstanding service.

Madam Speaker, one of the professors in the USA called John Bogle was consulted earlier this year by the Government to give a sense of guidance on entrepreneurship and investment. Therefore, the people who hold the belief that vitality decreases with increasing age are not only philosophical but imaginary.

I consulted my constituency and the people there instructed me to come and support this amendment. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.43
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections) - I beg to be protected from hon. Ssekikubo. 

Madam Speaker, I have come here to represent the views of the people of Kazo County about the amendment in the Constitution, which we are going to effect a few hours from now. The people of Kazo County overwhelmingly supported the amendment of Article 102(b). There were those who had been confused by my neighbour, the hon. Ssekikubo and did not know what position to take. Hon. Ssekikubo had disorganised them by telling them that amending the Constitution would be dangerous but they said it should be amended. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I have listened to the debate - my friends from the Opposition who I respect a lot, especially the Leader of the Opposition have not brought out the point of ability and willingness to serve this country. They are only looking at one person, the President of this country but not the ability and willingness to serve this country. (Applause) I think the matter should be that those who are able and willing to serve this country should come on board. Therefore, the question of looking at one individual is not right.

Those people saying that the amending of the Constitution is to enshrine a life presidency are not seeing the truth. I am a living example because when my predecessor retired, I came to Parliament. It is not because he wanted to remain as a Member of Parliament for Kazo County throughout. Therefore, if you are saying amending the Constitution is to make the President of this country stay in power for ever, please forget. The President is a Ugandan and if he chooses to represent his party in the next elections, he is very much welcome. I, therefore, bring the views of the people of Kazo County that we amend the Constitution in the next few hours. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)  

11.46
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The biggest argument on the issue of Article 102(b) is about a safety guard. Most of us here are knowledgeable in technology and when you put security in your phone - when you put a code, for example of the name Tayebwa, the application will show that it might be a weak code and so it will suggest to you to mix letters with numbers so as to get a strong code. However, if you use just a thumb print, one day when you fall asleep, your wife can sneak in, steals your thumbprint and opens your phone. Therefore, what I mean is that when I look at a safety guard, I look at what is strong.

Madam Speaker, when I consulted the people of Ruhinda North County, the issue they were clear on is that they cannot give a blank cheque and that is releasing an open Constitution; they need a safety guard. Therefore, we weighed the safety guards we have – which is the strongest? Age or term limits? We realised that President Kabila in Democratic Republic of Congo came to power when he was 29 years old. If you go by our Constitution, President Kabila can rule up to 46 years. Furthermore, the new President of Austria, has just joined power when he is 31 years.

If you scrutinise that, she can be in power up to 44 years, but if you brought term limits that President will step down in 10 years maximum. Therefore, they proposed that we do bring back term limits, but the issues of age limit do not concern them as long as we restore term limits. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to go to the issue of – some are calling it extending and enlarging our term. As for me, I believe as Parliament that we got a contract of five years with our voters and we do not have any power of varying that contract. The people of Ruhinda North sent me here - if I have a contract signed by two people, one party cannot go and extend the contract –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the next contributor. You have made your point. Okay, conclude.

MR TAYEBWA: I would like to conclude by saying that we should not sit here and lie to ourselves that we shall expand our term. If we are to propose that, let it start with 2021 as a new term, but not this term. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.50
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I would like to state that the people of Maracha East have said no to the amendment of Article 102(b). They further said that this issue is not a partisan one and concerns Uganda - we are amending the Constitution of a country that has had a history of political instability and so, Article 102(b) is the right provision to ensure a stable transition of political power. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the people of Maracha East have also told me to inform this House that lowering the age gap is not in the interest of the youths because the people who are advancing this argument have clearly stated that it is meant to ensure we address the problem of quality leaders who are scarce. That means the question of the upper age limit is meant to address the issues of quality leaders and so how will the youths compete with an incumbent who has all the resources at his disposal and who is on record for saying that the upper age limit must be removed so that Africa can address the chronic problem of quality leaders?

Furthermore, the people of Maracha also observed that age is a reality because our President is on record for saying that he works for himself, family and beliefs and he is not the servant of the people. Therefore, why should we amend the Constitution in the interest of one man? This debate is about the wishes of an individual but against the aspirations of the nation. 

On the argument that this amendment is meant to sustain peace, the people of Maracha said peace is a product of everyone’s contribution. The people of West Nile welcomed the NRA gorillas and that is why there is peace in West Nile. They could have chosen to fight and there would be no peace. 

On the question of political stability, they said Government must invest more in social services to ensure we have stability other than putting more money in arms –(Member timed out.)         

11.54
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kanyum is a county composed of different people and when I consulted them in two sub counties of Kanyum and Mukongoro - President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni had been voted for in these areas but he could not win because the area is mostly full of the opposition; the President of FDC comes from Kanyum sub county which is part of the county I represent.

Anyhow, during the consultative meeting with these people, there was a district chairperson who is an FDC member - there were over 1,000 people who told me that because of peace, development – because one of the reasons they want Parliament to amend the Constitution is that President Museveni promised to open a public university in Teso region. He also agreed to extend piped water to Kumi Municipality, which for many years never had piped water. 

These people had stayed in the camp for three years during the insurgency and so the President directed the Prime Minister to put a ferry crossing from Kumi to Katakwi which simplified their means of transport. The people I consulted unanimously told me to come and amend Article 102(b). As I speak, those people are listening to me on radios in the areas of Kanyum and Kumi. 

Madam Speaker, my people asked me a question: if the people of Uganda do not vote for Museveni, whom shall they vote for? This is because they have not seen a leader with the qualities like those of President Yoweri Museveni –(Member timed out.) 

11.58
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As all colleagues know, Nakaseke North County was core in the liberation war; both women and men, young and old fought to have the democracy, which this House and the rest of this country are enjoying today. During the liberation war - what these people fought for was unlimited democracy and so I would like to see unlimited democracy thrive in this country. 

I would like to thank the framers of the Constitution for the content in Article 1 and also the Articles that provide for the processes of amending the Constitution. 

When I hear people say, “Do not touch the Constitution” I recall that our Constitution has been amended four times since 1995. It was amended while we were moving from the Movement system to multi-party system. It was amended when we created the Office of the Leader of the Opposition, the Office of the Deputy Attorney-General and the Executive Office of the Prime Minister and it was also amended when we lifted the term limits.

Madam Speaker, I consulted the nine sub counties plus special sessions with the veterans. With exception of a few people in the towns, 99 per cent supported the amendment of Article 102 (b); they directed me to “touch” it. They did this recognising that we have got abundant human resource both in the upper age and lower age categories. The children of the veterans have come of age; they are now educated but they are not yet 35 years. Many of them want to become LC V and LC III chairpersons but Article 102 (b) limits them. 

Madam Speaker, they also told me that they are fatigued with elections. The elections are too frequent and expensive. Every after an election for two years, we have inflation and this is because of the money we release during elections, which is not backed up by production – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Finalise your statement. 

MS BBUMBA: On the term limits, their view was that it contradicts Article 1 of the Constitution, which gives powers to the people to choose how they want to be governed and who to govern them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

12.02
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent 25 districts. During the consultations, the youths of Kampala said that we should not touch the Constitution. However, the rest of the districts in the central region are in support of the amendment of Article 102 (b). 

Madam Speaker, I was challenged while I was in the greater Masaka as well as greater Luweero. The young people in those regions told me that they are always remembered and pampered by the honourable members during elections. 

The young people are the majority in this country and during elections they are mobilised, shown love and are told how important they are. However, they are so disappointed by most Members who do not care about them enough to present issues that affect the youths on the Floor of this House. This also applies to Members that are youthful. This Parliament is on record for having a good number of youthful members but when it comes to including the young people into leadership, they tend not to care about them either because they were lucky to make it to Parliament; they tend not to think about the young people, who still need the opportunities to be in leadership. 

It is not fair for the young people to always be called upon during the riots, protests and all the political conflicts yet when it comes to sharing the cake of this nation they tend not to involve them in the laws that bring them closer to the sharing of power. 

Therefore, I wish to submit that out of the 25 districts that I represent, youths from 24 districts of the central region told me to amend the Constitution; only Kampala District did not support this. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

12.05
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the amendment of Article 102 (b) of the Constitution. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the facilitation that you gave us to go out and look for the views of the people that sent us to Parliament. I had two rallies in both constituencies - Bunyole West and East in Butaleja and other meetings, which I held with other leaders.

The people of Butaleja said that their major concern is service delivery citing the tarmac road that has been promised by the President but which I am very sure will be in the budget for the next financial year. 

Secondly, my people put up a concern of the health sector. They said Government should look at it critically and find a solution for the appalling conditions.

Thirdly, the youths brought up the issue of unemployment and said that Government must look at unemployment as an effect to their performance. Once that is done, they do not have issues to do with the amendment of Article 102(b). 

Madam Speaker, everybody that has come here is quoting the Bible but it is that very Bible which says that there is no leadership that does not come from God. As I wind up, this very Constitution, in Article 259(1) allows us to amend it and so I see no reason why other Members are sacred of doing this on behalf of their voters.

Honourable members, I want to say that I am “touching” the Constitution with no gloves; so join me.

12.07
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present the views of my people of Mubende Municipality. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to go and consult our people.

However, before I give the views of my people, I would like to give two sayings. One is that a good shepherd has to smell like the flock and the other is that the voice of the people is the voice of God. Therefore, whatever I am going to say is the voice of God.

Madam Speaker, I was able to hold 11 consultation meetings and I want this to go on record. I have three divisions in my constituency. The first meeting comprised of all the councilors together with opinion leaders and they said, “No.”

I was able to conduct meetings in the following areas: Gayaza, Kangulumira, Kirungikisekende, Nabikakala, Kanfeera, Kawula, Mijumwa, Kasanja, Kyamukona and Kisujya. As leaders we have to go by the will of the people. In all the consultation meetings I held the people said, “No.” (Applause)

Madam Speaker, my jurisdiction is predominantly NRM and I urge honourable Members of Parliament - we are here because of the will of the people. It is hypocritical to deliver a massage, which is contrary to what the people you are representing hold. (Applause) One of the reasons they fronted is the consistency of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, the Constitution we are talking about –(Member timed out.)

12.11
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Katerera County in Rubirizi District. I thank you for giving us facilitation to go and consult our people. I consulted the top leaders who actually told me that they feared that I would not amend the Constitution but that since I had accepted to amend it, they were now with me; they allowed me to amend the Constitution.

I proceeded to the sub counties, one by one, and only got two people who said we should not amend the Constitution. All the others said we should amend it. 

Madam Speaker, the reason we should amend this Constitution is that I do not see myself going to vote when I cannot be voted for. This creates voter apathy, which is not allowed in most countries. For example in the USA or Britain, there is no age limit. Then why should we have it here in Uganda? Most of you people talk about going to the UK. Why don’t you tell the Queen to also resign or be voted for? She is always there but Britain has stabilised and is developing. Why don’t we emulate that example in Uganda so that we can also reach where Britain is?

Madam Speaker, most people say this matter is about President Museveni but he is not the issue here. I want to tell you by reciting the Quran, which says: “A’udhu billahi min ash shaytanir rajim, bismillah, ar-rahman, ar-rahim, in li zat lilahi jamih” - all leadership is from God. 

If God has decided that President Museveni is going to be the leader of this country up the end, it will be and none will stop it. I, therefore, implore my colleagues like the hon. Robert Ssentamu to come and we amend Article 102(b).

Honourable members, it is not a joking subject. The donors who give you some little money deceive you. I would like to assure you that this is Uganda and Uganda is not going anywhere. Uganda is ours and we shall stay in Uganda forever and ever more. Thank you. 

12.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to be on record on the issue of amending Article 102(b). In the first place, I want to thank you so much for the way you steered this House with the wisdom that you read from the Bible deriving it from the wisdom of King Solomon.

Madam Speaker, I want to first give the views of the people of Koboko Municipality. I moved in the three divisions of Koboko Municipality and in all the villages - 99 per cent of the people told me to not only amend the Constitution but to repeal Article 102(b) out of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, I want to declare my personal view that I am going to amend the Constitution and I am very happy that you are seated on that chair ready to give us the opportunity to amend the Constitution.

Let me give the reasons as to why I want us to amend the Constitution. Someone cannot say that a person should not offer himself or herself for the position of president at the age of 75 when at the same time you say that those who are 75 years above can go and cast the vote for someone of less than 75 years.

The people of Koboko Municipality stated clearly that they cannot imagine themselves going to 2021 elections without seeing the name Yoweri Museveni on the ballot. They want to see his name and they will vote for him again not because of anything else but partly because it is him who brought us from exile. We ran to Congo, South Sudan - we did not have infrastructure; we did not have a single road in Koboko. Now one can drive from Kampala to Oraba on a tarmac road. We are enjoying peace and stability in northern Uganda and it is because of the efforts of President Museveni. We cannot bring a technicality and knock him out of the race because he is above 75 years. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that I support the amendment of Article 102(b), not because of financial issues. I have been hearing people in the Opposition saying that we are doing this because we have been given Shs 40 million, Shs 400 million and at one time they said Shs 800 million. However, I want to state it clearly that all the brains here are doing this out of conviction not because of money. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we love our President and want to make it very clear that even Odonga Otto is going to support Article 102(b) – (Laughter) - let us clap for him. 

I also want – (Member timed out.)

12.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Bulamogi North West in Kaliro District. I am honoured to be here with little intervention and no disturbances. I would like to report to you that on your instructions, we moved to the constituencies. I conducted 12 consultative meetings. These meetings were of about 10,000 people. They gave me views and it is these views that I would like to extrapolate and relay to this House.

The people of Bulamogi said: “The Constitution is not static. It is not cast in cement and metal. It must change with the circumstances of the day. Therefore, you are under instructions to go and amend the Constitution.”

Madam Speaker, the framers of this Constitution made it two-and-half decades ago and they were cognisant of the fact that less than 50 per cent of the population then comprised of the youths and the life expectancy then, was about 45 or 43 years. I would like to drive you through a mathematical formula. 
At a life expectancy of 43 years, the framers of the Constitution put the age limit at 75 – that was over 30 years ahead. The life expectancy now is about 70. Therefore, logically, you must reason that at 70, you add 30 and so why not amend this Constitution.

Secondly, there is also a belief that we are in politics. Politics brings in people. We have a multiparty dispensation. You have parties going around. We have our own party and you have your own parties. Go and think and choose, we also think and choose and we come and compete. Give us the freedom on who to choose. There is no age in politics; it is free racing. Why do you limit people? Therefore, we are suggesting that the people must be given an opportunity to choose who they would like to lead them.

Ladies and gentlemen –(Member timed out.)

12.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking you. I also thank the chairperson and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report presented. I went to consult my people following your facilitation to us all, Madam Speaker. 

However, before I give the views of my people, I would like to observe that the framers of the 1995 Constitution envisaged a situation where we would actually need to amend that Constitution. What has happened is that since the promulgation of the Constitution, we have had inconsistencies in it – see Articles 1 and 104(7) and many others. That is why we have Chapter 18 that talks about amendments of the Constitution. The purpose is to cure some of these inconsistencies.

Madam Speaker, Article 102 actually discriminates against some people. Much as we say it is not mentioned in Article 21, it discriminates because we actually have people that have been locked out of leadership, governance or participation in the governance of this country because of age. I know the focus has been on the upper age limit but we are also saying that many of our young people contribute to the economy of this country yet at below 35 they do not participate in leadership - we need to have Article 102(b) amended in order to cure some of these inconsistencies.

I consulted people from 11 sub counties of Bungokho South and they said, “We do observe the inconsistencies and we want every citizen of this country to freely participate in the governance of this country, as long as he or she is above 18 years and there should be no capping of the upper age limit.”

Therefore – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your sentence.

MR WERIKHE: They told me to come here and enthusiastically support the repealing of Article 102(b). They said there should be no age limit in our Constitution. That is what I got from my people. Thank you.

12.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Achieng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. However, before I make my comments on the issue at hand, allow me to make a statement regarding what has been circulating on social media. 

I am not married to Gideon Onyango. I am not his wife and neither am I cohabiting with him nor having any relationship with him. Therefore, the allegation that I have been arrested for stealing a child that he fathered with a prostitute is totally false - (Laughter) - (Interjections)-  Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, your application will be considered in 2018. (Laughter)

Allow me to move to the issue at hand. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because Parliament facilitated us to move to our constituencies to consult. However, I want to say that the issue of equity was not considered.

I come from a district that has 21 sub-counties. People with two sub-counties were given the same amount of money as those with larger areas. I hope in future, when facilitating Members of Parliament, this will be looked into. Of course, I had a bit of a challenge on how to consult. 

However, when I finally consulted, the people were of the view that we should have a referendum on this matter. However, after explaining, one man from FDC made a very important statement that swayed everybody. This gentleman said that his president is about to be caught up by this age limit and he was looking at Dr Kizza Besigye leading this country –(Interjections)– that is what this young man said. Please, I am reporting views from my constituency and he said that because of that, I should come here and support the amendment of the Constitution and that swayed the views of everybody. 

Madam Speaker, the people however said we should restore term limits. I am glad that this is clearly contained in the report of the committee.  Allow me to mention –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You can conclude. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, regarding the extension of the term of this Parliament, we should be mindful that we have laws in this country. We have the Leadership Code (Amendment) Act, 2016 that guides us. Therefore, it is not proper for leaders to sit in this Parliament and come up with an amendment that is going to benefit us as individuals. That will be contrary to Section 12 (a) of the Leadership Code (Amendment) Act, 2016. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to submit that Ugandans should use their votes to elect leaders they so wish to elect. Let us use the votes and let us know that age limit is already written for each one of us in heaven. At some point, we shall leave this earth. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, let me congratulate you. I would like to appreciate the manner in which you have managed to steer this House for the last few days.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving us opportunity to go to our constituencies and consult on hon. Magyezi’s proposal to amend Article 102(b). I took the opportunity of traversing my constituency and consulted my people. I also got the opportunity to explain to them.

Having consulted in my four sub-counties - every man, woman and child who came into my meetings, I can say irrefutably and clearly gave me clear instructions to support the amendment of Article 102(b) without fear or favour. They told me not only to amend it but also to squeeze Article 102(b) out of the Constitution.
Madam Speaker, I am here to make it very clear that my people support the amendment of Article 102(b). That is on record and there is no doubt about it.

Yesterday, I was a bit surprised - Kitgum District has four Members of Parliament. I come from Chua East County and my colleague, hon. Okin comes from Chua West County. There is also the woman Member of Parliament hon. Margaret Lamwaka and my good colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar from the municipality. When my colleague, hon. Okin talked on behalf of the people of Kitgum District because last time I checked on record, the only person who could have talked for the people of Kitgum District should have been hon. Margaret Lamwaka, the woman Member of Parliament and not hon. Okin. He can only talk for his constituency, which is Chua West County and not for the whole of Kitgum.

I come from Chua East County and we made it very clear that we amend the Constitution; we differ from hon. Okin’s position. The people of my constituency are satisfied with the situation – they have a tarmac road that was never there since Independence. They have electricity at every single sub-county in Kitgum District; there is peace and security - the Karimojong no longer disturb us. Every year 30 to 40 students from my constituency go abroad to study on scholarships of different forms.

Madam Speaker, in Chua East County, we are satisfied with the status quo. But let us - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Conclude your statement.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I would like to address the issue of secession. I have lived and grown up in the corridor of power since I was young. This issue of secession of the North is an illusion; it is a mirage, a figment of somebody’s imagination. No one in the north will secede from this country. On Monday, we will be here doing business as usual. Nobody should secede. 

We are happy with this Government and the leadership. The north, east, west and south will not secede. Uganda will remain one country tomorrow and it will remain one country for the future. There is no doubt about it. So, I can talk confidently here that the north will not secede under any circumstances. We should not be threatened; we should not fear; and no amount of threats will make us change our position on Article 102(b). To talk about secession – (Member timed out.)

12.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you, for the opportunity. In 1995, when the Constituent Assembly legislated, they knew that times would change and indeed the Uganda of 1995 is different from the Uganda of today. 

The life expectancy has changed from 43 to 68 years. The revenue collection, which was Shs 5.6 billion, has changed to now Shs 15 trillion. There are a number of consistencies – they knew that things would change and these inconsistencies could be determined at a later time.

I want to quote two inconsistencies in this Constitution, which form the basis for amendment. The first concerns the lower age which hon. Magyezi has suggested to amend in electing LC III and LC V chairpersons. The Prime Minister of Austria - Austria is the 14th richest nation in the world and has a GDP of Shs 386 billion - is just 31 years. Our Constitution says that hon. Adeke here who has really made a contribution to this House, cannot be a chairperson of Ngora Sub County with a budget of US $300,000. Is it really fair?

Madam Speaker, the Member from Soroti quoted and hon. Elijah quoted the Bible. Also, allow me to quote the Bible; it is just to everybody. Job 12:12 says “Wisdom belongs to the aged and understanding to the old. That is a word of God. (Applause) 

Earlier on here, hon. Ssekikubo made a point that people like Mandela made a contribution but when did Mandela become a President? He became President at the age of 76 years. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, let us look at this Constitution critically. Our Constitution says even if you are now 74 years, 11 months and 29 days, you are ineligible to contest for leadership. What kind of pointlessness is this? The point we are making here is that we are not amending the Constitution for the sake of amendment it but to correct the inconsistencies in it. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Ndorwa County West and Kabale - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I am adding you one minute but you will give us more money. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the people of Kabale have no problem with Parliament amending the Constitution. In fact, they said the Constitution has no thorns; it can be touched. I thank you and ask my colleagues to support this amendment.

12.38
MR SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking you for the facilitation that was given to us to carry out the consultation. However, I also would like to join my colleague, hon. Sarah Opendi, in raising the issue of equity in the distribution of this money. This money made some of us very irrelevant in our constituencies. Although we did the consultations, we were not able to reach out to all the people we were supposed to. So, I would like to request that next time we are going for such kind consultation, you give us the guidelines because at the time we were on ground, many people did what they thought and deemed right for them to come back to this House in the next Parliament.

Madam Speaker, during consultations, some people met only their agents. Other people consulted only the party structures yet the law we are making is meant for the country and not for the party or agents. 
I happened to carry out public rallies and the majority of my people in Amuria said we should not amend Article 102. (Applause) Madam Speaker, until last night, I was receiving calls from the people of Amuria saying the Constitution of Uganda that we are talking about was made when the NRM was in power. They said the age cap was put in the Constitution at that time to keep off some leaders from contesting. Now, we forgot that one day, what goes around always comes around. (Applause) This time, we have reached the age of retirement and I think they should give opportunity for other people like me who can now contest for presidency. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the people of Amuria, including the youths said they are not looking at the position of leadership. They are looking at employment and what we should be discussing here is how we can address the issue of unemployment affecting our country.

For that reason, I stand here to represent the people of Amuria and not the party. I will not support the amendment of the Constitution. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

12.42
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): I salute God for bringing us this far. I salute you, Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda and all of you, Members for getting to this stage. I wish you all peace, obusingye, emirembe, kuc, ailajara, ekisil, comfort and enjoyment for the future.

God designed every human being with deliberate purpose to move forward: the ears, eyes, nose, mouth, breasts, hands, feet and all the other important parts are facing forward. Madam Speaker, when you asked us to consult the UPDF caucus, which is a constituency for the whole country, went around the whole country. We divided ourselves and we were supported by our commandants in the units and we reached almost every district.

Our main concern was to ensure – and that after our important meeting of the high command and defence council where we discussed the destiny of Uganda and Africa – and to give everyone confidence that they were free with whichever side they were on to discuss this matter as they wanted to allow a democratic process to take place.

Four main points summarise our observations and they are democracy, unity, security and the independence of Uganda. These happen to be the four original first principles of the ten-point programme. Along the course, democracy and all of them are catered for in the Constitution. 

We observed that most of the people actually had been intimidated and threatened because of the two words “togikwatako” and “kogikwatako.” However, we assured them that they had the freedom given by the Constitution - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the General to conclude.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Using the one minute, I would like to say there is no Constitution, law nor motion that cannot be amended. Life changes and therefore, we must change with times.

Secondly, if you touch security, which is being talked about here, it affects everybody. It does not know your party or religion. A cell does not know your age or qualification. If security is affected, it affects all of us. However, I would like to say there are many peace loving Ugandans; young and old - the security forces are trained, prepared, willing, able and ready to defend the peace of Uganda. Let no one threaten it. I thank you.

12.46
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here as Member of Parliament for Kabale Municipality to present the views of the people in that constituency. 

Yesterday, I was in the august House and some Members from my region said Kigezi spoke and it spoke in unity. They could have spoken in unity without fighting, but they might have not talked the language regarding what we are doing now. 

I would like to say that even my neighbour, the hon. David Bahati has said that the whole of Kabale have said yes - that is not true. I did consult my people and went on radio, called RDC to be with me on radio to promote peace, unity and tranquillity such that we are together in this consultation. 

I even asked them to have consultations where we were supposed to be tolerant to divergent views from different personalities. I even consulted the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who is my voter. I consulted in the following ways: I consulted the opinions and political leaders of Kabale Municipality and the people in general. Over 90 per cent of the people I consulted said, “Do not amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda” Only a few people said we can amend it.

There were a few people who came up and said, “Honourable, you very well know that the party that is in power, has a bus as their symbol” to which I responded in the affirmative. They went on to say that the bus moves with two brakes; there are the hand brakes and a footbrake. That was an old man asking me these questions. He went on to say that the first brake was the term limits and said, “You are now saying that you also want to remove the footbrake and you say oh my God! For God and my country, God help us and let this bus stop at any one time?” He continued that some of the people who left the party had gone with the lights and that is why they use symbols of lanterns when they are going for elections.

Madam Speaker, the people of Kabale Municipality have - I would like to conclude by citing a quote from a very a famous man, Mahatma Gandhi, which I received on my iPad yesterday and it says, “Many people, especially ignorant people want to punish you for speaking the truth, for being correct and being you. Never apologise for being correct or being years ahead of your time. If you are right and you know it, speak your mind; even if you are a minority of one, the truth is still the truth.” Thank you.

12.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I consulted my people of Kilak South, Amuru District and they clearly told me that I must not amend Article 102(b) in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the authors of the minority report - we are not few; we are very many. In this world one needs to stand for the truth even if they are alone. I would like to thank our colleagues from the NRM side who are bold; they are coming up clearly and presenting the views of their people; I appreciate you.

Madam Speaker, this is the time we need to tell the truth to the nation. If we cannot share the Constitution of this country, we shall share the border coast. The idea of seceding is not a myth. If some people think that they have numbers and keep on sitting on a few individuals, I think the time is coming for us to form our own nation and it is very important. In the past, a few individuals came out with a proposal, but we did not have a strong reason to do it. This time we have a very strong reason and I would like to quote what His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni said in 1980. 

When he was campaigning in Jinja, he said that anyone who tampers with the Constitution would cause him to go to the Bush and he did it. This time if you tamper with the Constitution, we are going to divide the country. We shall not allow staying in a country where the majority keep sitting on the minority. This is the time we need to tell the truth. I would like to say that our colleagues from NRM do not love His Excellency, Yoweri Museveni Kaguta. If they loved him, they would tell him the truth to just retire come 2021 because we need to learn from what is happening in other countries. Have you not learnt from what has just happened in Zimbabwe? Would you like His Excellency to end like Gaddafi of Libya? Do you want him to end – (Member timed out.)                        

12.54
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to also contribute to this debate and share the voices of the people of Tororo County North who I represent

When I went for the consultations - I think I was among the very few members of Parliament who were highly intimidated while on the ground - I found my opponent had mobilised seriously but thank God because at the end of the day, God took control of the situation and this is the report I am going to give to the House.

Madam Speaker, despite the fact that my consultation was highly charged, people were able to reason. They looked at the pros and cons because I gave them the opportunity to debate. At the end of the debate my voters said: “Hon. Nyakecho, we know that precedent has already been set. It is only Uganda that has age limit. Kenya, Tanzania, most of the countries in East Africa, Africa and the rest of the world over do not have age limit; what they have are term limits.” Therefore, I would like to stand firm on this ground and support the position of the committee to reinstate term limits.

I would further like to say that we need to listen to the views of our people. No level of intimidation will stop us from giving the views of our people. My people said, “Please go and amend the Constitution.” Of course we had to put it to a vote but majority took the day. 

However, Madam Speaker, I consulted over 6,000 people in three sub counties and the turn up was overwhelming –(Interjections)– hon. Ssekikubo, I wish you had come along with me, you would have witnessed this.

THE SPEAKER: Do not listen to hecklers. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, finally I would want to say that the current status quo is not so favourable. Yesterday, somebody here commented about the current legal regime – (Member timed out.) 

12.58
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this great opportunity granted to me. First of all, I wish to thank you for the care and love you showed me during the condition I have been in and what I am still experiencing. That is why I am here and able to deliberate and represent the people of Mityana Municipality so well. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I have been in Rubaga Hospital and there are so many people that managed to check on me, when I was able to understand each and every one but despite all that I was able to consult my people. There were so many people that visited me but they all told me to continue with the struggle of protecting the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, my colleagues have talked about age and some have even said that age has wisdom. However, I find that insulting. Being a youth, it is as if these people think that probably I do not have the wisdom. Are you forgetting that it is only God that provides wisdom? 

It is just so correct that when someone grows old, that person cannot reason enough. That is why there is a retirement age. 

Some of my colleagues have said that Article 102(b) is being discriminative. It is as if they are telling us that age can be discriminatory. That is very wrong because there are cases of people who want to get married when they are below the age of 18 years. The people of Mityana told me that they will not allow anything that favours the President of this country because they are suffering –(Member timed out.) 

1.01
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to begin with the words of an inspirational preacher called Ishmael Moore Ayivor who said, “If I am to choose between sleeping and being part of a leadership that pursues falsehood agenda, I would choose sleeping.” Stressing a falsehood agenda by a leadership sect is what Nelson Mandela called “A long walk to freedom.”

I regret to note that history has not helped some of us here to understand that as Members of Parliament, we are duty bound to save Uganda from going back to turmoil. 

The political and constitutional instabilities talked about in the preamble of our Constitution should be very clear to all of us. Politicians manipulated not only Parliaments of the day but also courts of law and the results was the history that all of us do not want repeated. 

Madam Speaker, some of us that come from Buganda have been guided and reminded by the Katikiro, Owekitibwa Charles Peter Mayiga that, the turmoil that resulted out of the instability referred to in the preamble of the Uganda Constitution cost Buganda about 1,000,000 lives. We are duty-bound, as representatives of Buganda, not to be party to any kind of manipulations that might put this country back into that turmoil. 

Madam Speaker, even debating ability or inability of a person at old age is pretence. There is a health specialist, Dr Jacinto Mammuto, who wrote a very wonderful research on old age and this is what it is; it is entitled, “Consequences of aging: the scientific angle.” The cognitive dysfunction of a man doubles at every five years after the age of 60. At the age of 80, one is affected with impaired thinking, perceptual disturbance, very poor abstraction, mental flexibility, planning and judgement and he calls this, “Impaired executive function.” 

Madam Speaker, the constituency I represent is a home to very senior officials of this Government, including the Vice President and this is what they sent me to say. (Laughter)
 
One, that instead of expanding the current tenure of office, it should be subjected to early elections to enable them dispose of some of the leaders they think have become a liability to this nation. 
Two, that before we think of any changes –(Member timed out.)

1.05
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, we are summoned to the most noble duties as Members of Parliament. The two most cardinal duties are representation and legislation. It cannot be heavier on our shoulders than it is today. 

Madam Speaker, I have heard a consistent line of argument that elections are enough to guarantee free and fair transition and peaceful transfer of power. I am here to recall the debate that took place both in the House of Representatives of America and the Senate because they never had limitations of terms. Actually, the very fear that the Americans represented are the very fears we are grappling with in this Parliament. They feared that if an individual stayed long enough in power, that individual can gain so much redress that he will control Parliaments; that he will have leverage over his political parties; that he will take charge of the treasury and the security apparatuses; and he will be the Alpha and the Omega and the law of the country and to avoid that they put limitations. 

There is a concept called the known-known; you cannot run away from it. A known reality is that President Museveni will not be eligible to stand in 2021, if the current Constitution is not amended. Those who are saying that there is a moral question on the extension of the term of Parliament, why isn’t there a moral question on extending and giving life presidency?

We say, Members of Parliament are immoral but the President is okay to sit with the caucus and give his merits and you find no moral question there.

Madam Speaker, I come from a rural constituency, which has the vice chairperson of NRM. President Museveni has never lost in that constituency and the people of Butambala have always voted NRM. I am the only Opposition representative from that area but the people of Butambala unanimously said enough is enough. Not driven by hatred or fear. They are simply saying that for all, they have not seen is peaceful transfer of power from an individual to another and that is what they want to see.

This Parliament is engaging in a very high-risk game. (Member timed out.)

1.08
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I stand here not only to pursue the dreams of our people but to proclaim the voices of the people of Maracha who think what this Bill seeks to achieve is to impose life presidency on them. The people I represent think this is a Bill, which will go down in our history as the most immoral, irrational, one bent on entrenching a clan rule in this country. So far too long, Ugandans have been used as a ladder for other people to climb to their destiny and the people of Maracha have come to realise this.

Madam Speaker, we had a man called Idi Amin who declared himself a life president and the result was war. We have people who have connived, they have hatched a plan to rule Uganda for several years and they think they must use other people to legitimatise this process. We are saying, “no.” We recognise that a man with bread in his mouth will never acknowledge famine. Whatever we are doing now, will neither give a blank cheque or usher lasting peace but will destroy this country forever.

However, we the people of West Nile, we the people of Maracha think we will make the right choice. I know everybody is in a dilemma like the Israelites were when they complained to Joshua on what they had to do and he asked them, “What do you want me to do? As for me and my family, we have chosen to serve the Lord.”
My colleagues, today you must be clear on who you want to serve. Do you want to serve the life presidency of an individual or the people of Uganda? The loin has been tied, you will untie it through your vote today and the world is watching.

We all held the Bible to proclaim that we would defend the Republic of Uganda and the Constitution. God never lies. You will call the wrath of God upon yourself today by voting yes or you stand with the people. 

Finally, I would like to say that this has been the most expensive regime to maintain, they have thrived on the blood of everybody and if you think that you want them to continue to impoverish others to make themselves rich and make Ugandans slaves in their own country, we are walking out of Uganda. Thank you.

1.12
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the views of the people of Bukoto East. This is a constituency with three sub-counties and 17 parishes. 

Madam Speaker, when you sent us to go and consult, I consulted from each corner of my constituency. In fact, to access some villages in Kanwa Parish, I have to go through Bukoto Central. So, I also consulted from the people of Bukoto Central. This is the voice of the people of Bukoto East. I thank you for giving us an opportunity to go and consult. However, what was lacking was the way to come back and account for these consultations because people are not laying evidence from the consultations they made.

The people of Bukoto East said that we should not amend Article 102(b). They also went ahead to say that even Article 26 of the Constitution should remain untouched. Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is the responsibility of Government to bring comprehensive amendments of all we want to see in the Constitution, discuss it and the people of Uganda make their pronouncements through a Constitutional Review Commission.

Madam Speaker, I was surprised yesterday when the MP for Lwengo, hon. Mbabali came here to deceive Ugandans that the people of Lwengo accepted, yet we witnessed –(Interjections)- I was there and I witnessed him being chased with stones that he should not amend. You have misrepresented the people of Masaka, Lwengo, Bukoto South.

Madam Speaker, even the people of Bukoto Central- (Member time out.)

1.16
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I come here to object to the majority report and support the minority report. I also thank you for facilitating us to go to our constituencies to consult. I consulted. In the six sub countries in Busongora South, the people told me that I should come and stand with them and say, “No amending the Constitution.”

Madam Speaker, I want to mention that this is a very serious matter that we need to debate with reason because it determines the destiny and future of this country. If we mishandle this amendment, this county may go back into turmoil that we may not easily handle. 

I am one of those people who believe in the security of this country. However, from the debate which is going on, I have realised that people just speak about security but do not mind about the causes of insecurity. President Museveni has told us before in his book, “Sowing the Mustard Seed” that one of the causes of conflict and insecurity which manifested before was overstaying in power. The people he talked about were President Milton Obote who did not spend the two terms and the other one was Amin who only spent nine years. 

He has been in power for 32 – and they are going to be 35 – and he needs more and he thinks he is not delaying in power. If we all think as he thinks, then this country is about to go into trouble. I will stand with the majority of the people of Uganda who say that this amendment must not go through and I am going to vote “No.” 

I also object to the proposal that the term of Members of Parliament should be extended. I have a contract for five years. As a person with a legal background, once you have entered into a contract with another person, unless the two of you agree to amend, one person cannot amend it. Therefore, I will not support that. I also call upon my colleagues who are seated on the other side that are proposing that we should amend to change your minds. This is the time to decide for Uganda. I thank you.

1.19
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I first want to put all those who tortured us on notice that when the regime changes we shall get you. Therefore, all those Special Forces Command (SFCs) who entered Parliament; we have your pictures and names. You can hide under the regime but we shall get you. It is a matter of time.

My first point is for those who think age is discriminatory, why can’t you have Gen. Moses Ali being the presidential candidate? You can see how they are struggling to keep alive. (Laughter) Why we put age limit in the Constitution is that when you grow old and your body gives way, you should give room to others who are young to come on board. 

NRM MPs, I am cautioning you. You think you are doing a good thing and that is why you hurried to ask Government to give all of you police protection. If you were doing a good thing, why did you ask for police from the NRM Caucus? (Interjections) If it is a popular idea, why would you ask for police?

Madam Speaker, I have been here for four terms and we are about seven who have been here for that number of terms. I want to assure you, NRM MPs that you are committing treason. You are not representing the views of your people due to personal reasons. You have a right to do that but I want to assure you that anyone over 75 years is not productive to Uganda.

I have a minister who fired his driver – I do not want to mention his name. The driver is 27 years old. Two weeks later, he had a separation with the wife and the wife went straight to settle in the same house with the driver, which means the young driver was assisting the minister with marital responsibilities. (Laughter)

We should not be intimidated. Article 260 of the Constitution says Ugandans can hold a referendum on anything. We are going to ask for a referendum at an appropriate time so that we vote whether we should be in Uganda or not. We shall send our ambassador to Uganda and we shall raise another flag without shame because we have tried these people since 1987 and it looks like we cannot manage now. 

Therefore, we rather concede and raise another flag on the other side of the Nile. We shall ask for a formal referendum the same way it was held for the lost counties of Buyaga and Bugangaizi so that we decide whether we continue to be part of Uganda. We shall ask for a referendum at an appropriate time.

On the issue of seven years, I personally have no problem. My people love me very much. They do not even mind me being here for more than seven years. They even want to vote for me now. However, their problem is that people like hon. Magyezi and hon. Anite should not be in this House for more than seven years. (Laughter)

In conclusion, these NRM people sold Nytil, Uganda Railways, Unions, they closed Kilembe Mines, they sold Nsambya Police Barracks land, they sold Shimoni Land, they sold CMI land, they closed Lint Marketing and Coffee Marketing boards. Now, you old people, what do you want to leave for Uganda? You are selling everything. 

The people of Aruu said “no” but other than that we shall cross to other constituencies to make sure those who said “yes” do not come back to this House. Thank you very much.

1.24
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important debate. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report they have presented. I represent all the people of Koboko District and I am the right person to give the true picture of what people of Koboko want. 

I carried out extensive consultations in all the six sub-counties and the municipality. I would like to inform you that it was the most peaceful consultation where people debated freely, including even the Opposition. I said what I want is the true views of our people and at the end of the day, we voted. 

About 10 per cent of the people did not support the removal of the age limit and they told me to represent their views even if they are few. I must inform Parliament that 90 per cent support the removal of the age limit. They said it is good we have removed the lower and upper age limits. 

Actually in the last election, we lost a person who could represent us very well as chairman LC III but because he was 29 years old, he was disqualified. Therefore, people said, “Let us remove this block so that our young people who are capable can stand and be elected at LC III, LC V levels and even as president.” 

When it comes to the upper limit, they asked, “What are your reasons for removing the age limit?” Without fear, they said the old people have the wisdom and the understanding and they can lead the country because they are strong. They specifically mentioned His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who has been leading us for the last 30 years. (Member timed out.)

1.27
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 1995, people debated this Article. I would like to quote Lt Col Kiiza Besigye, NRA Delegate; “Mr Chairman, first of all, maybe I should mention that I was supporting the minority report. We have said that power belongs to the people. We can only act on their behalf when they are not around. We can act and to that extent, we can represent them and take the decision. Therefore, I think it will be unfair of us having taken the fundamental decision that this will be a direct one man to one man decision of the people of Uganda to now limit them as if they cannot take a decision themselves at that stage. We should respect the sovereignty of Uganda and I do not think we should engage in putting age limit here.” I agree with him – (Interjections) – Dr Kiiza Besigye, 1995 Hansard of the delegates.

I can repeat it. He concluded “We should respect the sovereignty of Uganda and I do not think we should engage in putting age limit here. I support the deletion.” That was Dr Besigye. 
I have consulted the people of Oyam South that I represent. I did open consultations and I am glad that I was live on NTV with my consultation. My people have said I should come and amend. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, when there was a presidential election in the USA, I supported Hillary Clinton and my husband supported Bernie Sanders. At the time, Bernie Sanders was 74 old and Hillary Clinton was 59. The argument which I agreed to at that time - and many young people supported Bernie Sanders – for most of you who watched the primaries of the Democratic Party – the oldest person was  Bernie Sanders - (Member timed out.)

1.31
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I managed to carryout consultations in seven sub-counties out of 12 because circumstances beyond my control forced me to abandon some of the consultations.

Madam Speaker, some sub-counties said “No” and others said “Yes” to the constitutional amendment. The sub-counties of Majiya, Budondo, Buwenge, Buyengo, Busedde, voted “No.” Meanwhile the sub-counties of Butagaya, Buwenge voted “Yes.” The reasons advanced for not amending the Constitution mainly concern poor service delivery.

The road through Budondo to Mbulamuti - I was told that it was there when Amin was in power. The President has pledged to work on that road for a very long time. The people of Budondo are fed up of dust. There is a road from Mayuge-Busedde–Buyengo through Namagera - that road has taken many lives. Therefore, these people said “No.”

Youth employment – we have very many universities in this country that produce graduates but these youths are not employed. For that reason, they said “No” to the constitutional amendment. 

The health sector is in a poor state. We have health facilities in Jinja. About 16 villages were visited recently by the National Forestry Authority including eight villages in Busedde Sub-county and nine in Butagaya sub-county but they are not even allowed to harvest their crops. This is an issue which was of a great contention.

Madam Speaker, the elderly in Jinja do not benefit from the Social Assistance Grant to the Elderly (SAGE) Programme.  Most of them said they are retired and agreed to fit this side. However, if you do not give them some money, then the Constitution will not be amended.

We have the groups in Jinja District. This concerns two sub-counties of Busedde and Buyengo. Some promises were made recently. It was either made to the wrong people or majority of the people were not paid. Because the promises were not fulfilled, most of them said “No.”

Jinja is known for sugarcane growing. The time I went for consultation, the price per tonne had gone down which has resulted into reduction of cash inflows, making them say “No” to the constitutional amendment. Madhvani had also laid off quite a number of people and this - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 124 Members have contributed and the next stage requires seven hours. I now put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The SPEKAER: Honourable members, I suspend the House for 30 minutes to allow the Clerk to arrange for the second phase.

(On resumption at 2.10 p.m., the Speaker Presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is called to order. We are dealing with the proposals of amendment of the Constitution and under Article 262 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda: “Amendments by Parliament. A Bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any provision of the Constitution, other than those referred to in Articles 260 and 261 of the Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is supported at the second and third reading by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.”

Currently, the total number of Members of Parliament is 452 because we are short of the person who will come in from Ruhama. The number of Members of Parliament is 451. The 17 ex-officio Members of Parliament have no voting rights. Therefore, the number of Members of Parliament with voting rights is 434. 

In accordance with Article 262, if the motion for the Second Reading is to be carried, it has to be supported by the votes of not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament. This means two thirds of 434 Members is 289.3 but because we do not have 0.3, we are rounding it up to 289. 

Article 81(1) provides that “Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of this House shall be determined by majority of votes of Members present and voting in a manner prescribed by Rules of Procedure made by Parliament under Article 94 of the Constitution.”

Rules 98(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure guides on the types of voting that shall be used to vote on a motion for Second and Third Reading of the Bill amending the Constitution. Rule 98 provides as follows: “Roll call and tally voting shall be held in the following circumstances-

    (a) At the second and third reading of the Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend a provision of the Constitution.”

Therefore, the voting method for dealing with this motion is clearly stipulated as roll call and tally. In order to effect the provisions of rule 98 of the Rules of Procedure, I wish to provide the following guidance: 

For purposes of voting, three tally desks shall be provided; one for the aye votes, another for the noes and the third one is for the abstentions.

The Clerk will tally votes of Members and report to the Speaker. Three clerks will be assigned to record and tally votes for the ayes, noes and abstentions respectively.

To guarantee transparency and avoid disputes over the results, I invite the Government Chief Whip to designate an observer and I invite the Opposition Whip to designate an observer and I invite the Independent Co-ordinator to designate someone to observe the recording and tallying of results.

The prescribed place for the recording and tallying of the votes should be the bar, the place at the main entrance inside the entry and exit door of the Speaker. The Speaker will announce the commencement of voting and the Clerk will read out the names of Members in alphabetical order. 

A member whose name has been read will stand and speak out their votes. The Speaker will announce the end of voting after all Members present have voted. 

Tallying of votes should be done and results submitted to the Speaker who will announce the results. That is the process we are going to follow.

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: There is someone on the Floor. Please sit down.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, there are two Members of this House who are non-voters. They are the Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli District and the Member of Parliament for Omoro County. They do not form part of the college. Therefore, we have 19 non-voters in the House. I wanted the record to capture that because the total will be different.


THE SPEAKER: No, it is common knowledge the Speaker does not have a vote in this House. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, Madam Speaker and that is why I am calling them non-voters. We have two categories; the 17 ex-officio and the two Members of Parliament who are not going to take part in voting. Therefore, they are not part of the college which is going to vote.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Speaker does not vote. There is nothing to discuss.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to differ from the view of hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Government Chief Whip. Indeed, the Speaker only has choice as to whether not to vote or to vote. In other countries, the Speaker is a voting Member of Parliament. That is why you only decide as an umpire as to whether to vote or not vote but you remain with your casting vote. It is just like the chairperson of a committee. Therefore, she is part of the quorum.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Speaker does not vote. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas you have read the procedure and guidance on how we are going to carry out the voting, I am here as a representative of the people of Ngora and we have been discussing a sensitivie matter to the country.

I am here plus my other colleagues from the same district and I am sure there are also other districts. My people are on pressure to hear me speak their voice on this podium. Are we proceeding well to go and vote when we have not spoken on behalf of the people of Ngora?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amongin, take your seat.

2.19
MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I stand here in pain because this country spent colossal sums of money to facilitate Members of Parliament in their individual capacities but not as groups. You understand that even group consultations were denied. It will be unfortunate that people who swore individually want to be treated in groups.

Our people want to hear us deliver their views individually. It is also unfortunate that the whole Leader of Opposition is denied the opportunity to give the views of the Ugandans she has sworn to lead. 

It is unfortunate that as we come here to debate, two of the honourable members of this House have been arrested as they came to cast their vote. Would we be proceeding very well, Madam Speaker that –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, last week on Thursday, you declared that we were going to take three days to deal with this Bill. You gave us Monday and Tuesday and the Leader of the Opposition failed to prevail over her group and we ended up spending valuable time, which we should have used to debate the report. Is she in order now to claim that they are supposed to debate yet, they spent a lot of time dilly-dallying and now, they are crying more than the bereaved? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to ask Members not to abuse my friendship and generosity. Honourable members, we wasted the whole of Monday under the command of the Leader of the Opposition. That is the time we had planned to give more Members time. He who comes under the law comes with clean hands. Your hands are not clean. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, I would like to remind the Members of the Opposition about the National Assembly Parliament Powers and Privileges Act. Section 4 reads, “No process issued by any court in Uganda in the exercise of civil jurisdiction shall be served or executed within the process of Parliament while Parliament is sitting or through the Speaker, Clerk or any other office of Parliament.” Those members were attempting to insult Parliament in session. 

(Members rose_)Honourable members, let us proceed with the roll call. Members who are in the no man’s land, please move. We need that space. (Members rose_)Clerk can you do the needful. Members get ready to speak your vote. It is either yes, no or abstain. (Members rose_) 
     
I put the question before we went for recess for the Bill to be read for the second time.

(Members voted by roll call and tally.)

    1. Ababiku Jesca - Yes
    2. Abacacon Gutomoi - No

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, we came here to legislate; we are not voting machines. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told you that we are voting on the Second Reading. The question is that the Bill be read for the third time. 

    3. Abala David	– Absent
    4. Abigaba Cuthbert – Yes
    5. Abiriga Ibrahim – Yes
    6. Achen Christine  – 
    7. Achia Remigio – Yes
    8. Achia Terrence –
    9. Achieng Sarah Opendi – Yes
    10. Achiro Lucy  – No
    11. Acidri James –  Absent
    12. Acon Julius –  Yes
    13. Adoa Hellen –  Yes

MR KATUNTU:  Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Rule 98(4) of the Rules of Procedure reads: “The Speaker shall then direct the doors to be locked and the bar drawn and no Member shall thereafter enter or leave the House until after the roll call vote has been taken.” All the doors are open and Members are moving in and out. (Interjections) I am sorry to have raised this point so that we obey the rules. If the Members think that we do not have to obey rules - thank you very much. 

(Voting continued_)
    14. Adeke Anna – No
    15. Adome Bildad –  No
    16. Adong Lilly –  No
    17. Agaba Abbas –  Yes
    18. Ajilo Maria Goretti – Yes
    19. Akamba Paul – Absent
    20. Akampurira Prossy	– Yes 
    21. Akello Judith Franca -  No
    22. Akello Lucy – No
    23. Akello Rose – Yes
    24. Akello Silvia – No
    25. Hon. Akena Jimmy	- No
    26. Hon. Akol Anthony -
    27. Hon. Akora Maxwell -
    28. Hon. Akugizibwe Lawrence - Yes
    29. Hon. Akurut Violet	 - Yes
    30. Hon. Aleper Margaret - Yes
    31. Hon. Alero Tom Aza - Yes
    32. Hon. Ali Moses - Yes
    33. Hon. Alioni Odria - Yes
    34. Hon. Alum Santa - No
    35. Hon. Alyek Judith - Yes
    36. Hon. Ameede Agnes - Yes
    37. Hon. Amero Susan - No
    38. Hon. Amoding Monicah - No
    39. Hon. Among Anita - Yes
    40. Hon. Amongi Betty - Yes
    41. Hon. Amongin Jacquiline - Yes
    42. Hon. Amoru Paul - Yes
    43. Hon. Amule Doreen - Yes
    44. Hon. Angella Fred - Yes
    45. Hon. Angundru Moses - Yes
    46. Hon. Angura Fredrick - Yes
    47. Hon. Anite Evelyn - Yes
    48. Hon. Anyakun Esther - Yes
    49. Hon. Anywarach Joshua - No
    50. Hon. Aogon Silas - No
    51. Hon. Aol Betty - No
    52. Hon. Aol Jacqueline 		
    53. Hon. Ajedra Gabriel - Yes
    54. Hon. Ariko Herbert	 - No
    55. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara - Yes
    56. Hon. Arinda Gordon - Yes
    57. Hon. Asaba Paul - Yes
    58. Hon. Asamo Hellen - Yes
    59. Hon. Asiimwe Evarlyne - Yes 
    60. Hon. Asiku Elly - Yes
    61. Hon. Atiku Benard - No

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, on lifting the term limits, I vote “Yes”.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable member, that matter will come after Committee Stage. Come back and take the vote properly. Take the vote without description.

    62. Hon. Anywar Beatrice - Yes
    63. Hon. Atim Joy - No
    64. Hon. Aim Ogwal Cecilia - No
    65. Hon. Atuhaire Jacklet 	
    66. Hon. Atyang Stella - Yes
    67. Hon. Asinde Brenda - Yes
    68. Hon. Avur Jane - Yes
    69. Hon. Awor Betty Engola - Yes 
    70. Hon. Ayaka Rose - Yes
    71. Hon. Ayebazibwe Jastine - Yes
    72. Hon. Ayepa Michael - Yes
    73. Hon. Ayoo Tony - Yes
    74. Hon. Azairwe Dorothy - Yes
    75. Hon. Baba James - Yes
    76. Hon. Babirye Judith - Yes
    77. Hon. Babirye Sarah - Yes
    78. Hon. Babirye Mary Kabanda - No
    79. Hon. Kadogo Veronica - Yes
    80. Hon. Bafaki Gordon - Yes
    81. Hon. Bagiire Henry - Yes
    82. Hon. Bagoole John - Yes
    83. Hon. Baguma Spellanza - Yes
    84. Hon. Bahati David - Yes
    85. Hon. Bakireke Nambooze - No 
    86. Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles - Yes 
    87. Hon. Balyeku Moses - Yes
    88. Hon. Kawooya Anifa - Yes
    89. Hon. Baryayanga Andrew - No
    90. Hon. Baryomunsi Chris - Yes 
    91. Hon. Baseke Fred - Yes 
    92. Hon. Bategeka Lawrence - Yes 
    93. Hon. Syda Bbumba	 - Yes
    94. Hon. Bebona Josephine - Yes
    95. Hon. Bigirwa Norah - No 
    96. Hon. Bintu Jalia - Yes
    97. Hon. Mukitale Stephen	
    98. Hon. Birungi Carolyn - Yes
    99. Hon. Bitangaro Sam - Yes
    100. Hon. Bukenya Michael - Yes
    101. Hon. Burundo Alex - Yes
    102. Hon. Karooro Okurut Mary - Yes
    103. Hon. Butime Tom - Yes
    104. Hon. Nsaba Buturo - Yes
    105. Hon. Bwino Fred  		
    106. Hon. Byabagambi John - Yes
    107. Hon. Byandala Abraham - Yes 
    108. Hon. Byarugaba Alex - Yes
    109. Hon. Byekwaso Flavia - Yes
    110. Hon. Byibesho Sam - Yes
    111. Hon. Centenary Franco - No
    112. Hon. Chekamondo Rukiya - Yes
    113. Hon. Chekwel Lydia - Yes
    114. Hon. Chelimo Paul - Yes 
    115. Hon. Chemutai Everlyn - No
    116. Hon. Cheptoris Sam - Yes
    117. Hon. Dhamuzungu Geoffrey - Yes 
    118. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret - Yes
    119. Hon. Driwaru Zaitun - Yes
    120. Hon. D’Ujanga Simon - Yes
    121. Hon. Dulu Angel Mark  		
    122. Hon. Ecweru Musa - Yes
    123. Hon. Egunyu Janepher - Yes 
    124. Hon. Eitunganane Kenneth - No
    125. Hon. Elotu Cosmas - Yes
    126. Hon. Etuka Isaac - Yes
    127. Hon. Fungaroo Hassan - No
    128. Hon. Gafabusa Richard - No
    129. Hon. Galabuzi-Ssozi Dennis - Yes
    130. Hon. Gonahasa Francis - No

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are Members sitting in the lobby. Can I ask those who have already voted to give them space so that they can come in and vote. Leave in an orderly manner.

Honourable members, those who have already voted, remain somewhere in the building. Do not leave the precincts. 

(Voting continued_)

    131.    Hon. Guma Gumisiriza - Yes
    132. Hon. Gume Fredrick - Yes
    133. Hon. Igeme Nabeta - Yes
    134. Hon. Ikojo John Bosco - Yes
    135. Hon. Ilukor Charles - Yes
    136. Hon. Isala Eragu Veronica - Yes
    137. Hon. Musumba Isaac - Yes
    138. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace - Yes
    139. Hon. Kabafunzaki Herbert - Yes
    140. Hon. Kabagyeni Rose  
    141. Hon. Kabaije-Mwine Sheila - Yes 
    142. Hon. Kabaziguruka Michael - No
    143. Hon. Werikhe Michael - Yes
    144. Hon. Ssekitoleko Robert - Yes
    145. Hon. Kafuuzi Jackson - Yes 
    146. Hon. Kahunde Helen - No
    147. Hon. Kajara Aston - Yes
    148. Hon. Kajungu Rosette - Yes
    149. Hon. Kakooza James - Yes
    150. Hon. Kakooza Joseph - Yes
    151. Hon. Kalemba Christopher - Yes
    152. Hon. Kaliisa Jovrine - Yes
    153. Hon. Kalule-Ssengo Emmanuel 
    154. Hon. Kaluya Andrew - Yes
    155. Hon. Kamara John - Yes
    156. Hon. Kamateeka Jovah - Yes
    157. Hon. Kamugo Pamela - Yes
    158. Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim - Yes
    159. Hon. Kamusiime Caroline - Yes
    160. Hon. Kamusiime Pentagon - Yes
    161. Hon. Kangwagye Stephen - Yes
    162. Hon. Karubanga David - Yes
    163. Hon. Karuhanga Gerald 
    164. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth 
    165. Hon. Kasaija Matia - Yes
    166. Hon. Kasibante Moses - No
    167. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki - Yes
    168. Hon. Kasolo Robert - Yes
    169. Hon. Kasozi Ibrahim - No
    170. Hon. Kasozi Joseph - Yes
    171. Hon. Kasule Robert - Yes 
    172. Hon. Kasumba Patrick - Yes
    173. Hon. Katali Loy 
    174. Hon. Kato Lubwama - No 
    175. Hon. Katoto Hatwib - Yes
    176. Hon. Katumba Wamala - Yes
    177. Hon. Katuntu Abdu - No
    178. Hon. Katuramu Hood - Yes
    179. Hon. Katusabe Atkins - No
    180. Hon. Katushabe Ruth - Yes 
    181. Hon. Katwesigye Oliver - Yes
    182. Hon. Kemirembe Pauline - Yes
    183. Hon. Kesande Grace - Yes
    184. Hon. Khainza Justine - No
    185. Hon. Kibalya Henry - No
    186. Hon. Kibuule Ronald - Yes
    187. Hon. Kiiza Ernest - Yes
    188. Hon. Kiiza Stella - Yes
    189. Hon. Kiiza Winfred - No
    190. Hon. Kinobere Herbert - Yes
    191. Hon. Kipterit Christopher - Yes
    192. Hon. Kisa Stephen - Yes
    193. Hon. Kisembo Noeline - Yes
    194. Hon. Kitatta Aboud - Yes
    195. Hon. Kitutu Goretti - Yes
    196. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey - Yes
    197. Hon. Kiwanuka Keefa - Yes
    198. Hon. Kiyingi Deogratius 		
    199. Hon. Kizige Moses - Yes
    200. Hon. Koluo Joseph - Yes
    201. Hon. Komakech Lyandro 	- No
    202. Hon. Komuhangi Margaret - Yes
    203. Hon. Koreta Ivan 	- Yes
    204. Hon. Kulayigye Felix - Yes
    205. Hon. Kumama George -Yes
    206. Hon. Kunihira Agnes - Yes
    207. Hon. Kusasira Peace - Yes
    208. Hon. Kutesa Pecos - Yes
    209. Hon. Kutesa Sam - Yes
    210. Hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace - Yes
    211. Hon. Kyagulanyi Robert - No
    212. Hon. Kyambadde Amelia 		
    213. Hon. Kyeyune Haruna - Yes
    214. Hon. Lakot Susan - Yes
    215. Hon. Lamwaka Catherine - Yes
    216. Hon. Lamwaka Margaret 	- Yes
    217. Hon. Lanyero Molly - Yes
    218. Hon. Lokeris Peter - Yes
    219. Hon. Lokeris Samson - Yes
    220. Hon. Lokii John Baptist - Yes
    221. Hon. Lokodo Simon - Yes
    222. Hon. Lokoru Albert - Yes
    223. Hon. Lokwang Hillary  - Yes
    224. Hon. Oketayot Lowila - No
    225. Hon. Sseggona Lubega 	
    226. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth - Yes
    227. Hon. Lufafa Nelson - Yes
    228. Hon. Lugoloobi Amos - Yes
    229. Hon. Lukyamuzi David  - No
    230. Hon. Luttamaguzi Paulson - No
    231. Hon. Lyomoki Sam  - No
    232. Hon. Macho Geoffrey - No 
    233. Hon. Mafabi Ishma - Yes
    234. Hon. Maganda Julius  - Yes
    235. Hon. Magyezi Raphael - Yes
    236. Hon. Makumbi Henry - Yes
    237. Hon. Mandera Amos - Yes
    238. Hon. Mangusho Lawrence  - Yes
    239. Hon. Masika Apollo - Yes
    240. Hon. Masiko Winfred - Yes
    241. Hon. Mawanda Michael  - Yes
    242. Hon. Mayende Stephen - Yes
    243. Hon. Mbabaali Muyanja - Yes
    244. Hon. Mbabazi Janepher  - Yes
    245. Hon. Mbaju Jackson - No
    246. Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher - Yes
    247. Hon. Mbayo Esther  - Yes
    248. Hon. Mbeiza Margaret - Yes
    249. Hon. Mbogo Kezekia - Yes
    250. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa - No
    251. Hon. Migadde Robert  
    252. Hon. Mirembe Lydia - Yes
    253. Hon. Moriku Joyce 
    254. Hon. Mpuuga Mathias  - No
    255. Hon. Mudukoi Fred - Yes
    256. Hon. Kahonda Dononzio  - Yes
    257. Hon. Mugema Peter 
    258. Hon. Mugeni Milly - Yes 
    259. Hon. Mugoya Gaster - Yes  
    260. Hon. Mugume Roland - No
    261. Hon. Muhanga Margaret - Yes 
    262. Hon. Muheirwe Daniel - Yes
    263. Hon. Muhindo Tonny - No
    264. Hon. Mukasa Julius - No
    265. Hon. Muruli Mukasa Wilson - Yes
    266. Hon. Mukisa Robina  - Yes
    267. Hon. Mukoda Julie - Yes
    268. Hon. Mukula Francis - Yes
    269. Hon. Mulindwa Isaac - Yes
    270. Hon. Munyagwa Mubarak 		  
    271. Hon. Musana Eric - Yes
    272. Hon. Musasizi Henry - Yes 
    273. Hon. Musoke Paul - Yes 
    274. Hon. Musoke Robert - Yes 
    275. Hon. Mutebi David - Yes 
    276. Hon. Mutebi Noah - Yes 
    277. Hon. Mutonyi Rose - Yes 
    278. Hon. Mutuuzo Peace - Yes
    279. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi 	- No
    280. Hon. Muyanja Johnson - No 
    281. Hon. Muyingo Chrysostom - Yes
    282. Hon. Mwesige Adolf - Yes
    283. Hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana - Yes
    284. Hon. Mwesigye Fred - Yes
    285. Hon. Mwijukye Francis - No
    286. Hon. Mwine Mpaka - Yes
    287. Hon. Nabakooba Judith - Yes
    288. Hon. Nabayiga Idah  
    289. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah - Yes
    290. Hon. Nabulindo Jane  - No
    291. Hon. Naggayi Nabilah   		
    292. Hon. Nagwomu Moses - Yes
    293. Hon. Naigaga Mariam - Yes
    294. Hon. Najjuma Sarah 
    295. Hon. Nakate Lillian - Yes 
    296. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah
    297. Hon. Nakayenze Connie - No 
    298. Hon. Nalule Safia - Yes 
    299. Hon. Namayanja	Florence - No 
    300. Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist - No 
    301. Hon. Namoe Stella - Yes 
    302. Hon. Namuganza Persis - Yes
    303. Hon. Namugwanya Benny - Yes 
    304. Hon. Namujju Cissy - Yes
    305. Hon. Namukhula	Grace - Yes
    306. Hon. Namuyangu Jenipher - Yes
    307. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan - No
    308. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria - Yes
    309. Hon. Nankabirwa Ruth - Yes
    310. Hon. Seninde Rosemary - Yes
    311. Hon. Nantaba Aida 		
    312. Hon. Nanyondo Veronica - No
    313. Hon. Nauwat Rosemary - Yes
    314. Hon. Nayebale Sylivia - Yes
    315. Hon. Ndamira Catherine - Yes
    316. Hon. Ndeezi Alex - Yes
    317. Hon. Ngabirano Charles - Yes
    318. Hon. Ninsiima Boaz - Yes
    319. Hon. Niringiyimana James - No
    320. Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred 		
    321. Hon. Nokrach Wilson - Yes
    322. Hon. Nsamba Patrick - No
    323. Hon. Nsereko Muhammad - No
    324. Hon. Nsubuga Simeo - Yes
    325. Hon. Ntende Robert 	
    326. Hon. Nyakecho Annet - Yes
    327. Hon. Nyiira Zerubabel - Yes
    328. Hon. Nzoghu William - No
    329. Hon. Onek Hilary - Yes
    330. Hon. Obiga Kania - Yes
    331. Hon. Oboth Jacob - Yes
    332. Hon. Obua Denis - Yes
    333. Hon. Ocen Peter - No
    334. Hon. Ochen Julius - No
    335. Hon. Odonga Otto - No
    336. Hon. Odongo Jeje - Yes
    337. Hon. Odur Jack - Yes
    338. Hon. Odur Jonathan    	
    339. Hon. Ogama Ismail - Yes
    340. Hon. Ogenga-Latigo Morris - No
    341. Hon. Okot Ogong Felix - No
    342. Hon. Oguzu Lee Dennis - No
    343. Hon. Ogwang Peter - Yes
    344. Hon. Okabe Patrick - Yes
    345. Hon. Okello Anthony - Yes
    346. Hon. Okello Bonny -  Yes
    347. Hon. Okello Charles Engola - Yes 
    348. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara - No 
    349. Hon. Okori-Moe Janet -  Yes
    350. Hon. Okot Peter -  No

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to seek your indulgence. Hon. Sarah Najjuma is sick and so I would like to request that she votes and goes to the hospital. 

(Voting continues_)

    351. Hon. Najjuma Sarah - Yes
    352. Hon. Okumu Ronald Reagan - No 
    353. Hon. Okupa Elijah - No
    354. Hon. Okwir Samuel - Yes
    355. Hon. Olanya Gilbert - No
    356. Hon. Olega Ashraf - Yes
    357. Hon. Omony Oscar - Yes
    358. Hon. Biyika Lawrence - Yes
    359. Hon. Ongalo-Obote Clement - Yes
    360. Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel - No
    361. Hon. Onyango Gideon - Yes
    362. Hon. Onzima Godfrey - Yes
    363. Hon. Opolot Patrick - Yes
    364. Hon. Opolot Jacob - Yes
    365. Hon. Orot Ismael 	- Yes
    366. Hon. Oryem Henry Okello - Yes
    367. Hon. Osegge Angelline - No
    368. Hon. Oseku Richard - Yes
    369. Hon. Osoru Mourine - Yes
    370. Hon. Othieno Richard - Yes
    371. Hon. Otto Edward Makmot -Yes
    372. Hon. Oula Innocent - Yes
    373. Hon. Ouma George - Yes
    374. Hon. Oyet Simon - No
    375. Hon. Ruhunda Alex - No
    376. Hon. Rwabushaija Margaret - Yes
    377. Hon. Rwabwogo Sylvia - No
    378. Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice 	- Yes
    379. Hon. Rwakoojo Robina  - Yes
    380. Hon. Rwamirama Bright - Yes
    381. Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda - Yes
    382. Hon. Sabiiti Denis  - No
    383. Hon. Sebaggala Abdulatif  - No
    384. Hon. Seguya Lubyayi  - Yes
    385. Hon. Sekindi Aisha  - Yes
    386. Hon. Sematimba Peter  - Yes
    387. Hon. Silwany Solomon  - Yes
    388. Hon. Sizomu Gershom  - No
    389. Hon. Soyekwo Kenneth - Yes
    390. Hon. Ssebikaali Yoweri - Yes
    391. Hon. Ssekabiito Joseph - Yes
    392. Hon. Ssekandi Edward - Yes
    393. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore - No
    394. Hon. Ssembatya Edward  - Yes
    395. Hon. Ssempala Kigozi  - No
    396. Hon. Ssempijja Vincent  - Yes
    397. Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim  		 	
    398. Hon. Ssemuli Anthony - No
    399. Hon. Ssentongo Robina  - No
    400. Hon. Ssewanyana Allan  		 
    401. Hon. Ssewungu Joseph  - No
    402. Hon. Kyinyamatama Juliet - Yes 
    403. Hon. Taaka Agnes  - Yes
    404. Hon. Taban Idi Amin  - Yes
    405. Hon. Takirwa Francis  - Yes    
    406. Hon. Tayebwa Thomas  - Yes
    407. Hon. Timuzigu Michael  - No
    408. Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas  - No 
    409. Hon. Turyamuhweza Fred  - No
    410. Hon. Tumuramye Genensio  - Yes
    411. Hon. Tumusiime Rosemary - Yes
    412. Hon. Tumwebaze Frank - Yes 
    413. Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda  - Yes
    414. Hon. Tumwine Anne Mary  - Yes
    415. Hon. Tumwine Elly  - Yes 
    416. Hon. Turyahikayo Paula  - Yes 
    417. Hon. Tusiime Michael  - Yes 
    418. Hon. Twesigye John  - Yes
    419. Hon. Itungo Nathan  - Yes 
    420. Hon. Twinamasiko Onesimus  - Yes
    421. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye  	- Yes
    422. Hon. Wakabi Pius  - Abstain 
    423. Hon. Waluswaka James 	- Yes
    424. Hon. Nambozo Florence  - Yes 
    425. Hon. Walyomu Moses 	- Yes
    426. Hon. Wamanga-Wamai Jack			
    427. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi  - Yes
    428. Hon. Watenga Godfrey - Yes 
    429. Hon. Watongola Rehema  - Yes
    430. Hon. Wekomba Sarah  -  Yes
    431. Hon. Woboya Vicent - Yes
    432. Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce  -  Yes
    433. Hon. Yeri Apollo  			  
    434. Hon. Zaake Francis -  No
    435. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah	 			

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when voting started, there were members who were stuck in the lobby but they are here now. I ask the Clerk to check whether they are all here.

(Voting continues_)

    1. Hon. Abala David  - Yes
    2. Hon. Achen Christine -  Yes 
    3. Hon. Achia Terence - Yes
    4. Hon. Acidri James - No
    5. Hon. Akamba Paul - Yes
    6. Hon. Akora Maxwell  - No
    7. Hon. Aol	Jacqueline -  Yes
    8. Hon. Atuhaire Jacklet  - Yes
    9. Hon. Mukitale Stephen  - Abstain
    10. Hon. Bwino Fred - Yes
    11. Hon. Dulu Angel Mark - Yes 
    12. Hon. Kabagyeni Rose  - Yes
    13. Hon. Kalule-Ssengo Emmanuel - Yes
    14. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth  		   
    15. Hon. Kiyingi   Deogratius  		
    16. Hon. Kyambadde Amelia - Yes
    17. Hon. Migadde Robert  - No
    18. Hon. Moriku Joyce  			
    19. Hon. Naggayi Nabilah  			
    20. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah - No
    21. Hon. Ntende Robert  - Yes
    22. Hon. Nabayiga Idah - Yes 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ideally I was supposed to have closed the doors under rule 98(4). However, that exists in a situation where all the Members have got seats, but in this Parliament, 150 Members do not have seats. Therefore, it was not possible to lock them out and that is why I did not lock the doors. I hope there is nobody in the lobby. Is there anybody who has not voted? We now close the ballot.  

Honourable members, this is the outcome of the vote: There were two abstentions, 97 against and 317 in favour of the motion. (Applause)

Honourable members, in my communication, I had indicated that a “Yes” vote would require 289.3 people but it has garnered 317. Therefore, the motion has been carried. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THHE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. Is there any amendment on clause 1? 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to replace clause 1 (2) of the Bill with the following:

“(2) The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first 30 days of the last 172 days before the expiration of the term of Parliament.”

The justification is: to expand the duration within which to hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections from the last 120 days as proposed in the Bill to 172 days.

Secondly, to require the determination of when elections are held in Uganda to be the term of the Parliament and not that of the President, which is prone to change. It will also harmonise the term of office of the President with that of Parliament.

Thirdly, to provide adequate timelines for processes arising from a presidential election such as organising and holding a presidential election re-run, challenging a presidential election, determining a petition, challenging a presidential election by court, as well as organising and holding a fresh election in case a presidential election is annulled by court as empowered in Articles 103(5) and 104(2), (3) and (6) of the Constitution.

Lastly, to comply with the recommendation of court in the case of Amama Mbabazi v Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Electoral Commission & the Attorney-General, Presidential Election Petition No.1 of 2016. 

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with the proposals of the committee. The committee is proposing an amendment to read, “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first 30 days of the last 172 days before the expiration of the term of Parliament.”

Madam Chairperson, I tried calculating how we arrived at voting on the 18th of February and I realised that in the Constitution, it is written that elections have to be held within the first 30 days of the 90 days. When I calculate basing on the committee’s proposal, we would be holding elections in November, actually around 20th of November. 

Madam Speaker, in November we have very many activities. We are all familiar with what takes place in November. We have national examinations, students will be in school and we again risk having a court order by students who are of voting age so that elections are extended like the LCI elections. When shall we go to campaign? Shall we campaign from September to November? We know that this is the peak of the second rains. Where will you get people? The farmers will be busy with their fields.

We know very well that the framers of the Constitution are Ugandans who studied the character, behaviour and activities of Ugandans. They knew very well that most activities are over between December and February - there is no garden work, the school calendar is closed - and therefore, people can adequately attend to candidates during the campaigns. 

Therefore, I do not agree with the proposal of the committee of the first 30 days of the 172 days. I would rather go with the proposal in the Bill of the first 30 days of the 120 days. I beg to submit.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, when I was contributing to the general debate, I made a point that I want to repeat now. The Supreme Court of Uganda directed the Attorney-General to act on these matters. Hon. Magyezi has no mandate as a citizen to bring this matter for amendment to Parliament. Therefore, if we continue, we would be doing a disservice to our country because this matter was expressly directed to the Attorney-General and hon. Magyezi is not the Attorney-General. Therefore, he has as no mandate to bring this matter for amendment before this Parliament.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Chairperson, can I respond?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is taking charge of your issues? I thought we had the committee chair? Are you responding?

MR MAGYEZI: The chair has allowed me to respond.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us collect all the issues first and then you respond.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, yesterday you guided the House on some issues which were incorporated in the report and yet were not part of the committee’s mandate. The committee rightly said on page five -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have not reached there; we are on clause 1.

MS OGWAL: But we must start by -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, let us look at clause 1. Hon. Ogwal you are a senior legislator; please take your seat. We do not jump clauses. Let us go clause by clause.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I wanted us to first remove those issues that were smuggled into the report. They must be removed before we proceed. Otherwise, what mandate -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please take your seat. We are on clause 1.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, initially I agreed with the position of the committee of 120 days. However, on second thoughts, I invite you and the Members to look at Article 61(2) of the Constitution. It says, “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first thirty days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the term of the President.”

Madam Chairperson, on average, a month is 30 days and if you divide 90 by 30 you actually get three months. When you calculate 172 days and divide by 30, on average you are talking of five months. This raises more questions, although we all agree on the first 30 days. The committee agrees on the first 30 days; the Constitution also mentions the first 30 days; and the amendment they are coming up with of 172 days also talks of the first 30 days. In essence, what this means is that the first 30 days is more paramount and very essential. 

Any other extension of more than three months as being mooted here should be discouraged because of the timetables in this country like the one for the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), the season for farming and so on. Our framers of the Constitution took into account all those. Therefore, there is no better time that presidential, parliamentary and local council elections in Uganda can take place other than between February up to May at most. 

Madam Chairperson, I think that was taken into account. For me, any attempt to cause an amendment to the number of last days and extending the days to more than 90 is a fallacy and should be discouraged. Let us leave the position in the Constitution as it is. Like the physicists say, “Leave Pi as Pi.” Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, on the issue of the time, the honourable members say that we shall be voting in November.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the concerns of the Members and that was the concern of the committee members too. At first, nobody thought that these days could be extended from the usual 90 days to even 120 days. However, the committee observed that Article 61 had an inherent mistake. We discovered that it provided for only 90 days within which presidential elections are held yet the time required was 122 days. 

The current Constitution in its form has a mistake in the calculation of days, and here we co-opted statisticians and experts; it was not just a question for the lawyers. We went over this one by one and we discovered that what we needed in the current Constitution, without amendment, was actually supposed to be 122 days, not the 90 days, to conduct elections within the last 30 days of the 90 days. 

The committee came up with these days by considering the time within which processes happen after a presidential election has been held. The committee found out the following, and here you can get your pen and start tallying; you will find how we came up with these days:

Article 61(2) requires that elections are carried out within the first 30 days of the last 90 days of a presidential election. Now, the first 30 days of the last 90 days is why we have been holding elections consecutively around 18th of February for the last two elections and swearing in should be by 18th of May. That is exactly the last 90 days. That is the first 30 days of the last 90 days to the end of term. 

Article 103(7) of the Constitution obligates the Electoral Commission to declare results from a presidential election within 48 hours – those are two days – from the close of polling. Article 103(5) requires the Electoral Commission to organise a presidential re-run within 30 days. We have never had a re-run but in legislation we have to think of the future. Now you have the 30 days plus two days plus 30 days and that is already 62 days. 

Article 104(2) requires an aggrieved candidate to file a petition challenging the election of a president within 10 days of the declaration of results. That is already 72 days and that is how it stands now. 

Article 104(3) allows the Supreme Court only 30 days within which to inquire into and determine the petition filed challenging the presidential election. That brings us to 102 days. 

Article 104(6) requires that once a presidential election is annulled, a fresh election is held within 20 days from the date of annulment. That brings us to 122 days and that is how it is now in the Constitution. 

However, we discovered that the tallying was, as it is now, a mistake. It was even a mistake that the Bill proposes 120 days – two days less. Therefore, I must appreciate the team of members of this committee and the technocrats for discovering this. 

The committee observed that if all the above processes are to be carried out, the time currently prescribed in the Constitution would be insufficient and an additional 32 days will be added – as it is now. 

The committee observed that the proposal by the Bill to hold elections in 120 days is insufficient considering that the amendment made to Article 104 as proposed in clause 3 of the Bill will require a minimum of 182 days for all the processes accruing after a presidential election to be complied with.

Madam Chair, the committee further observed that in arriving at the time within which presidential, general parliamentary and local council elections are held, there is need to take into account the timelines prescribed in Articles 103, 104 and 105 of the Constitution so that sufficient time is allowed for all the processes that the Constitution allows to accrue after a presidential election is held. The 172 days were arrived at as follows: 

    a) In Article 61(2), elections are held within the first 30 days – (Interjection) No, this is now the proposed amendment in terms of how we came to 172 days, using the existing provision. Within Article 61(2), elections are held within the first 30 days of the last 172 days. 

    b) In Article 103(7), the Electoral Commission is given two days within which to declare the results of the election. If you count that, it becomes 32 days. 

    c) In Article 103(5), the Electoral Commission is allocated 30 days within which a presidential re-run is organised and conducted. We were thinking that 20 days is not smart enough.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, which month do we fall in? Where do those 30 days fall? Hon. Lilly Adong said that will be in November. Where do we fall according to your calculations? Is it in August, June?

MR OBOTH: These will be adjustments backwards. If we consider 172 days and conduct elections in the first 30 days of 172 days, then elections could be held on 28th of November or the first week of December. We all know that according to the school calendar, during that time it is the holidays. However, the Electoral Commission has a lot of discretion and the 30 days given can either fall on 28th of November at the earliest or -

The committee recognises that this may result in having elections in November or early December, depending on when the Electoral Commission holds the elections. The committee, however, does not believe that this will affect school-going children since the third term can be shortened to take this into account.

The committee also noted that usually the third term ends in late November or early December. If we go with the proposal made by the committee, elections will be held on or by 28th of November, being the first day of the first 30 days, or 28th of December, being the 30th day of the first 30 days. Therefore, since the Electoral Commission has the discretion to determine when these elections can be held, it will take into account all those issues in determining the date of the elections.

Madam Speaker, we have a challenge; we cannot even leave the Constitution as it is. That is the response. It is a matter of statistics and maths.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, if the 30 days start on the 28th of November, when do they end?

MR OBOTH: They would end on the 28th of December.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, elections can be held in December.

MR OBOTH: Elections can be held at the earliest on the first day of the first 30 days, which is 28th November, or on the last day of the 30 days, which is the 28th of December. So between 28th November and 28th December, an election has to be held.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Lilly Adong.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not buy the argument of the chairperson of the committee. Does it mean you are going to postpone Christmas during the time for elections? That is the time when people exchange gifts and many other things; we cannot expect elections to be on that day.

Madam Speaker, I would suggest that we go by the first 30 days of 120 days, so that elections are held between 15th and 16th of January. Our campaigns usually take about two months and if we go by the committee’s proposal, it means that if we start campaigns in October, you will never get people to attend the rallies. The campaigns will also interrupt the school calendar and yet we know that some of our campaign rallies take place around school premises. We also know that Ugandans have become politically aware and interested in campaign rallies; we would be interrupting the lives of Ugandans in other aspects.

Madam Chair, I request, if need be, that we go with the proposal in the Bill of the first 30 days of 120 days, so that elections are held between 15th  or 18th of January. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is an ongoing case – I do not know whether the Electoral Commission has settled it – on this issue of examinations. I think we should not interfere with the right to education; not for elections. Let us find a solution. Allow the children to do their exams but also let us find a solution.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chair. The issue before us touches lives of many Ugandans and it is a matter of elections. When we go into electioneering, a lot comes to a standstill. We are not ready to short-change the education standards of our children just for a level of convenience.

Since this was not much of a matter of contention in this Bill and there is also a court case like you have clearly stated, - still sub judice - my view is that we leave it as it is and we move to the next clause that is not contentious.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the chairperson has made calculations saying that the timeframe stated in the Constitution already has a problem and is not achievable in case of a rerun. 

MR TUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chair. Whereas I agree with the chairperson about Article 61 in regard to the 172 days, I would like to move an amendment to clause 3 by deleting the word “presidential” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are not there. We are doing clause 1. Are you addressing Article 61? But there is no clause 3 in it.

MR TUSIIME: Article 61(3) of the Constitution states, “Except where it is impracticable to do so, the Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections on the same day.”

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment on the same by deleting the word “presidential” appearing immediately after the word “hold”. The justification is: It is intended to separate the tenure of the office of the President –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what you are saying is not relevant to what we are doing. We are talking about the time for holding elections. We are saying what is the best time to hold the elections?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, if I may provide further information. We did not just arrive at this aspect; we had a stalemate and the committee members agreed that we summon the legal experts and the statisticians of the Electoral Commission. This was actually an agreed position with the input of the Electoral Commission. That is exactly how we can resolve the stalemate. Any re-engineering would continue to either push –(Interjection)– It is uncomfortable but the Kenyans are specific; theirs is on the first Tuesday of August. We considered several provisions on how we can do this, and this is the 172 days.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, on this issue, we have to first believe that we are the lawmakers. The Electoral Commission is there but the law is made from here. The main issue is that in our view, we need elections to be held at least between January and March. That is the right thing.

To me, Madam Chairperson, it would even be better if we maintained February like we always have. We can then adjust whatever we need to adjust while considering February as the month for elections, so that we do not tamper with any activity which has been existing. 

Therefore, if there was a calculation error, calculate properly but leave February as the month for elections. That will help us better.

MR SSEMPALA KIGOZI: Madam Chairperson, we have two big problems with November and December. As we all know, the UNEB exams end around the first week of December. Definitely, holding elections between November and December close to the festive season is a bigger problem. 

At the same time, I would like to inform this House that around that time, teachers are invigilating and yet they are a very big resource to the electoral processes in Uganda. They are usually the returning officers because they are the knowledgeable ones. At the same time, in December the same teachers are marking UNEB exams for all levels. Therefore, it is very pertinent that the elections are held between January and March when all these other processes of the education system have ended. Thank you so much.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I am not comfortable with the proposal from the committee. Uganda will be the only country where elections are conducted in November and the swearing in of the President and Members of Parliament is in May. Therefore, you remain in office for six months when you are out of power. As incumbent Members of Parliament, you remain in Parliament for six months when you have lost while those elected remain waiting. 

Therefore, Members of Parliament, we need to sit down in a sober manner, consult on this matter and not allow a president who has lost in an election to remain in power for six months. You know what can happen with presidential power within six months. A Member of Parliament who has lost an election has lost interest and yet he remains in service for six months. We need to decide on this one.

MS ADOA: Madam Chairperson, I also do not agree with the position of November because that is a very sensitive time for schools. Third term is a very sensitive term where the school must determine whether every child can move to the next class, and teachers have to prepare their students for UNEB exams. 

However, also in February, after the elections most of the parents, especially civil servants, fail to get money for their children because the districts take a long time to receive funds. They find it very difficult to take their children to school. Therefore, I would also go with 15th of January so that by end of January, parents are preparing to take their children to school in February. Otherwise, it would affect even the first term, which is the foundation. 

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to invite the chairperson of the committee to look at page 16 where there is a recommendation of the Equal Opportunities Commission. I will read it verbatim: 

“The Equal Opportunities Commission observed that the amendment in clause 1 of the Bill will have the effect of holding presidential, general parliamentary and local council elections in January instead of February as happens currently. The Equal Opportunities Commission observed that this will ensure that the school going and university students will be able to participate and exercise their right to vote…” - and also their right to education will not be violated - “…since elections will be during January holidays.” 

I also associate myself with hon. Adoa on the same. Let the elections be in January. Thank you.

MR AMORU: Madam Chairperson, I think what we are trying to cure is the fact that the provision as it is now does not cater for a situation where we have a rerun. If we focus on that, we shall avoid leaving it as it is because we must attempt to cure it. 

To me, January would be most ideal. If we can reduce some of the days for filing in court and then place the elections in January, we can still cater for a rerun in case it happens. Thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I listened to the chairperson narrate the difficulty the committee had. However, if you heard what hon. Okot Ogong talked about and you reconcile it with what the honourable colleague who brought up the issue of the examinations and the seasons said, we could reduce the days from 172 to 140 so that we bring the election period to January. Wouldn’t that kill two birds with one stone - respond to the court’s demands and also accommodate our interests?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, how does the calculation of 145 days look like? We are saying it should not in any way interfere with the education of the children and their exams. As the chairperson calculates, hon. Kizige can speak. 

MR KIZIGE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson.  We seem to be losing the point. The constitutional provision is centred on the time when the term of office of the President expires. In the present situation, we have the 12th of May as the date when the term of office of the President expires. Therefore, either way, we have to work backwards.

I do not see us going below November and December unless we adjust the term of office of the President by a number days accordingly. The only alternative, Madam Chairperson, is for the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Electoral Commission to sit down in the electoral year and draw an electoral calendar-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are legislating for the whole country. We must take into account the interests of all the stakeholders. We cannot subject the Ministry of Education and Sports to administer exams in August this year and in an election year they set exams in another month. It would have an impact on university admissions and tertiary institutions. Let us hear from the Minister of State for Education.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I would like to inform this House that elections have been taking place in February and all our students are back in school by that time because they report back in the first week of February. Therefore, adjusting the days to January would be an opportunity for our students to vote. 

I, therefore, do not see why we do not push the days to January. I think it is the best time. I would like to appeal to the chairperson to concede. I beg, Chairperson.     

MR MWESIGE: I do not have an amendment, Madam Chairperson, but I would like to recommend that we go by the Bill because it brings us to January. As hon. Kizige correctly said, you have got to begin from when the term of the President ends, which is 12th May. If you have to say elections will take place in the first 30 days of the last 120 days, then it means you have got to go back to 12th January and this means elections can only take place between 12th January and 12th February. This, in my view, is safe. 

The 172 days would take us to November, as hon. Odonga Otto said, and to have a newly elected President waiting from the time he is elected in November up to May to be sworn in is a recipe for chaos. Therefore, I think that the position of the Bill is well thought out and if we go by the Bill, it means the earliest you can have the election is 12th January and the latest date you can have the election is 12th February. 

I do not see a compelling reason to expand the days to 172. The Bill has solved the problem. First, it takes us to January when the activities in the calendar of the country are not very crowded. Secondly, it makes it more convenient for the new President. He would still have to wait, but not up to May. It also creates enough time for the petitions to be filed and disposed of. Therefore, I recommend that we stick to the position of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Adong, are you happy now?       

MS ADONG: Chairperson, I agree with that position. From the start, I said I will go with what is in the Bill but not the proposal of the committee. I, therefore, urge the chair to concede.

MR OBOTH: Chairperson, it is not a matter of concession, but at least you will appreciate that the committee has brought out the anomalies. If it is in the interest of this House that the chair concedes, I will do so. However, we are aware of the inherent mistake.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon. Okot Ogong and hon. Mwesige have raised the issue regarding the time in which the elected president waits to be sworn in. From November to May would be a very long period. However, even February to May is still a long time. Therefore, I want to ask what the adequate time would be for an elected president to wait to be sworn in. Is it one, two, three or four months? 

If we agree on an election in January, it is still a long period. We know that if we got some cantankerous person elected as president, he can cause chaos in those four months just like he would in six months.

MR OBOTH: Well, we had similar questions in the committee and during the debate here. If you get a cantankerous president, he does not even need one month to cause chaos if he knows he has lost. Therefore, how much time is long? You can never hold elections one or two weeks or even one month to the end of the presidential term and that is part of the dilemma we had. At the moment, you still have to hold elections I think three months to the end of a term and the new president and Members of Parliament wait and are paid up to 18th of May. 

The counting begins from the end of the term not towards it. That is when you are counting backwards. Therefore, I appreciate this because what we are talking about here is exactly what we went through. Most people were in for 120 days and it took us two days to resolve this matter. However, if in the wisdom of the Members you want me to concede, even after knowing that there is a mistake, I will concede with your consent.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Chairperson. I see the pain of the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs when he says there is a mistake or a gap, but he would simply concede even though he knows that there is a problem. I think that this would not be good for us while we are trying to solve a problem. 

I support the proposal of having elections held in January and the term ends in May. I, therefore, would like to ask the chairperson to help us highlight those clauses that we would possibly need to adjust so that we can have elections held in January and not in November or December. We can then fix this by making the necessary adjustments. Can you come and help us? The chair is talking about statistics and facts that we may want to force through, but we could get a way of making adjustments to those sections of the law and we move on. Thank you, Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chair had some proposals on the extension of time to file petitions, how long the court will wait to hear and make judgements - Those are the areas which we need to make accommodate within the 172 days. That is what we are trying to accommodate.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I am seeking is in regard to the drafting. In the current text, these days are subjected to the expiry of the term of the President. However, in the new drafting, they have pegged them to the expiry of the term of Parliament. 

I am aware that the term of Parliament runs concurrently with the term of the President, but I wonder why the change in the drafting from the original text, which refers to the term of the President, to the new one. I just needed clarification as to what could have informed the change. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we allow the chairperson to work out new calculations on dates of filing and hearing before we take a decision on this. I want to defer this to give you time to make new calculations, also taking into account the demands of the Supreme Court that the days are not enough. See how you can fix that in but also fix in the 120 days. Honourable members, we have got to take into account the time of filing and hearing; it is important because this report talked about it. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, according to estimation, a petition would take at most two months. If we could estimate that an elected leader waits at least for a period of three months, which is a quarter of a financial year, then that is reasonable enough. 

The only thing that we now have to resolve or consider is the time when our children will be home, so that they can participate in the voting. We also need to take into consideration that we have to cure this problem because a big crisis can arise when an incoming president has to wait. If we do not cure it today, then we are going to amend this Constitution every day.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us defer this matter to allow the chairperson and his team to work out new calculations to satisfy the Supreme Court judgement on the presidential election petition. Otherwise, we are now going to tie the hands of the Electoral Commission and the court. This is a very serious issue. Therefore, let us defer that particular item.

MS MUTAMBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Taking into consideration the concerns of our honourable colleague, I would like to propose that instead of saying, “the first 30 days”, we say “the first 45 days”.  This would enable us get an extra 15 days, which would take us to January and would take care of our concerns. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think let the chairperson take that into account.

MR TUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In consideration of what the House will agree on in regard to time, I would like to propose a further amendment to the same subclause (2). After the statement, “expiration of the term of office of the President”, I propose that we add, “Parliament or local government council as the case may be.”

Madam Chairperson, I intend also to move subsequent amendments that are intended to separate the tenure of the office of the President as provided for under Article 105 (1). 

With your indulgence, Madam Chairperson, I wish also to propose an amendment to clause 3 by deleting the word, “presidential” appearing immediately after the word “hold”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know where you are in this Bill. 

MR TUSIIME: We have been debating about the number of days to be provided. I wish to propose an amendment, after we agree to the time, in regard to the parliamentary or local government council elections as the case may be. This is prompted by my intention to move a subsequent amendment to separate the tenure of the office of the President as provided for under Article 105 (1) from the term of Parliament and the local government councils. Those particular ones may be related to the Bill as well as provided for by the memoranda of the Bill, and even as far as the tenure of the local government and Parliament is concerned. 

If you agree, Madam Chairperson, I would move these amendments at this time because they are related to the entire Bill. We could then discuss them at an appropriate time so that we do not miss on this as we move on in our discussions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think you need to indicate where you want to introduce a new clause. We need to indicate the entry point. 

MR TUSIIME: The addition is that after agreement of the number of days before the expiration of the term of the President-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it after Clause 1 (2)?

MR TUSIIME: After the word “President” we should add, “Parliament or local government council as the case may be”. The justification is that this is intended to separate the tenure of the office of the President as provided for under Article 105 (1) from the term of Parliament and the local government councils. It would provide also for election of the President since the presidential term cannot be amended by Parliament alone. 

Madam Chairperson, subsequently, I intend to move those particular related amendments to Articles 77, 181 (4), 289 and 291. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Article 61 (2) of the Constitution currently reads, “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first thirty days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the term of the President.” We shall agree on the date. However, if I understand hon. Tusiime well, he is saying in addition, we should say, “Before the expiration of the term of the President, Parliament or local government council as the case may be.” 

Hon. Tusiime was moving but it appears like we are not following and I am trying to see whether I understand him. The way I understood him, he is saying that he is introducing additional amendment on 61(2), which we have been considering because currently it reads; the Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government councils elections within the first 30 days of the last 90 days before the expiration of the term of the President. We are yet to agree on the date.

He is saying that he wants to introduce and additional amendment that will read; the last 90 days before, the expiration of the term of the term of the President, Parliament or local government councils as the case may be. 

He is saying that his justification is that he intends to move some other amendments later, which will affect this one. Am I correct hon. Tusiime? That was his reasoning that he intends to bring additional amendments, which will have consequential amendment on 61. In addition, that since we are considering 61 now, then we consider that amendment now and then he will be allowed later to bring other amendments if I got him very well. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, is he moving formally? Okay. Let us do this honourable members; I understand you want to introduce a new clause. Let us deal with 61(2) and then you can come in with a new clause. Maybe, it will be 61(2), (3), or something else. Can we take the vote on-

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, as you wisely guided, we have tried to harmonise to see the centre of our concession. We could concede to the proposal as in the Bill, being mindful that the other amendments that can try to take care of so that it is 120 days. Therefore, in case of the annulment, we are going to handle under Article 104(7) by inserting other proposals and I think we will resolve the matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can I put the question? Honourable members, we are trying to save the timeframe to hold election. Let us take a vote because we have said 172 is too big, 90 is a problem, I think we are zeroing in on 120, which is ideal.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, there is a technical lock here that we need to understand. This Article 61(2) envisions two elections in one provision. It envisions a general election and a re-run. He has cured one problem that for a re-run, they will provide for the days under 105.

However, the lock is here, the words the “first thirty days” was saying a general election- according even to the minister, should be held in January. Now when we say the first 30 days of the 90 or 120 and so on, it is supposed to take care of a re-run, which we will now take care of later.

However, when you are talking of the “first thirty days” let us now look at when the term of the President ends. Does it take into account January so that we can move the general elections to January? That question has not been answered.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, we have already agreed on that. This proposal, which is in the Bill, allows us to have elections in January. We have left November and December for the sake of education. Now we have said we can hold elections in January.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we have conceded except that we need to have 122 days. The Bill proposes 120 but as I explained earlier, the Bill actually is unearthing what is already there as a mistake. Therefore, at least-

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want us to add two days?

MR OBOTH: Add two days so that it is 122 days. The first 30 days of the 122 days.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the amendment for hon. Tusiime is also on (2). I want to find out whether the question you are putting is for both the committee, the days and the amendment proposed by hon. Tusiime. The amendment of hon. Tusiime is adding on the (2). The (2) is ending with the word “president”.

Now, hon. Tusiime wants after president, you put a comma and then you add the following words, “Parliament or Local Government Council as the case may be.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I think it is already there: “The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government elections within the first 30 days of the last 122 days before the expiration of the term of Office of the President.”

MS AMONGI: What is being added which is critical, are the words, “… as the case may be” because an amendment is intended at a later stage for purpose of separating the election for Parliament, Local Government. I think hon. Tusiime’s future amendment, which is about to come is looking at the issue of separating parliamentary and local council elections and then the one for President.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have an objection on that. The election shall be as you have read. You can decide to hold these elections on different dates according to this one. However, you should not go beyond the term of the expiry of the President. For example, you can decide to have the presidential election on 12 of January, then have parliamentary one in March, have local government in May so long as you can have them on different dates. It does not have any problem.

Therefore, Madam Chair, the wording is okay. It should not have more than what it is. We should only agree on the days and in those days, you can hold elections and it does not necessarily mean that when you are holding them on different days we need to also say for presidential, parliamentary and local government.

Madam Chair, in the current state, you are aware that we only hold the presidential and parliamentary elections on the same day but local government is held on another day. It has never affected this law. Even if you separated it now, it will not affect the law.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we should agree on the days. If the chair of the committee has agreed, he says he wants 122 days; we give him the 122 days and test it, within 30 days and the 122 days. Election can start on the first day of the remaining 122 days. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, let us understand what hon. Tusiime is saying. He is saying that he has substantial amendments the effect of which will be to separate the elections of the President, Parliament and Local Government Councils later which he is bringing. If that be the case, maintaining the wording as it is in the Bill will be negatively impacted if we pass the intended amendment.

We have looked at those amendments and entirely agree with hon. Tusiime that if the amendments are to be passed – necessarily – these elections will be separate. Therefore, the wordings – which have nothing to do with period when Parliament starts or ends – (Interjection) - the wording of saying “president, parliament or local government councils as the case may be” remain relevant.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is only the Attorney-General who has looked at the amendment. If the amendment was for all of us, he should have given them to us and we look at it. If you want to look at it at an appropriate time, the best is that you would have come and said let us stay this clause and come back to it. This is because, supposing you amend it and we go there and we do not agree on the amendment you are proposing, what happens?

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would propose that if the Attorney-General is interested in some amendment, let him stay this clause, we go ahead and we come back. You cannot do something in speculation. Please, let us go ahead, we stand over this, go to the next clause, deal with it and come back. That is how we have been making laws here.

Madam Chairperson, is the Attorney-General in order for wanting to speculate on the law here when we know what we are doing?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the wording which says “presidential, parliamentary and local councils as the case may be” takes care of a situation even when we do not pass the amendment and the wording will still flow if we pass it now.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Mafabi because you cannot base your judgment now to effect amendments on this one in anticipation of other amendments which are not yet before us. The logical thing to do would to be that if those amendments are there, let them be brought now before us because we are here. Let us look at them on their merits and if they are feasible we pass them. After passing them, we can revisit this clause we are considering.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us defer a decision on this one, we move down and come back later if there are still amendments.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I concede to that arrangement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing they are not for this section. Are they all for clause 1?

MR SSEKIBUBO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to request Members to be very careful when we are here trying to legislate for separate elections because it has financial implications that this country may not be able to sustain and of course there are other dangers involved. 

However, the problem was not on the functions and the days, according to the Supreme Court ruling. It was about the 10 days within which to file a petition and also about the electronic voting and the evidence to that effect. When Members look at the functions of the Electoral Commission under Article 61, things like the demarcation and compiling of registers will already be in place. Where the problem was – and what the committee should have looked at – would have been Article 104 where they are talking about challenging presidential election. That is where you needed ample time. The 10 days were few and you needed more days. What I am saying is that let us wait and reach there and not tamper with it at this stage.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we would move because what hon. Ssekikubo is saying is actually one of the clauses of the Bill that we are going to handle. Our concession to the proposal in the Bill is to the effect that we would handle that under clause 3 of the Bill. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, I think you had guided well. We would go with that with a slight amendment of adding two days only so that it would be much safer and we move on. In any case a presidential term – for your information – is determined under Article 105 and it is not fixed like for Parliament from 18th of May to 18th of May. I think with that concession we can progress.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The two days to make it 122. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended by the addition of two days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, you have put a question on clause 1 but it is not clear to me whether the phrasing of hon. Tusiime has also been voted on as part of the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that will be coming in a new clause, I think.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: For further clarification, it is part of that clause, Madam Chairperson. If you are putting it to a vote, we would rather decide because the only words they are putting are “as the case may be” and the rest is part of what is in the Bill. Therefore, if we could agree, we add the words “as the case may be” because if I heard hon. Tusiime well, he even proposed that if we get there we will bring an amendment on sub clause (3) which will help us get the whole principle by deleting the word “presidential” appearing immediately after the word “hold” in sub article (3). That would help us get the principle and we place that article once and for all.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause (3) are you talking about? In the main? You move it substantively.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, you cannot make a law in anticipation. What you want to do – if you do not know – maybe it should have been part of the chairperson’s amendments or you can bring it even before third reading. As we stand now, the issue is clause 1 and you cannot say after some time I will bring some amendments which will affect this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: His proposal is to amend clause 1 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If he is going to amend clause 1, he would have requested to stay over it.  However, in the current state-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Tumwebaze.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, we are in the process of considering the Bill. There is even still an opportunity of re-committal. Therefore, if somebody has given notice that there is an amendment within this process, there is no anticipation, hon. Nandala.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, alternatively, to avoid this impasse, allow hon. Tusiime to bring all the amendments that touch on Article 61, so that we consider them at this point in time.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, if hon. Tusiime was allowed to table his amendments, they are not really bulky, then this House would have a clear picture. We should be systematic and move together. To keep saying let us amend this in this manner - In any case, there is an amendment which will come in the next 30 minutes which will affect this. It confuses us. After all, we are here.

If his amendments have the effect of changing clause 1, in the form that it is, we shall reduce clause 1. The idea of re-committal really is not - That is not a good argument because re-committal comes in exceptional circumstances. It is not a desirable thing to do. It only comes where there are problems. I would like to suggest that we allow hon. Tusiime to table his amendments. They are just two pages. We listen to them and if possible, adopt them and then go back to clause 1.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, those are some of the reasons. According to the ruling you made some time back, you said if there is something fundamental like in this case, hon. Tusiime should have taken these things to the committee. They would have formed either part of the committee report or - so that when they come here, they would say there were some amendments which were brought, and as committee they decided X and Y. 

Madam Chairperson, Parliament is not ending today. Let us deal with what we have in the Bill. I cannot discuss what I do not know. That is why I am requesting for your guidance, Madam Chairperson. 

We are talking about anticipation and yet we do not know what we are raising. I would like to propose that we should go ahead, and if there is anything, we can come back.
 
MR OBUA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are at committee stage. When we address our minds to rule 131, under functions of a Committee of the whole House and Select Committee on a Bill, it states: “(2) The Committee of the whole House and the select committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit, if the amendment (including new clauses and new schedules) are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.”  

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move under this rule that looking or peeping into the mind of hon. Tusiime, I think that Members at this stage can still move an amendment. It appears hon. Tusiime has an assortment of amendments which has consequential effects. It infects the others. It would only be prudent that hon. Tusiime, is given an opportunity to present his entire proposed amendments and then the committee of the whole House considers them. I beg to move. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For the last 30 minutes, we have had the intended hon. Tusiime amendments in the air and it does seem that they are somewhere because I saw hon. Adolf Mwesige, waving a copy. Can we share these proposals? I suppose they are not nuclear buttons that he is moving with them. We could share them if they are well intended. Otherwise, if they have the net effects of causing a re-committal at this stage, then we would better look at them and consider well in time, whether we can take them alongside the current considerations, or even look at a possibility of them coming ahead. Can we look at these propositions right now so that we can acquaint ourselves with them to avoid going back and forth if they are tenable and acceptable? I do not think he is planning to surprise colleagues about these.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the only way we can see the proposals is when hon. Tusiime actually presents. I would like to add that even if there is to be a re-committal, we must first get notice during this time that some changes are required. Let us hear the proposals so that they are available to all the Members.

MR TUSIIME: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson – (Interruption)
  
MR TINKASIIMRE: Madam Chairperson, you have accepted that he presents his amendments which, I agree with but as he is proceeding, we want to follow him. It is our normal practice. He could upload them on our iPads or give us hard copies - (Interruptions)

MR TUSIIME: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My proposed amendments of Article 61, of the Constitution are as follows:

Amendment 1, By substituting for clause (2), the following –
“The Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections within the first 30 days of the last 172 days, before the expiration of the term of the President, Parliament or Local Government Council as the case may be.”

To amend clause (3) by deleting the word “Presidential” appearing immediately after the word “hold”. 

Justification 

This is intended to separate the tenure of the office of the President as provided for under Article 105(1) from the term of Parliament and Local Government Councils, and the election of the President since the presidential term cannot be amended by Parliament alone.

Amendment 2

This is the amendment of Article 77 of the Constitution. Article 77 of the Constitution is to be amended in clause (3) by substituting for the word “five” appearing immediately before the word “years” with “seven years”. 

Justification

The proposed amendment of Article 77 (3) of the Constitution is intended to increase the term of Parliament from five years to seven years to give Members of Parliament enough time to accomplish parliamentary business for the development of Uganda since five years have been found to be too short for purposes of development.

Madam Chairperson, this is because during the past two years, Members of Parliament are getting acclimatised to parliamentary procedures, conducts and business. Secondly, the other Members of Parliament in the first two years are still held up in courts of law defending their status. Accordingly, most Members of Parliament settle in the third year to start serious parliamentary business. During the fourth year, Members of Parliament are preparing for primaries within their political parties for another election and the fifth year is all eaten up by the general elections.

This means that Parliament has only one year to engage in serious parliamentary business.

Amendment 3 

Article 181 is to be amended in clause (4) by substituting for the word “five” appearing immediately before the word “years” the word “seven”.

Justification

The amendment of Article 181(4) of the Constitution is intended to increase the term of Local Government Councils from five years to seven years to align it with the tenure of the office of the President and the term of Parliament since Government must act as one.

Amendment 4

Replacement of the Article 289 of the Constitution 

Article 289 of the Constitution should be amended by substituting for Article 289 the following: 

Article 289. Term of the current Parliament

“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the term of the parliament in existence at the time of this Article comes in into force, shall expire seven years from its first sitting.”

Justification

This provision is intended to replace the current Article 289 of the Constitution since it was introduced in 2005 in the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005 as a transitional provision and has since served its useful purposes and it is now a spent provision in the Constitution.

In addition, Madam Chairperson, the replacement is intended to provide for the transitional provision to extend the term of the current Parliament from five years to seven years from 2016 to 2023. 

Amendment 5

Madam Chairperson, replacement of Article 291 of the Constitution. Article 291 of the Constitution is amended by substituting for Article 291 the following:

Term of the current Local Government Councils

“For the avoidance of doubt, the term of seven years prescribed for Local Government Councils by clause (4) of Article 181 of the Constitution shall apply to the term of the Local Government Councils in existence at the time that clause came into force.”

Justification

This provision is intended to substitute for the current Article 291 of the Constitution since it was introduced in 2005 in the Constitution (Amendment) Act of 2005 as a traditional provision and it has since served its purposes and is now a spent provision.

Madam Chairperson, the replacement is, therefore, intended to avoid the transitional provision to extend the term of Local Government Councils from five years to seven years and to be precise, from 2016 to 2023.

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, honourable members, those are the proposals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. This would have been good if it were debated in the report. However, now that it is here, let me refer Members of Parliament to rule 93 of our Rules of Procedure that says “Declaration of personal interest in any matters before the House”.

Madam Chairperson, as we speak now, what hon. Tusiime has raised is of an interest to the current Members of Parliament. The rule says, “A Member shall not take part in the discussion of any matter before the House or committee, in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of the interest to the House or Committee”.

Madam Chairperson, the rule says, “(2) A Member having any interest in any matter before the House shall declare the nature of his or her interest in the matter and shall not vote on any question relating to that matter.” Now, we came here for five years and the Constitution by which we came says we are going to be here for five years. We cannot make the Constitution retrospective because there is nothing we are trying to clear which had gone bad. We cannot make a law retrospectively and you cannot say - (Interjection) - I have not even spoken and you are already giving me information? Please, give me a chance to develop my point. You are here and you will speak. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we came here for a term of five years and the contract we signed with the people of Uganda was for five years. There is no way you can come here and change the contract when the other party is not involved- (Interruption)

MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The amendment of Article 61(2) has implications which are also spoken about in our rule 123, “Rules regarding settlement of financial matters” and it tells us when to amend and how not to amend as long as it has an effect on the consolidated fund. Chairperson you will realise by amending rule 61 to extend the number of days, we are even extending the period for nomination backwards, it has an economic effect to the country. 

In short what I understand the intention of hon. Tusiime is to recover the time and the economy of the country by introducing those amendments and, therefore, these are consequential and it ceases being a conflict of interest. 

Is, therefore, the member in order to say that we are abrogating a rule and want to benefit ourselves when we are trying to cure an effect by amending Article 60(1), 103 and 104, is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I think that the House is in catch 22 situation. First, it is only this House that can legislate. The local councils cannot come here, so we must do it for them. The President cannot come here, so it is this House which must do it for him. Therefore, this House has to carry out that duty. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for your ruling, Madam Chairperson. I think my colleague should have listened carefully. We are talking about Article 61, 77 and 291; I have not talked about Article 102 and 104. I wonder how a colleague just stands up and mentions what I have not spoken unless you wanted to show yourself.

Chairperson, what I mean is that there is nothing we are recovering under Article 1 of our Constitution; it says power belongs to the people –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much, chairperson. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose on the issue of conflict of interest, but I see him moving to debate on a substantial matter. On the issue of conflict of interest which he raised, Chairperson, is it procedurally right for him to proceed on debating a matter substantially when we have not yet moved to that clause?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I made a ruling because there is only one Parliament, so we must do that duty for the local councils and President who cannot come here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Chairperson. You had ruled, but I think my colleague was dozing and forgot. Therefore, what we are trying to talk about is what hon. Tusiime raised, don’t hurry you will reach if you want. Article 1 of our Constitution says, “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.”

Now, if we do what we would like to do, we will be infringing on the powers of the people of Uganda because they are the ones who voted us into power. They voted us for five years to do what is required. If you are saying that we amend this law, there is no problem, but it cannot apply to the current Parliament. The reason is simple, first the people of Uganda voted us for a contract of five years.

Chairperson, as soon as the five years expire –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: I want to raise a point of order and I would like to know whether hon. Nandala-Mafabi is in order to derive debate of this House in light of the clear provisions of the Constitution under our laws? When we embark on hon. Tusiime’s amendment and amend the articles he is proposing, we are not doing it exclusively for this Parliament, but we are doing it for posterity, today and future.

We are not considering only this Parliament, but we are talking about local council governments. Chairperson, when we were faced with the proposed amendments, we thought guidance from the people who are supposed to tell us whether the amendments in any way impact on the national coffers, whether they have financial implications or not.

Chairperson, the Ministry of Finance which gives clearance of financial implications gave us a certificate of financial implications which clearly indicates that contrary to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying if the expected amendments pass, the country will register a saving in revenues.

I would like to read from the certificate of financial implications. It says: “Funding and budget implications. The principle to extend the term of Office of the President, Parliament and local councils does not have additional funding implications to Government beyond the current emoluments and allowances which shall be met within the existing resources.

e) Expected savings and all revenues to Government. If the amendments are approved, there will be no general elections in 2021 and, therefore, savings to Government in form of resources earmarked for elections in 2023.
 
In addition, there will be savings from the resources that would otherwise be required to purchase vehicles for Members of Parliament in the real term of 2021.” The submission is that clearly these proposed amendments do not have any financial implications to the country.

Considering that we are making these amendments for posterity for all the local councils and Parliament and they do not have any financial implications, therefore, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to distract debate on these amendments stating a rule which is not applicable?


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me say this again; it is only this House that can legislate for the whole country, especially on issues of governance. I am sure that this Parliament legislated for the five years and it can still legislate for the country again.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if the Attorney-General can come and bring a certificate of financial implication that he is very happy about, let hon. Tusiime bring- I thought the Executive was not aware; I am so surprised. 

Madam Chairperson, the issue I am raising is that we are just representatives of the people. Therefore, we cannot turn ourselves into the people and the people become representatives. If you are saying that we were not voted here for five years, then I would like somebody to explain to me if we were voted for seven years. There is no way in which you can come and amend your current term. This law can only take effect in 2021 if you want but not now. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us agree on the principles and then we can agree on the time. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the seven years because the five years have been enough for us. You have talked about regular elections; why do you want to take a long period? In this case, if you have an inefficient person, then you will have a problem. 

In Africa – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, according to the report we got from the committee, they have analysed 19 countries. Of those, 15 are talking about five years. One talks about seven years. Two, were four years and another one was six years. 

Why then don’t we reduce the terms to four years? Why do you want a long period? What you are raising does not carry anything and this law will be expunged like the anti-homosexuality law. We passed it here, somebody went to court because of the illegality and the law was no longer in existence. 

Madam Chairperson, this is not acceptable and the people of Uganda cannot agree on this. We are representatives; we are not the people of Uganda. We should remember Article 1 of the Constitution that states that, “All power belongs to the people.” Therefore, they are the ones to determine this. We signed a contract for five years. 

I have not refused the local councils because we legislate for them but we cannot come and say they should also extend their term for seven years. We are saying that we should maintain the five years. If you want the seven years, it should only run after 2021. I submit. 

MR TUSIIME: Madam Chairperson, permit me to lay on the Table a certificate of financial implications and the copy of the proposed amendment. I beg to lay. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to be a bit patient with each other. Hon. Tusiime my good friend and classmate is moving on a very fast track. I would like to ask of him to step on his brakes and we appreciate each other on where he is going and how he is moving. 

As I speak, he is laying documents on the Table. These documents have a lot of implication on where we are coming from and where he intends to move us. However, we are patient enough to try and understand his intended journey. 

Before that, Madam Chairperson, I would like to imagine that Articles 61 (2), (3) and 77 that he mentioned cannot be laid on the Table in isolation of Article 105 (1), which is an entrenched article. I would like to concede that under Articles 260 and 261, 77 are not entrenched per say. However, I need to be properly convinced on a few principles. 

First of all, any lawyer here would know that we are talking about the Constitution; the supreme law of the land. We are aware that all laws that we try to enact must be in conformity with it because it is still a generic document. Suddenly because you are trying to amend the Constitution, we need to understand whether any intended amendment would not infringe on other articles of the Constitution. 

That is why I am raising the fact that Articles 61 (2) and 77 cannot be discussed in isolation of Article 105 (1). For example; would you think of extending the term of Parliament while staying the term of the President? Assuming that you change the term of President by referendum such that it is fits there with that of Parliament; how sure are you that after extending the term of Parliament to seven years, a referendum will automatically give you seven years of the presidency? Are we here to enact anarchy? I think we need to be careful – (Interruption) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and hon. Mpuuga for giving way. I think you are right that the term of Parliament currently is tagged to the term of the President. That is why hon. Tusiime indicated earlier on that his amendment affects other articles in the Constitution. 

That is why the proposed amendment on Article 77 (3) affects Article 61 and others. In effect, if we carry the amendment, then the elections and terms for Parliament and local councils will be separate from that of the President and there will be no problem. 

If a referendum has to be taken, that is a different decision and it is not a question of law. It should be a question of the organisation. Hence, if we carry the amendment, all the other articles that are affected are being proposed to be amended and there will be no problem with the way I understand these amendments. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your information. I heard hon. Tusiime quite well and did record down all the articles intended for the amendments. 

My point of contention is for example if you move to amend Article 77 (3), you will automatically offend Article 1. You will be impeaching the power of the people because you can only extend the term of office through the power of the people in an election, not in Parliament. If you do that, the consent of the people can only be obtained through regular free and fair elections. 

You can disagree but we are not bound to agree. However, I am making my point that if you amend Article 77 (3), you will offend Article 1 of our Constitution.

We are not in a state of war for you to extend the term of Parliament through Article 77 (4). There is no emergency so in my view, the intended amendments moved by my brother offend –(Interruption)
	
MS AMONGI: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the proposal by the honourable member is not to extend the tenure, because extension as envisaged, which is conditional under Article 77 (4) is where there exist a state of war or emergency which prevents a normal general election from being held hence extension of life of parliament to a period not exceeding six months. That is where extension comes.

In the circumstance of the amendment being proposed, it is on the question of the term of Parliament - the term from five to seven. Therefore, that is the difference between the issue of extension and term of Parliament and Local Government.

As you rightly stated, this provision from parliamentary and local government is not entrenched. Further information to that is to the effect that Article 79, which is a function of Parliament, gives Parliament the power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.

Therefore, if the honourable member feels that for the purpose of good governance, we need to make that the programme of Government, it is still benefiting the people. It will not offend the power of the people. We will still be within the realms of the functions of Parliament.

MR MPUUGA: Let me finalise Madam Chair. I do appreciate the views of my dear sister; but I would like to advise that the Constitution is a unique document? If you were schooled in law, I would have referred you to a case of Gen. David Tinyefunza v. the Attorney General. There is a Supreme Court judgment in reference to the nature of the Constitution.

The Constitution is interpreted as a whole, not in parts and all these articles actually do complement each other. They cannot be read in isolation. This is why when you offend 77(3), 61(2), actually 105(2) entrenches in a way 77(3) and 61(2).

If you are going to interpret the Constitution -(Interjection)- are you going to have a seven year term of Parliament and five year term of the presidency; unless you are interpreting the Constitution differently from what I know. You are going to be offending Article 1, 61(2) 77(3), 105(2) by trying to attack this particular article.

Therefore, Madam Chair, I effectively disagree with the intended amendment and my understanding of the law views these as unconstitutional amendments.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am not going to differ very much from my learned friend. I only want to put it to the House that in my opinion, we are becoming too much to the Ugandans, let us be very open.

This thing of just hiding –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Chairperson, I am rising on an issue in regard to what we are debating right now on the proposed amendment and the comment that hon. Tinkasiimire has made on the Floor. He has mentioned that the Members of the Tenth Parliament are becoming too much. I am wondering whether hon. Tinkasiimire, who has interest in the proposed amendment that has been brought by hon. Tusiime is in order. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us concentrate on legislating and let us agree whether we receive, accept and so on.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I want us to be very honest to ourselves, honest to this country, our children and our great grandchildren, that these proposals are not coming in good faith.

Madam Chairperson, when you look at the proposal -(Interruption)

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, the word “honourable” goes with conduct. Is it in order for the honourable member to impute that Members of this august House are not honest?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order. Now, honourable members, what I understand this amendment to be about is that henceforth, instead of holding elections every five years, they suggest that they be held every seven years. I think that is the gist of this amendment and that is seven years for the local councils and Parliament - that is my understanding.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, when you read the proposals, they have been kind enough, they have even included this current term from 2016 to 2023. In my opinion, I have a specific contract for five years with the people of Buyaga West.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Tinkasiimire, would you support a situation where the local governments are elected for seven year, Parliament five years and President five years.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, whereas, I agree with the desires of the Members, I entirely disagree with us making a law for the sake of benefiting ourselves. There is no local council that has submitted to this House a memorandum saying five years is not enough. This one is coming from a Member of Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I stated earlier that there is only one House in this country, which can legislate for the whole country; it is our responsibility to legislate for the whole country.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: My last submission-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Take your seat.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, initially when this proposal came up, some of us had reservations. I belong to the private sector, I took time to go and consult the Private Sector Foundation, this is business community that pays our taxes and today they told me they are tired of footing our huge bill which comes almost after every day. As soon as we come out of elections, we start electioneering and we disrupt their businesses. They were very clear that extending this term will give them time to do their businesses and realise more taxes. 

As I talk, they are watching you – the private sector foundation and the business community down there. It is no wonder that if you see this certificate of financial implications, it is very clear that we are going to save for this country huge sums of money that will go into infrastructure, education and other developments. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, when you look at Article 79 – which is very clear – we have the powers to make laws. The Constitution gives this Parliament powers to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance. The good governance the people are talking about is the period which can give them peace and time to develop this country.

The extension of seven years is not meant for Byabagambi as an individual. This is a mere term which will affect everybody – local government, Parliament, presidency and everybody. Therefore, I request that this should be passed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(New clause introduced.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The draft people will sort out the numbering.

Clause 2

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in clause 2, the committee agreed with the proposed amendment to Article 102(b) and proposed that Article 102 is redrafted as follow. 

“Article 102: Qualifications and disqualifications of the President”

    1) A person is qualified for election as President if that person-
    a) is a citizen of Ugandan by birth;
    b) is a registered voter;
    c) is a resident in Uganda on the nomination day; 
    d) has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent.

    2) A person is not qualified for election as President if that person-
    a) is of unsound mind;
    b) is holding or acting in an office the functions of which involve the responsibility for, or in connection with the conduct of an election;
    c) is a traditional or cultural leader as defined in Article 246 of this Constitution;
    d) has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law enforced in Uganda and has not been discharged;
    e) is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of fine;
    f) has within seven years immediately preceding the election been convicted by a competent court of an offence involving dishonesty or moral turpitude; or
    g) has within seven years immediately preceding the election been convicted by a competent court of an offence under any law relating to elections conducted by the Electoral Commission.”

Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to specifically provide the qualifications for election as president and to remove age restriction as a condition for election as president. The explanation is that the qualification for election of a person as president has been entrenched in all constitutions of Uganda since 1966 with varying limitations. 

Under the 1966 Constitution of Uganda, Article 36 required that the President was that person who was the leader in the National Assembly of the party having numerical strength, which consists of the majority of all the Members of the Assembly returned to the Assembly after a general election. 

Age restrictions were first introduced in the 1967 Constitution and required a person to be 40 years to be President but without the upper age restriction. 

In the 1995 Constitution – which was based on the Odoki Report – the proposal collected from the people of Uganda was that for a person to be President he or she should be 40 years and above but without an upper age restriction. The upper age restriction was imposed by the Constituent Assembly to protect the presidency from insane leaders. 

The committee noted that currently, Article 102(b) has the following legal challenges:

    (a) Article 102(b) is contrary to the spirit of objective No.II of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy and Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda.
    (b) Article 102(b) marginalises the aged and youth in as far as limiting their candidature for election as President of Uganda. 

Madam Chair, as we had indicated earlier, the committee’s decision was based on the following: 

    a) The need to allow Ugandans – keeping within the spirit of Article 1 of the Constitution – to have the unfettered right and sovereignty to choose their leaders, especially the person holding the Office of the President. 
    b) There was no scientific evidence adduced before the committee indicating that persons below 35 years and those above 75 years are incapable of leading a nation.
    c) There was no evidence adduced before the committee indicating that persons below 35 years and those above 75 years lacked the requisite cognitive abilities to lead a nation.
    d) There is no evidence that all persons above the age of 75 years suffer from cognitive decline and are, therefore, unable to lead. 

The committee observed that different people have different traits and capabilities at different stages of growth. The committee noted that Article 102(b) assumed wrongly that all persons below the age of 35 and those above 75 lack the intellectual ability to lead a nation, merely based on their age.

The committee however observed that paragraphs (b) and (c) of Article 102, conflict in the sense that whereas paragraph (a), requires that a person qualifies for presidency, if he or she is a citizen by birth, paragraph (c), on the other hand, requires that a person qualified for presidency, if he or she qualifies for election as a Member of Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, Article 80, prescribes the qualifications for being a Member of Parliament. It says such a person must be a citizen of Uganda. By implication, therefore, if paragraph (a) and (c) are to be implemented, there will be confusion as to whether a person has to be a citizen by birth as prescribed in paragraph (a) or be a citizen by birth as prescribed in the qualifications of a Member of Parliament. In order to remove this confusion, the committee proposes to re-draft Article 102 as above. I beg to report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2, be amended, as proposed by the chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, in Uganda, parties can nominate a candidate. If you look at (c), it says “A resident in Uganda on the nomination day.” That means that that person must have been in Uganda on the nomination day and yet a party can nominate their candidate. I would like to propose that we should delete (c) since it conflicts with the Constitution and the electoral laws. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Member is proposing that on the committee’s recommendations, there is a requirement that a person is qualified for election as President, if that person is a resident in Uganda on nomination day and he has said it is a dangerous thing.

We had a situation in the Committee of Appointments where we refused to approve the appointment of some ambassador on this ground. I would like to request the chairperson of the committee to help us define what amounts to residence. Otherwise, if residence is physical staying in Uganda – or is there another legal connotation to it? I would like to propose to say that “a resident of Uganda by the nomination day” so that there is no specific requirement for anyone to be in the country to be a resident on nomination day.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we do not want to take much time on that. The requirement to be a registered citizen - even for all other offices, residency is required. However, if someone wants to be President and they can be nominated from the USA, maybe online – Madam Chairperson, we concede to delete that, if that is what they envisaged. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the current -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which is your area of dissatisfaction?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The moment you are a citizen of Uganda by birth – the only problem comes where there is the issue of dual citizenship. I would like to request the chairperson to help me understand. Supposing someone has dual citizenship, for example, he or she is a Ugandan by birth and Rwandese by residence or registration or descent, will he or she be eligible to contest as a President of Uganda? We need to now tie it here. Mr Chairman, I am talking to you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is asking: Suppose a candidate flew in at 8 o’clock and then at 10 o’clock he goes for nomination, would that be a problem? That is what he is asking. Must they sleep here in order to go for nomination? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  I would like to add also, should a person who has dual citizenship - for example, someone who is Ugandan by birth but is also a citizen of UK, like the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) boss. Can he or she contest as a President?  Under this law, what stops him? Unless we put it very clear that a person who is contesting as the President should be of dual citizenship. Otherwise, if you do not, the ISO boss of Uganda who is also a UK citizen can stand as a President.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we are not talking about that. We are on residence. Isn’t that what you asked? Whether you must sleep here in order to be nominated or not -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: For that, we have said we should delete it. The second question is – The Chairperson has conceded that we should delete. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I created a scenario. From LCI election in the Local Government Act, the words used are that for a person to qualify, you must be ordinarily a resident of that area. For a Member of Parliament, the same applies. For presidency if this Parliament – If he or she is a citizen and   is a registered voter - although people think it is not a requirement for that person to have been a resident here on nomination day. You do not have to be living here. 

The proposal we are suggesting would envisage that this is excluding those who will be flying into the country on that day. Otherwise, to be nominated here, you have to be present. If it is in the opinion of this House, it is a matter we can concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for someone to want to be a President of 30 million people; when they cannot live here; what sort of President is that?

MR KIVEJINJA: Madam Chairperson, I steered the dual citizenship law. We put out clear demarcations of who should be a President and we did it in consonance with the Constitution. When you are a dual citizen, you are not eligible to stand for President. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, our senior colleague, hon. Kivejinja, clearly knows that any law that is ultra vires in the Constitution shall be rendered redundant to the extent of its inconsistency.

Therefore, the law requires someone to be a citizen. In this case, let us address ourselves to the issue of residency. Madam Chairperson, there is a huge possibility at a point in time; it may not happen today but it can happen that a certain regime that may have fear of certain individuals can exile someone forcefully for six months to elections. Honestly speaking, we are legislating for a nation and we do not know what might happen. Someone can fall sick towards the days of the elections and he is taken out of the country for treatment for about six months, and yet the law on residence ordinarily envisages a period of either six months or a year. 

In this case, Madam Chair, we are still comfortable with the law that a person should be a citizen by birth. To be honest, people will decide whether it is better to have a resident or a non-resident. That can really be decided by the electorates at such a time when they deem it fit.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that at the time of nomination, a presidential candidate must be present in person. I think that can create a lot of problems. As an aspiring President, you may fall sick and you are airlifted to America, UK or Nairobi. In this case, somebody can injure you intentionally so that you are airlifted for treatment. In other cases, somebody can kidnap you and take you away to another country so that you are not present at the time of your nomination. I think we leave it as a citizen.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, for us we had conceded already to deletion of Article 102(c). Therefore, we delete that and we shall sort ourselves when we get there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that- 

MS AMULE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I do not know whether the correction on Article 102(a) - The report of the committee is saying “a President shall be a citizen of Uganda” and it stops there. I would love to introduce “a citizen of Uganda either by descent or by birth” depending on what the House may take. However, I would go with “by descent” to avoid our hospitality of accepting refugees from all over the world and tomorrow throwing out our own bona fide Ugandans.

Secondly, on Article 102(c), I would also think that-

MR ODONGA OTTO: The words “citizen by birth” and “citizen by descent” are legal terms. In fact, the one we want is “citizen by birth”. That is the one proposed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is in the Constitution.

MS AMULE: Thank you so much, honourable member, for the information. However, according to the ruling of the Chairperson, we are supposed to introduce new things at this stage, delete what we do not want and incorporate what we would like to add. According to me, my proposal is “by descent”. 

Madam Chairperson, in clause (c) I think it is very prudent for us to have a President who loves Uganda and would like to be part and partial of the problems and victory of Uganda. We are not saying you should only be present at the time of your nomination, but you should be a resident of the country. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give hon. Amule is that she is on the right tract. It is very difficult for a person who has been out of the country for such a long time to come and impose himself on the people as their leader. You know, -(Interjections)- let me submit first; you will have the Floor.

Madam Chairperson, on the issue of residency, it is even very vital for us to specifically say one must have been a resident in the country within the last term of the current President at least for 182 days, so that people get to know you before you come to office. That is the best. Somebody can come with dollars here and disorganise the people who have been here all the time; that is not good.

Therefore, I feel that is the best thing to do. However, this one saying you must be present on the day of nomination does not work. Residency has an implication. Poverty in taxation; when we are talking about international taxation-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 102 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 102, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3 of the Bill, the committee proposes to amend Article 104 as follows:

“(2) 	A petition under clause 1 of this article shall be lodged in the Supreme Court Registry within 14 days after the declaration of the election results.

(3)	The Supreme Court shall enquire into and determine the petition expeditiously and shall declare its findings not later than 45 days from the date the petition is filed.

(6)	Where an election is annulled, a fresh elections, shall in accordance with Article 103, be held within 44 days from the date of the annulment.

(7)	If after a fresh election held under sub-clause (6) of this article, there is another petition which succeeds, then the presidential election shall be postponed and upon the expiry of the term of the incumbent President, the Chief Justice shall perform the functions of the Office of President until a new President is elected and assumes office.”

This proposal is by amending immediately after clause (7) as it is in the law the following new clauses:

“The Electoral Commission shall organise and conduct the election postponed in clause (7) within six months of the expiry of the term of the incumbent President.”

Madam Chairperson, now we should be considering in light of the 122 days which is retained in the law so that when we are inserting from sub-clause (7), we have the days in our minds.

“Chairperson, notwithstanding, the Electoral Commission shall organise and conduct elections postponed in clause (7) within six months of the expiry of the term of the incumbent President”. We are proposing that to insert this “- notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, a person elected President following an election held in clause (7)(a) or Article 103(3) of this residue term of Parliament” - that is what we had proposed.

“The Chief Justice shall not while holding the office exercise the following powers of the President under sub clause (7).

(a)	The nomination or appointment of judges of courts of judicature.
(b) 	The nomination or appointment of any other public officer whom this Constitution or any other law requires the President to appoint.
    (c) The nomination or appointment or dismissal of public officers. 
(d) 	The nomination or appointment or dismissal of a high commissioner, ambassador or diplomatic or consular representative.
(e) 	The Prerogative of Mercy. 
(f) 	The authority to confer honours in the name of the people and Republic of Uganda. Whenever the Chief Justice holding the Office of President under clause (7), the Deputy Chief Justice shall perform the duties of the Chief Justice prescribed in this Constitution or any other law”.

Madam Chairperson, the following are the changes proposed by the committee: “Increase the time within which to file a petition from 10 to 14 days”. Here we have to consider whether we maintain or retain.

“Increase the time within which the Electoral Commission can hold fresh elections upon nullification of presidential elections from 20 to 40 days.

To require the Electoral Commission to comply with the processes prescribed in Article 103 of the Constitution when holding fresh elections following the nullification of a presidential election by court.

These processes include: carrying out fresh nomination for presidential aspirants, collection of the relevant signatures to support each candidate’s nomination as required in Article 103. We were here watching what was happening in Kenya; the issues in court were whether the rerun required a fresh nomination. 

Article 104(7) to require the Chief Justice instead of the Speaker to take over the presidency in circumstances where a second petition challenging the election of an incumbent President succeeds and the presidential election is postponed.

To put a timeline of six months within which to hold the postponed Presidential Election in Article 104(7); To require the Chief Justices whose term of office is not connected to the term of Office of the President and Member of Parliament to take over the presidency instead of the Speaker of Parliament whose term of office ends with that of the President?

Madam Chairperson, we are looking at a situation where we have just been in elections say in February and by May, before you are elected and sworn in, the term of the President expires on 12th May and there is nobody to swear you in. There should be an elected Government and President by that time –(Interjections)- term of Parliament ends on 12th May and so does that of the presidency.

To require the Deputy Chief Justice to prescribe the powers of the President, acting may not exercise. Therefore, we made those proposals and we copied what is in Kenya and we applied it here so that an acting President - we cannot leave a blank cheque to do anything, but we had to prescribe what you could do or not do. 

To require the Deputy Chief Justice to take over the duties of the Chief Justice upon assumption of Office of President by the Chief Justice. The explanation is that the committee observed that the current Article 104 prescribes timelines for carrying out certain processes that are unrealistic in light of the duties imposed.

Therefore, the committee recommended increasing those timelines as follows:

    1. To increase the time for filing a petition from 10 to 14 days in order to afford the petitioner adequate time to collect evidence.
    2. To increase the time within which the Electoral Commission can hold fresh elections upon the nullification of a presidential elections from 20 to 45 days.
    3. To increase the time within which court is to determine a petition from 30 to 44 days and we are giving in allowance for five days in between for weekends. 

The Bill does not address the ambiguity in Article 104(6) of the Constitution. The committee noted with concern that Article 104(6) is ambiguous in the sense that, it is not clear as to whether when a presidential election is annulled; any person can participate in the subsequent election or it is only persons who participated in annulled election that can participate like the case in Kenya.

The committee proposes in Article 104(7), that the Chief Justice instead of the Speaker takes over the presidency in circumstances where a second petition challenging the election of an incumbent President succeeds and the presidential election is postponed.

This is based on the fact that the Speaker just like the President, his or her term would have ended with that of the President meaning that there might not be a Speaker to take over the office.

The committee noted that when the election is postponed, Article 104(7) did not prescribe the time within which the postponed elections are to be held and that is just blank in the current Constitution. This is likely to be abused if the time, within which the postponed election is to be held is not indicated. The committee proposes six months within which the postponed elections are to be held.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also noted that the Constitution had not provided the powers of the person occupying the office of the President. Other than through an election exercise, the committee is of the view that certain powers of the President should not be exercised by a person in an acting capacity. 

These powers include: power to appoint officers and dismiss persons. This is because if it is not legally permissible for a person to exercise certain powers of the President while in acting capacity. The committee also proposed that a person elected president in the middle of the term of Parliament does serve five years as required in Article 105 of the Constitution, but only serves the duration of Parliament. This is to ensure that at all times, the term of Parliament and that of the President run concurrently. This will also ensure that the cost of holding elections in Uganda is minimised. We asked the Electoral Commission and they said they use about Shs 140 billion in every election. 

Whereas for Members of Parliament - we have now members who came as a result of a by-election unfortunately, in our committee we had one from Iganga who will serve for the remaining period. However, under Article 105 (1) of our Constitution, it is stipulated that a person elected as President shall serve for five years. This means, if anything in the event of death or resignation, anybody that comes has to serve for five years. Therefore, the changes we were making were that the person should serve only for the remaining period. 

Madam Chairperson, that is what we can report. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I just wanted to draw your attention to the fact that the proposals you read were based on 172 days but we have voted it to 122 so- 

MR OBOTH: I think that the technical bench would probably be able to harmonise the changes so that it fits in. We now probably have to reduce the acting period of six months and we have a very able technical team there; I see them nodding, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So will they work within the 122 days? 

MR OBOTH: They have to work within the 122 days. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I do not have a copy of the original Bill by hon. Magyezi and I have not addressed my mind to it. However, what the committee chairperson is proposing is very dangerous and I do not think we have enough time to dispose it off. 

First of all, they are changing the order of precedence in this country. My understanding of the order of precedence is the President, the Vice President, Speaker of Parliament and the Chief Justice. 

I have to be persuaded; if not, then we will leave the Constitution the way it is. They are saying in a situation where there is a rerun, the Supreme Court is the one to determine the matter. In that instance, the person who is to determine the matter and probably knows that he may be the next President is most likely going to cause more problems in the judgement. Therefore, this totally abuses the principle of separation of power whether you follow the theory of John Locke, Thomas Hobbes or Jean-Jacques Rousseau. 

Therefore, there is no way a Chief Justice that is determining a case would have to be the next President in case there is quagmire. This is very dangerous. 

Hence, I would want honourable members to address their minds to it. I do not know what was in hon. Magyezi’s mind when he said, “The Supreme Court shall inquire in the matter.” However, he does not go to say the Chief Justice would become the President. 

Therefore, I would persuade Members - and there might be another law which has defined the order of precedence in this country; I do not know if the committee has addressed it. 

We rather maintain what we have in the Constitution. I have been involved in election petitions; the difference between 10 and 14 days to me is little. The only input the Magyezi motion can bring, if he says that he is following the Supreme Court directive, is that we can only add more days for filing presidential petitions. We should also be specific on how much time the Supreme Court should take. Otherwise, we should leave the rest as it is in the Constitution. 

MR MWESIGWA: Madam Chairperson, this is one of the few times I agree with my friend, hon. Odonga Otto, for the good reasons he has given. One, at any one given time, there will always be Parliament. Therefore, there will always be a Speaker. 

Two, the Chief Justice is engaged in the institution. Even if he is not personally handling the election petition, he is heading the institution that is determining the election petition. I would propose that we maintain the provision as it is. (Applause) 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I actually did not understand it and I was busy trying to inquire from the Members. When I read the Constitution, Article 109 clearly provides who takes over in the absence of both the President and the Vice-President. 

In my understanding, the reason we have elections on the same day is that Parliament is still on and the Speaker of Parliament is still a Speaker of Parliament. Therefore, the presidency is still as it is. 

In case there are petition issues in the office of the President, the Members of Parliament are not affected because a sitting Parliament still moves on until the 16th or 18th day of May. Therefore, the Speaker of Parliament is still there with her full due powers, roles and mandate. 

Now in case there is a situation where we have to go for a rerun, there is nothing hindering Parliament in the know from swearing and constituting itself. Once you constitute Parliament, it will move to elect its Speaker and the Speaker will take responsibility. These are functions of elected leaders and they must remain with elected leaders. 

You saw what happened in Kenya recently; they were about to go to a quagmire. Therefore, we must maintain the status quo. 

MS BINTU: Madam Chairperson, to add on to what my sister has said; the new Parliament is elected when the old one is still on-going. When the new Parliament is being sworn in, the old one expires. However, I envisage a scenario where the new one has been sworn in before they can elect their Speaker and the election of the President gets nullified. 

Then what I am talking about is that period of either one or two days lag. I am seeking clarification on who handles that period because in this case, the term of the Speaker and the Parliament has expired. The new Parliament is sworn in but the Speaker is not yet elected and yet the elections of the President have been nullified. How do we handle that period? Who acts there? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think our practise has been that the old Parliament only expires when the new one is sworn in so there is no gap. 

MR MWESIGWA: To clarify further, until a new speaker is elected and sworn in, the Speaker remains the Speaker. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I think we have handled this matter. The reason the committee expanded the time was to give us time to do the petition and also to organise the rerun. Hence, the period is within the time that we have expanded so there will be no gap at all and I think that is fine. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, hon. Okot-Ogong read the committee chairperson’s mind. However, we wanted to concede, especially in view of the 122 days that we had indicated earlier.  One colleague down here was asking me if I envisage becoming Chief Justice and if I wanted a special position, but that is not true. I knew she was joking. 

Madam Chairperson, we are conceding to the status quo and then the rest would be consequential to harmonise it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it has not been amended. There is no amendment.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put to the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The title 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, there is a clause here - The committee has another clause. I want to ask the chairperson about me inserting immediately after clause 3, amendment to Article 105 of the Constitution. 

On page 5, there was a clause about term limits. The committee was proposing to amend Article 105 of the Constitution to add there: “A person shall not hold office as President for more than two terms.” 

The justification is to reinstate the term limits in the Constitution and to clearly require that for purposes of computing term limits, a term will start running from the next constitution of Parliament.

MR OBOTH: Well, Madam Chairperson, at the beginning of the debate, this committee suffered a bit of a setback when this House was inquiring where we got what we put in on term limit and the tenure of the presidency. 

During the debate, I was here throughout. We thought as a committee that Members would be excited about this. Just a few of you, were. As I stand now, since that was not part of the Bill, I decline to pursue that proposal. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to move an addition of a new clause. Madam Chairperson, since you allowed hon. Michael Tusiime to raise an amendment, I want to bring an amendment to Article 105 of our Constitution to introduce term limits -[Members: Aye] - thank you. 

I want to say that a person shall not hold office as President for more than two terms. In addition to that, this should take effect from the next Parliament. We do not want to count this Parliament; we want this one to be entrenched as (f) in chapter 5 under amendment - entrench it as chapter 7, Article 105 (1) and (2). I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, that would be a good trade off. I want to support the submissions by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we need to have term limits reinstated to two terms and we have that Article entrenched so that in future, when we are not here and anyone wants to change anything to do with term limits, they will have to go for a referendum. I, therefore, implore my colleagues that we accept that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, what do you say?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the Members are putting the committee chair in a very difficult position. For us we made a proposal, the general recommendations on a number of things. We leave it to this House, whether it is in the interest of this House or the nation; but for us from the beginning and I want to be clear - I mind about the integrity of myself and the name of the committee.

We did what we did including when somebody doubted Prof. Baryamureba - his submission on page 7 and it was on this record, over things that touched on my own integrity as a leader of this committee.

Now, Madam Chairperson, I have reported on the clauses that we considered, I leave it to you that we do not have any personal interest in pursuing this - but as a committee, we have reported.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question Article 105 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have moved both amendments that this Article be re-entrenched –(Interjections)- under Article 260 we entrench it to be under (f), we add and (2). The justification is to avoid it being changed at will.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that that clause be further amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I want us to move well aware of exactly what we have just passed. The motion by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if I heard him very well, was to reinstate term limits. We have not had occasion to debate that motion –(Interjection)- if we had occasion, we would demonstrate that the same reasons we have used to remove age limit are the same reasons for which in 2005 we removed term limits.

Secondly, that matter cannot be amended by this Parliament –(Interjection)- It is a question of a referendum –(Interjection)- Yes, in 2005 it was a referendum that removed term limits. I beg that you consider this matter –(Interjection)- and we debate the matter exhaustively and we take a decision well knowing what it is we are deciding. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the issue which went to the referendum in 2005 was the issue of the political system.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General should be courteous. You had ruled on this matter. Is he in order to proceed that way?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we voted on it already. 

I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.56
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.57
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017” and passed the entire Bill with amendments and also introduced and passed new clauses – amending articles 77, 181, 29, 291, 105 and 260. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall go for the third reading. I will now invite the Clerk to ring the Bell for 15 minutes. Therefore, I will suspend proceedings for 15 minutes. The bell will be rung and we reassemble.

(House suspended at 8.59 p.m. for 15 minutes)

(On resumption at 9.25 p.m. the Speaker, Presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going for third reading. I invite all the Members who are able to sit in the Chamber to come in inside so that we can take the vote.

I would like to appeal that you do not make preambles. Just vote because the preambles are taking time. They were done on the second reading. You do not need to do preambles on the third reading. Just vote.  Vote either Yes, No or Abstain.

MR RUKUTANA: I rise on a point of procedure. We have passed the provisions of the Magyezi Bill with amendments. We have also passed the amendments proposed by hon. Tusiime, including term limits proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. However, there is something we have to clarify.

Madam Speaker, in the Tusiime amendments, the commencement date is clearly specified. However, in the Nandala-Mafabi amendment, we did not agree on the commencement date – (Interjection)- no, what is in the committee report is not what we passed. The chairperson abandoned the amendment in the committee report.  Hon. Nandala-Mafabi moved his own amendment but it falls short of the commencement date and yet in the Tusiime amendment, there is the commencement date.

Madam Speaker, if we are to move properly, we should be clear on the commencement date of the Nandala-Mafabi amendment. I would like to propose that it should be known to us that we do not have mandate to determine presidential terms. That is for the referendum. The commencement date for the term limits can only be after the referendum.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can see my colleague, hon. Mugoya, very busy trying to demonstrate that he knows everything. However, I have a judicial report here for you. 

Madam Speaker, I said we should put two term limits so that every President serves two terms. The two terms are known. As soon as you go for an election, you know that you are going for two terms. The current one is in accordance with the current law; it is a different contract. We are not touching on it.

If we had said it should be retrospective that is when you would make an argument. Otherwise, it is not retrospective. It would mean as soon as you are elected as the President, you must know that you are serving for two terms. What is wrong with this? Why don’t you make me the Attorney-General of your country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invite hon. Magyezi to move for the third reading.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

9.41
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) BILL, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill be read the third time and do pass. We are going to start by roll call.

(Members voted by roll call.)

    1. Ababiku Jesca - Yes
    2. Abacacon Gutomoi - Absent
    3. Abala David - Yes 
    4. Abigaba Cuthbert - Yes
    5. Abiriga Ibrahim - Yes
    6. Achen Christine - Yes 
    7. Achia Remigio - Yes
    8. Achia Terence - Yes
    9. Acheng Sarah Opendi - Yes
    10. Achiro Lucy - No
    11. Acidri James - No
    12. Acon Julius - Yes
    13. Adoa Hellen - Yes 
    14. Adeke Anna - Absent	
    15. Adome Bildad -Absent
    16. Adong Lilly - No
    17. Agaba Abbas - Absent			
    18. Ajilo Goretti - Yes					 
    19. Akamba Paul - Yes					
    20. Akampurira Prossy - Yes				
    21. Akello Franca - No
    22. Akello Lucy - No 					
    23. Akello Rose - Yes 					
    24. Akello Silvia - Absent					
    25. Akena Jimmy – No
    26. Akol Anthony - Absent					
    27. Akora Maxwell - No				
    28. Akugizibwe Lawrence - Yes			
    29. Akurut Violet - Absent			
    30. Aleper Margaret - Yes				
    31. Alero Aza Tom - Yes						
    32. Ali Moses - Yes						
    33. Alioni Odria - Yes					
    34. Alum Santa – No 					
    35. Alyek Judith - Yes					
    36. Ameede Agnes - Yes					
    37. Amero Susan - Absent					
    38. Amoding Monicah - No
    39. Among Anita - Yes					
    40. Amongi Betty - Yes					
    41. Amongin Jacquiline - Yes				
    42. Amoru Paul - Yes					 
    43. Amule Doreen - Yes					
    44. Angella Fred - Yes					
    45. Angundru Moses - Yes				
    46. Angura Fredrick - Yes					
    47. Anite Evelyn - Yes					
    48. Anyakun Esther - Yes					
    49. Anywarach Joshua – No 
    50. Aogon Silas - No
    51. Aol Betty - Absent						
    52. Aol Jacqueline - Yes					
    53. Gabriel Aridru - Yes					
    54. Ariko Herbert - No					
    55. Arinaitwe Rwakajara - Yes				
    56. Arinda Gordon - Absent					
    57. Asaba Paul - Yes					
    58. Asamo Hellen - Yes					
    59. Asiimwe Evelyn - Yes					
    60. Asiku Elly - Yes					
    61. Benard Atiku - No
    62. Anywar Beatrice - Yes				
    63. Atim Joy - No
    64. Atim Ogwal Cecilia - No					
    65. Jacklet Atuhaire - Yes				
    66. Atyang Stella - Yes					
    67. Asinde Brenda - Yes					
    68. Avur Jane - Yes						
    69. Awor Betty - Yes					
    70. Ayaka Rose - Yes					
    71. Ayebazibwe Jastin - Yes				
    72. Ayepa Michael - Yes					
    73. Ayoo Tonny - Yes					
    74. Azairwe Dorothy - Yes				
    75. Baba James – Yes  
    76. Babirye Judith - Yes 
    77. Babirye Sarah - Yes 
    78. Babirye Kabanda Mary - Absent
    79. Babirye Veronica - Yes 
    80. Bafaki Gordon - Yes
    81. Bagiire Aggrey - Yes 
    82. Bagoole John - Yes  
    83. Baguma Spellanza - Yes   
    84. Bahati David - Yes 
    85. Bakireke Nambooze Betty - Absent 
    86. Bakkabulindi Charles - Yes   
    87. Balyeku Moses - Yes   
    88. Kawooya Anifa - Yes  
    89. Baryayanga Andrew - No
    90. Baryomunsi Chris - Yes 
    91. Baseke Fred - Yes 
    92. Bategeka Lawrence – Yes  
    93. Bbumba Syda - Yes  
    94. Bebona Josephine - Yes  
    95. Bigirwa Norah - No
    96. Bintu Jalia - Yes 
    97. Mukitale Stephen - Absent
    98. Birungi Carolyn - Yes    
    99. Bitangaro Sam - Yes   
    100. Bukenya Micheal - Yes  
    101. Burundo Alex - Yes   
    102. Karooro Mary Okurut - Yes  
    103. Butime Tom - Yes          
    104. Buturo Nsaba - Yes 
    105. Bwino Fred - Yes         
    106. Byabagambi John - Yes  
    107. Byandala Abraham - Yes  
    108. Byarugaba Alex - Yes  
    109. Byekwaso Flavia - Yes  
    110. Byibesho Sam - Yes   
    111. Centenary Robert - Absent
    112. Chekamondo Rukiya - Yes    
    113. Chekwel Lydia - Yes  
    114. Chelimo Reuben - Yes
    115. Chemutai Everlyn - Yes  
    116. Cheptoris Sam - Yes     
    117. Dhamuzungu Geofrey - Yes    
    118. Diri Baba Margaret - Yes 
    119. Driwaru Zaitun - Yes         
    120. D’ujanga Simon - Yes        
    121. Dulu Angel Mark - Yes     
    122. Ecweru Musa - Yes          
    123. Egunyu Janepher - Yes       
    124. Eitunganane Kenneth - No
    125. Elotu Cosmas - Yes         
    126. Etuka Isaac - No
    127. Fungaroo Hassan - No 
    128. Gafabusa Richard - Absent 
    129. Galabuzi Dennis - Yes    
    130. Gonahasa Francis - Absent
    131. Guma Gumisiriza David - Absent
    132. Gume Fredrick - Yes    
    133. Igeme Nabeta - Yes    
    134. Ikojo John Bosco - Yes    
    135. Ilukor Charles - Yes    
    136. Isala Eragu Veronica - Yes    
    137. Musumba Isaac - Yes    
    138. Kaahwa Tophace - Yes    
    139. Kabafunzaki Herbert - Yes    
    140. Kabagyenyi Rose - Yes    
    141. Kabaije Sheila - Yes    
    142. Kabaziguruka Micheal - Absent
    143. Werikhe Michael - Yes
    144. Kafeero Robert Ssekitoleko - Yes    
    145. Kafuuzi Jackson - Yes      
    146. Kahunde Helen - Yes    
    147. Kajara Aston - Yes    
    148. Kajungu Mutambi Rosette - Yes    
    149. Kakooza James - Yes    
    150. Kakooza Joseph – Yes
    151. Kalemba Christopher - Absent
    152. Kaliisa Jovrine - Yes    
    153. Kalule Ssengo Emmanuel - Yes    
    154. Kaluya Andrew - Absent 
    155. Kamara John - Yes    
    156. Kamateeka Jovah - Absent
    157. Kamugo Pamela - Yes    
    158. Kamuntu Ephraim - Yes    
    159. Kamusiime Caroline - Yes    
    160. Kamusiime Pentagon - Yes    
    161. Kangwagye Stephen - Yes    
    162. Karubanga David - Yes    
    163. Karuhanga Gerald - Absent
    164. Karungi Elizabeth - Absent 
    165. Kasaija Matia - Yes    
    166. Kasibante Moses - Absent
    167. Kasirivu Atwooki - Yes    
    168. Kasolo Robert - Yes    
    169. Kasozi Ibrahim - Absent 
    170. Kasozi Joseph - Yes    
    171. Kasule Robert - Yes    
    172. Kasumba Patrick - Yes    
    173. Katali Loy - Absent 
    174. Kato Lubwama Paul - Absent    
    175. Katoto Hatwib - Yes    
    176. Katumba Wamala Edward - Yes    
    177. Katuntu Abdu - Absent
    178. Katuramu Hood - Yes    
    179. Katusabe Atkins - No
    180. Katushabe Ruth - Yes    
    181. Katwesigye Oliver - Yes    
    182. Kemirembe Pauline - Yes    
    183. Kesande Grace - Yes     
    184. Khainza Justine - Absent
    185. Kibalya Henry - No
    186. Kibuule Ronald - Yes    
    187. Kiiza Ernest - Yes    
    188. Kiiza Stella - Yes    
    189. Kiiza Winfred - No
    190. Kinobere Herbert - Yes
    191. Kipterit Christopher - Yes
    192. Kisa Stephen - Yes
    193. Kisembo Noeline - Yes
    194. Kitatta Aboud - Yes
    195. Kitutu Goretti - Yes
    196. Kiwanda Godfrey - Yes
    197. Kiwanuka Keefa – Yes
    198. Kiyingi Deogratious - Absent
    199. Kizige Moses - Yes
    200. Koluo Joseph - Yes
    201. Komakech Lyandro - No
    202. Komuhangi Margaret - Yes
    203. Koreta Ivan - Yes
    204. Kulayigye Felix - Yes
    205. Kumama George - Yes
    206. Kunihira Agnes - Yes
    207. Kusasira Peace - Yes
    208. Kuteesa Pecos - Yes
    209. Kutesa Sam - Yes
    210. Kwiyucwiny Grace - Yes
    211. Kyagulanyi Robert - Absent	
    212. Kyambadde Amelia - Yes
    213. Kyeyune Haruna - Yes
    214. Lakot Susan - Yes
    215. Lamwaka Catherine - Yes
    216. Lamwaka Margret - Yes
    217. Lanyero Molly - Yes
    218. Lokeris Peter - Yes
    219. Lokeris Samson - Yes
    220. Lokii John Baptist - Yes
    221. Lokodo Simon -	Yes
    222. Lokoru Albert - Yes
    223. Lokwang Hillary - Yes
    224. Lowila Oketayot – No
    225. Lubega Medard – Absent 
    226. Lubogo Kenneth - Yes
    227. Lufafa Nelson - Absent
    228. Lugoloobi Amos - Yes
    229. Lukyamuzi David - No
    230. Luttamaguzi Paulson - No
    231. Lyomoki Sam - No
    232. Macho Geoffrey - Yes
    233. Mafabi Ishma -	Absent 		
    234. Maganda Julius - Yes
    235. Magyezi Raphael - Yes
    236. Makumbi Henry - Yes
    237. Mandera Amos - Yes
    238. Mangusho Lawrence - Yes
    239. Masika Apollo - Yes
    240. Masiko Winifred - Yes
    241. Mawanda Micheal - Yes
    242. Mayende Stephen - Yes
    243. Mbabaali Muyanja - Yes
    244. Mbabazi Janepher - Yes
    245. Mbaju Jackson - No
    246. Kibanzanga Christopher - Yes
    247. Mbayo Esther - Yes
    248. Mbeiza Margaret - Yes
    249. Mbogo Kezekia - Yes
    250. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa - No
    251. Migadde Robert - No
    252. Mirembe Lydia - Yes
    253. Mpuuga Mathias – Absent 
    254. Mudukoi Fred - Yes
    255. Kahonda Donozio – Yes
    256. Mugema Peter – Absent 
    257. Mugeni Milly - Yes
    258. Mugoya Gaster - Yes
    259. Mugume Roland - No
    260. Muhanga Margaret - Yes
    261. Muheirwe Daniel- Yes
    262. Muhindo Harold - No
    263. Mukasa Julius - No
    264. Mukasa Muruli - Yes
    265. Mukisa Robina - Yes
    266. Mukoda Julie - Yes
    267. Mukula Francis – Yes
    268. Mulindwa Isaac - Yes
    269. Munyagwa Mubarak - Absent
    270. Musana Eric - Yes
    271. Musasizi Henry - Yes
    272. Musoke Paul - Yes
    273. Musoke Robert- Yes
    274. Mutebi David - Yes
    275. Mutebi Noah - Yes
    276. Mutonyi Rose - Yes
    277. Mutuuzo Peace - Yes
    278. Muwanga Kivumbi – Absent
    279. Muyanja Johnson – Absent
    280. Muyingo Chrysostom - Yes
    281. Mwesige Adolf - Yes
    282. Mwesigwa Rukutana - Yes
    283. Mwesigye Fred - Yes
    284. Mwijukye Francis - No
    285. Mwine Mpaka - Yes
    286. Nabakooba Judith - Yes
    287. Nabayiga Idah – Absent 
    288. Nabbanja Robinah - Yes
    289. Nabulindo Jane - Yes
    290. Naggayi Nabilah - Absent
    291. Nagwomu Moses - Absent
    292. Naigaga Mariam - Yes
    293. Najjuma Sarah - Yes
    294. Nakate Lillian - Yes
    295. Nakawunde Sarah - Yes
    296. Nakayenze Connie - No
    297. Nalule Safia - Yes
    298. Namayanja Florence - Absent
    299. Nambeshe John - No
    300. Namoe Stella - Yes
    301. Namuganza Persis - Yes
    302. Namugwanya Benny - Yes
    303. Namujju Cissy - Yes
    304. Namukhula Grace - Yes
    305. Namuyangu Jenipher - Yes
    306. Nandala-Mafabi - No
    307. Nankabirwa Ann – Yes 
    308. Nankabirwa Ruth – Yes 
    309. Seninde Rosemary – Yes 
    310. Nantaba Idah - Absent
    311. Nanyondo Veronica - Absent
    312. Nauwat Rosemary – Yes 
    313. Nayebale Sylivia – Yes 
    314. Ndamira Catherine – Yes 
    315. Ndeezi Alex – Yes 
    316. Ngabirano Charles – Yes 
    317. Ninsiima Boaz – Yes 
    318. Niringiyimana James - No
    319. Niwagaba Wilfred - Absent 
    320. Nokrach William – Yes 
    321. Nsamba Patrick - No
    322. Nsereko Muhammad - No 
    323. Nsubuga Simeo – Yes  
    324. Ntende Robert – Yes 
    325. Nyakecho Annet – Yes 
    326. Nyiira Zerubabel – Yes  
    327. Nzoghu William – Absent 
    328. Onek Hilary – Yes 
    329. Obiga Kania – Yes 
    330. Oboth Jacob – Yes 
    331. Obua Denis – Yes 
    332. Ocen Peter – Absent  
    333. Ochen Julius - No
    334. Odonga Otto - No
    335. Odongo Jeje - Yes 
    336. Odur Jack – Yes  
    337. Odur Jonathan - Absent 
    338. Ogama Ismail – Yes 
    339. Ogenga-Latigo Morris - Absent
    340. Okot-Ogong Felix - No 
    341. Oguzu Denis - No 
    342. Ogwang Peter – Yes 
    343. Okabe Patrick – Yes 
    344. Okello Anthony - Yes 
    345. Okello Bonny – Yes 
    346. Okello Charles – Yes 
    347. Okin P.P Ojara - No
    348. Okori-Moe Janet – Yes  
    349. Okot Peter - No
    350. Okumu Reagan - No 
    351. Okupa Elijah - No 
    352. Okwir Samuel – Yes 
    353. Olanya Gilbert – No 
    354. Olega Ashraf – Yes
    355. Omony Oscar - Yes
    356. Biyika Lawrence - Yes
    357. Ongalo-Obote Kenneth – Yes 
    358. Ongiertho Emmanuel – Absent 
    359. Onyango Gideon – Yes 
    360. Onzima Godfrey – Yes 
    361. Opolot Patrick – Yes 
    362. Opolot Jacob - Yes 
    363. Orot Ismael - Yes 
    364. Oryem Henry - Yes 
    365. Angelline Osegge - Absent 
    366. Oseku Richard – Yes 
    367. Osoru Mourine – Yes 
    368. Othieno Okoth – Yes 
    369. Otto Makmot Edward – Yes  
    370. Oula George – Yes  
    371. Ouma George – Yes 
    372. Oyet Simon – Absent   
    373. Ruhunda Alex – Absent 
    374. Rwabushaija Margaret – Yes 
    375. Rwabwogo Sylvia - No
    376. Rwakimari Beatrice - Yes
    377. Rwakoojo Robina – Yes 
    378. Bright Rwamirama – Yes 					
    379. Rwemulikya Ibanda – Yes					
    380. Sabiiti Denis - Absent 					
    381. Sebaggala Abdulatif – Absent				
    382. Seguya Lubyayi – Yes						
    383. Sekindi Aisha – Yes						
    384. Sematimba Peter – Yes					
    385. Silwany Solomon – Yes					
    386. Sizomu Gersom – Absent	
    387. Soyekwo Kenneth– Yes					
    388. Ssebikaali Yoweri – Yes					
    389. Ssekabito Joseph – Yes					
    390. Edward Ssekandi - Absent
    391. Ssekikubo Theodore - No
    392. Ssembatya Edward – Yes					
    393. Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel – Absent					
    394. Ssempijja Vincent – Yes					
    395. Ssemujju Ibrahim – Absent 
    396. Ssemuli Anthony - Absent 
    397. Ssentongo Robinah - No
    398. Ssewanya Allan – Absent
    399. Ssewungu Joseph - Absent 
    400. Ssuubi Kyinyamatama Juliet – Yes					
    401. Wejuli Agnes – Yes						
    402. Taban Idi Amin – Yes						
    403. Takirwa Francis – Yes					
    404. Tayebwa Thomas – Yes						
    405. Timuzigu Michael – No
    406. Tinkasiimire Barnabas - No
    407. Tumuheirwe Fred - No
    408. Tumuramye Genension – Yes					
    409. Tumusiime Rosemary – Yes					
    410. Tumwebaze Frank – Yes					
    411. Tumwesigye Elioda – Yes					
    412. Tumwine Anne Mary – Yes					
    413. Tumwine Elly – Yes						
    414. Turyahikayo Paula – Yes					
    415. Tusiime Michael – Yes					
    416. Twesigye John – Yes 
    417. Twesigye Nathan – Yes					
    418. Twinamasiko Onesimus – Absent 				
    419. Waira Kyewalabye – Yes					
    420. Wakabi Pius - Absent						
    421. Waluswaka James – Yes					
    422. Wamala Florence – Yes					
    423. Walyomu Moses – Yes						
    424. Wamanga Wamai - Absent
    425. Wamakuyu Mudimi – Yes					
    426. Watenga Godfrey – Absent					
    427. Watongola Rehema – Yes					
    428. Wekomba Sarah – Yes						
    429. Woboya Vicent – Yes						
    430. Yaguma Wilberforce – Yes					
    431. Yeri Ofwono Apollo - Absent	
    432. Zaake Francis – Absent 
    433. Oulanyah Jacob - Absent 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were Members who were called and they were in the lobby. Clerk, please call them.

    1. Abacacon Gutomoi – Absent 		
    2. Adeke Anna - No
    3. Adome Moses - Absent						
    4. Agaba Abbas – Yes						
    5. Akello Silvia - Absent 						
    6. Akurut Violet – Yes  
    7. Amero Susan – Absent 
    8. Aol Betty - No
    9. Arinda Gordon – Yes
    10. Babirye Kabanda Mary - Absent
    11. Nambooze Betty - Absent 
    12. Mukitale Stephen - Abstain 
    13. Centenary Robert - No
    14. Etuka Isaac - Absent 
    15. Gafabusa Richard - Absent  
    16. Gonahasa Francis - Absent 
    17. Kabaziguruka Micheal - Absent
    18. Kakooza James - Yes
    19. Kalemba Christopher - Yes
    20. Kamateeka Jovah - Yes
    21. Katali Joy - Absent
    22. Kato Lubwama - Absent
    23. Katuntu Abdu - Absent
    24. Khainza Justine - No
    25. Kyagulanyi Robert - No
    26. Lufafa Nelson - Yes
    27. Mafabi Ishma - Yes
    28. Mpuuga Mathias- Absent
    29. Mugema Peter - Absent
    30. Muyanja Johnson - Absent
    31. Muwanga Kivumbi - Absent 
    32. Nabayiga Idah - Yes
    33. Nabulindo Jane - Absent
    34. Naggayi Nabilah - Absent
    35. Nakawunde Sarah - Absent  
    36. Namayanja Florence - Absent
    37. Nantaba Idah - Absent
    38. Nanyondo Veronica - Absent 
    39. Nzoghu William - Absent 
    40. Ocen Peter - Absent
    41. Ogenga Latigo - Absent
    42. Ongiertho Emmanuel- Absent
    43. Osegge Angelline - Absent 
    44. Oyet Simon - Absent 
    45. Ruhunda Alex - Absent
    46. Sabiiti Denis - Absent
    47. Ssebaggala Latif - Absent
    48. Sizomu Gershom - Absent
    49. Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel -  Absent 
    50. Ssemmuli Anthony - Absent
    51. Ssewungu Joseph - Absent
    52. Wakabi Pius - Abstain  
    53. Twinamasiko Onesimus - Yes
    54. Zaake Francis - Absent
    55. Nagwomu Moses - Yes
    56. Nzoghu William - No

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the roll call is now closed. The clerks can carry out the counting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know that I can go to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline but they might take a year to finish this case yet we have discussed this. For the good of this House and to wish my colleague a Merry Christmas, I withdraw the statement. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; that part of the Hansard should be expunged.

Honourable members, as we wait for the results, you are invited to the end of year Christmas party for the Members of Parliament. It will take place at the car park at 6 o’clock tomorrow evening and the dress code is smart casual.

Honourable members, these are the results of the roll call: the abstentions were two, 62 were against and 315 were in favour of the Bill. (Applause)

Honourable member, the question was that the Bill be read for a third time. I now declare that the title has been settled and the Bill passes. 

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) ACT, 2017.”

THE SPEAKER: The Constitutional (Amendment) (No.2) Act, 2017 has now been passed.  Thank you. 

11.03
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you whole heartedly for steering the House right from the beginning up to the end. Colleagues, you will agree with me that when we decided to elect, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga as our Speaker, we made no mistake. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we did not choose you because of your age, tribe and gender but instead we looked for your competence and experience. Congratulations and thank you so much.

I would like to thank you honourable colleagues. It was a good journey. Congratulations, Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done. It has been a very long day and I would like to thank the Clerk and her team, the Hansard team and our security people.

I also would like to give notice that the Parliamentary Commission is coming with a motion to amend the Constitution and I expect the same kind of support to the Parliamentary Commission as you have supported hon. Magyezi.

Honourable members, I wish you a Merry Christmas. The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 11.05 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
