Thursday, 22 November 2012

Parliament met at 3.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting; I welcome His Excellency the Vice President and all of you.

I am very pleased to have the Minister of Education here because I have desperate appeals from the teachers in Kamuli, who have not been paid since July - the primary school teachers - and I think I am speaking for teachers in many parts of the country. So, I do hope the minister will solve that issue. We are going for Christmas and the teachers do not know what to do. I hope something will be done.

3.37
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am seeking from you is about the news in which I heard your name in the electronic media, that you were banned from travelling to Atlanta because of the Bill on homosexuality. I am wondering whether it will affect the introduction of that Bill in the House – the homosexuality Bill. 

On the radios, they were saying that the Speaker of Parliament had been banned from travelling to Atlanta for her own safety, and I do not know whether it is true - because of your stand on the homosexuality Bill, which you said is going to be a Christmas package to Ugandans. I do not know your take on this because I heard it on the radio that you had been barred from travelling and maybe, they could even bar you from travelling to any other Western country.

I do not know whether that will resurrect that homosexuality Bill.

THE SPEAKER: First, you are the ones who are delaying that Bill. Secondly, I have not been barred from going anywhere. You do not have to worry about that.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi Mbaguta): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is true there are some teachers across the country whose salaries have not been paid. This arises out of the forensic audit by the Auditor General, where he identified that some teachers were actually out of their stations and they were ghosts.

Following that report, as a ministry, to implement the recommendations, those who had been identified were removed from the payroll. We also then advised the CAO that they should now take the list that we have re-submitted to them, to confirm that those teachers that had been reflected in the report were bona fide teachers.

We gave them three months, July, August and September in which to re-submit. I would like to say that in some cases, some districts have delayed, and I would also like to inform the House that salaries of a particular month are prepared in the previous month. So, I would expect those submissions that have come to the Ministry of Public Service to be put back to the payroll in November because this month’s salary was prepared in October, and if those submissions were in, they should be able appear on the payroll. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister, because last week, the health staff of Gulu District - Gulu Referral Hospital - were on strike because they had not received their salaries for the last eight months.

I would like to find out from the minister whether she is aware of this and what her ministry is doing as far as the salaries of those health workers are concerned.

Most of the RDCs intervened and talked to them. They agreed to go back to work, but they may soon start striking again. Could the minister give us information about that?

MS NABULYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is about those teachers who are getting half pay; what are the reasons behind that? Like they have put it, there are those who are not even on the payroll and they are quite a big number registered with the Ministry of Education.

What is the situation? People get half pay for a long time and the reasons are not stipulated clearly, and others are missing on the payroll, while others have not got salaries for months now.

DR BITEKYEREZO: For Mbarara Hospital, Madam Speaker, the situation is bad. Why? Some nurses were given excessive amounts of money, some actually ended up getting Shs 2 million or Shs 3 million per month, and they thought the President had rewarded Health with salary increments. So, they withdrew the money, but now, they are recovering the money and they are leaving some of my nurses no money at all.

However, there are some health workers in Mbarara Hospital who had a strike about three weeks ago. Again, the cause was failure of the ministries of Public Service and Finance to give them their salaries.

The same situation has happened in Mubende Hospital. I think the Ministry of Public Service should come up very clearly and tell us what is going on. Is it the same story like the pensions money? What is happening? I thank you.

MS AMODING: The inquiry I would like to make to the Minister of Public Service regards the teachers. I do not know whether she is aware that some teachers are getting less and others are getting excess. For those teachers who have taken long without being paid, and eventually access the payroll, are not paid their arrears.

In Ngora, I have over 44 teachers. Those who are not on the payroll and those that are getting less compared to the actual amount they are supposed to be getting. Thank you.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to assure you that when accounting officers who trigger off access to the payroll have done their part, we the Ministry of Public Service promise and assure you that we shall pay.

We have said that we removed a number of people arising out of the forensic audit. We have re-submitted those lists to the accounting officers. Some of the accounting officers have been very first while others have been very slow, because we needed to confirm that they are actually off the payroll.

Secondly, access to the payroll is not triggered off by Ministry of Public Service; it is triggered off by the accounting officer, the CAO, the town clerk and so on. Once they do due diligence we are able to enable the people to access the payroll.

For those who are getting excess payments because of the system’s problem, we are doing a recovery, and this recovery has been discussed with UNATO, the sector ministry - Ministry of Health in particular - on the modalities of recovery of the money that was paid in excess.

As a principle, we never make a civil servant fall below the 50 percent pay. So, the ministry will ensure that these public officers do not fall below the principle of being paid 50 percent. 

On the half pay as I have said, it is an issue of the system. It had a problem but we have tried to rectify it. 

Mbarara Hospital was discussed and I think some names of the health workers have been re-submitted for access to the payroll. When you have arrears not paid from July to today, you must first access the payroll and then we recapture the arrears of salary after you are entered on the payroll.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

3.46
MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I raised three questions and these were: Questions 52/1/09; 53/1/09 and 54/1/09 as follows:

“i)	What mechanism has the ministry put in place to streamline the payment of nominal ground rent (Busuulu) by tenants to avoid possible evictions by landlords?

ii)	What criteria does the ministry use in selecting people to benefit from the issuance of certificates of customary ownership and certificates of occupancy?

iii)	What is the role of RDCs in land matters?”

3.47
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much madam Speaker, I have prepared responses; I do not know whether you have a copy and whether Members have received their copies. But I will make sure that I speak in such a manner that we are all on board as arrangements are made to provide you with copies.

QUESTION 52/1/09

Madam Speaker and colleagues, our response is that the Land Act provides that in such a scenario, the tenant takes the money, which is the Busuulu, to the land tribunal, but as we all know, the tribunals were suspended and instead, the magistrates Grade I are the ones performing those duties. They are the ones supposed to receive the money.

My ministry has taken up this matter with the Judiciary to ensure that the magistrates’ courts receive this money in line with the land administration guidelines on enhancing security of occupancy lawful and bona fide occupants on registered land under the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010.

QUESTION 53/1/09

As regards to the second question; issuance of certificates of customary ownership and certificates of occupancy is demanded based on the request from the benefitting districts. However, for the ministry to actively get involved, it requires all the land administration institutions at the local level to be in place and operational; that is the area land committees which are at the sub-county level, recorders, district land boards and the district land offices.

QUESTION 54/1/09

Regarding the third question - the roles of RDCs; RDCS chair security committees in their areas of jurisdiction.

Land matters have in many cases taken on a security angle. Where we have had persistent threats of eviction, RDCs have been requested to ensure that the law is complied with, and law and order maintained in their areas.

QUESTION 53/1/09

The other question - that is question 53/1/09 – a) the response is that, giving loans to tenants by occupancy under the Land Fund will commence after the approval of the Land Fund regulations, which are before Cabinet for consideration and approval as submitted by my ministry.

The regulations will determine how the loan component will be managed, but more importantly, its functioning will depend on the availability of funds in order for this activity to commence.

b) 	Under this current financial year, Shs 10.353 billion was allocated for land compensation and realisation activities as follows: Shs 7 billion for land compensation to absentee landlords; and Shs 3.53 billion for regularising land ownership of bona fide occupants in Kibale District.

No funds were earmarked for giving loans to tenants by occupancy this financial year.

c) 	My ministry has been and will continue sensitising the local leaders and the public on the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 which criminalises illegal evictions. Specifically for Wakiso District, sensitisation has already started; we have a programme covering the central region, except that we are having problems of funding, which has now been compounded by recent budget cuts which targeted internal travel, meetings and seminars, and all this work of sensitisation can only be undertaken when you are undertaking internal travels because that is the only way you can reach out to people; by holding meetings. These were the first targets under the budget cuts in order to cater for the health sector.

d) 	My ministry will use this opportunity to avail the public with literature on their land rights, land procedures and land reforms. It is anticipated that by the end of this sensitisation, tenants and landlords will know how to relate to each other.

The procedure that will lead to issuance of certificates of occupancy by the recorder, who is the sub-county chief at Local Government level, and they will appreciate the importance of living in harmony and utilising the land gainfully.

The land evictions that are currently taking place in many parts of the country are of great concern to Government.

It has been decided that a meeting be convened involving all key stakeholders, in order to come up with a way forward to address the current problem of land evictions.

The date for this meeting is to be communicated by His Excellency the President on Monday 26th November 2012, and he will be chairing this very important meeting to deal with land eviction. We shall make sure that we give it as much publicity as possible such that critical people such as Members of Parliament and other leaders, besides the relevant Government agencies, can attend and give their views so that we come up with a clear way forward.

There is a question regarding the National Land Policy. Government has not yet failed to put in place a National Land Policy, but more importantly is that, this National Land Policy is in the final stages of approval and will soon be available to all the stakeholders in the country. I thank you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Supplementary only to hon. Seninde.

3.55
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for trying to respond to these issues. However, on the issue of the Busuulu - because we all know very well that it is only failure to pay Busuulu that people can be evicted from their Bibanja. I would like to ask the minister - he has clarified that the courts will be in charge of receiving the Busuulu - but I want to ask the minister because even the courts up to now refuse the Busuulu. Can the minister tell us whether there is a statutory instrument that gives authority or mandate to the courts to receive Busuulu? The question is, is this a private business? If there is no statutory instrument, how sure can we be that the courts are in position to receive this Busuulu? Because they are currently refusing it. 

Having said that, we very well know that we have zonal desks -under the Ministry of Lands - in every district. I would like the minister to tell us if he can do something to ensure that at least there is a desk at each zonal office, which can deal with rejected Busuulu or Busuulu for the absentee landlords. Because, we know that this money can be taken to the Consolidated Fund, but how is the court going to account for this money? These are the questions.

When we come to the issue of the RDCs, he has tried to clarify. We do appreciate that the RDCs are there to foresee security issues, but many of them have gone beyond their boundaries. They take decisions on land matters. Some of them have even become land brokers and this is in most of the areas. Therefore, we want to know why Government does not come up with clear guidelines on where the RDCs are supposed to stop in as far as land issues are concerned. Right now, my people are badly affected and I do not know whether we are going to look for them when we want to look for votes.

When we go to the issue of the Land Fund, I do appreciate that there is no money, and we appreciate the responses of Government. However, I want to appeal to Government, if our people are all thrown off their land, where will Government find them to give them the Land Fund, if we cannot find a way of protecting our people now? I want to appeal to Government to do something in the next financial year. Let it be done in a phased manner. I know it cannot be done throughout the country at a go, but at least let it be done in a phased manner, starting with the most affected areas, Wakiso being one of them.

Otherwise, we may think we are training and sensitising people, but where we have done the sensitisation is where the rich men are evicting people. The minister has made it categorically clear that training is taking place in Wakiso, but I want to tell the minister - if you are not aware - where we have just completed sensitisation is where the rich men are throwing people off their land.

So, I appeal to Government, if there is a Land Fund in the law, we need to implement this law. If we do not implement it, then we are not protecting Ugandans, and I want to appeal to the minister to help us with that. (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. Seninde. Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from hon. Seninde is that, it seems she is concerned about one side of the coin. What about the other side of the coin, where the real land owners are also burnt and then thrown out by bibanja holders? What will be the way forward?  It seems you are bent on only one side, but the reverse is also true.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are introducing a new practice where the person who asked the question will be the only one who raises a supplementary. So, it is hon. Seninde. If you have finished, let me know so that I invite the minister. 

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the question that my colleague has raised, and it is really pertinent because, even in my constituency, I have landlords and tenants. However, when we look at the issues of landlords evicting people unlawfully, and we know very well that about 70 percent are the bibanja holders who do not have titles; about 25 percent are the landlords. The reason I speak for the majority is because they are the ones most affected. It is the responsibility of Government to sensitise the landlords together with the tenants to bring an amicable agreement between them. 

If we have not yet done it thoroughly well and yet a law is in place, and we have not taken the trouble to even protect those who are being evicted, then I think something is wrong. That is why I am concerned. That law is there, but why is it that day by day, people are being thrown off their land?

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude with one statement. One of my friends told me - and he is a Munyankore. I hope my colleagues here from that side will agree with me or will put me right. He said that if you want to see how angry or that even a Munyankore can get hold of a panga, trespass on three of his things; his cows, his land and his wife. You will see how tough that Munyankore can be. 

My question is, why are we pushing these people so far? The Bible and the Lord’s Prayer says, “Do not lead us into temptation.” Aren’t we pushing people into temptation if we do not fight for them as Government? So, this is my major concern, Madam Speaker.

Finally, we are requesting, after the minister has completed answering these questions, that we bring a motion like we explained to you, Madam Speaker. I beg that we bring a motion on land issues.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Seninde is whether she is legislating for Banyankore.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I am not legislating for Banyankore; I was only giving an example. (Laughter)

4.03
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Seninde for raising this question, which has given me the opportunity to clarify on fairly critical matters.

My ministry issued Statutory Instrument No.55/2011, regarding issues of Busuulu and we have copies of this.

Regarding the issue of the courts, this is also catered for in the law, and when one makes reference to the Amendment Act, this is clearly addressed. 

Regarding the role of RDCs and overstepping their boundaries, and where others are choosing to trade in land matters and, therefore, exacerbating the situation on the ground, this is a matter we are steadily following up, and you will agree with me that the conference which is being convened is clearly aimed at dealing with all these matters.

I would like to request that honourable members from the areas that have been greatly impacted upon by these land evictions come and attend this conference when invitations are extended to you. Kindly, spare time - we shall be communicating the date. It is our belief that we must find a clear solution to all these problems so that our people can be able to live in peace and harmony with each other and more importantly, lead a gainful and productive life.

Regarding the issue of the Land Fund, it is true, the Land Fund is extremely critical in regard to addressing this particular problem, and I want to assure hon. Seninde that this is one of the matters that my ministry has been following up fairly vigorously. I am sure as soon the regulations and the funds are in good supply, the funds should be made available as one of the solutions to dealing with this particular problem of land and people being assisted to acquire registerable interest in this land.

As regards areas where we have had sensitisation turning out to be the very areas where evictions are taking place, I know, hon. Seninde and I, and some of my colleagues in the ministry have been out on these sensitisation exercises. It is unfortunate that after we departed from some of these areas, landlords decided to turn on some of the bibanja owners, but I can tell you, we are trying to make sure that we have a clear solution to this problem.

I am sure when we are done with this conference, we shall be in a position to clearly agree on the interventions that we must make in order to ensure that there is no re-occurrence of some of these land evictions. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we thank the minister. I would like to announce two invitations. The Minister of Trade invites Members of Parliament to attend the opening ceremony of the COMESA Summit tomorrow at Munyonyo at 8 O’clock in the morning. So, please go to Munyonyo in the morning to support the Minister of Trade and the President at 8 O’clock. 

I also want to announce that on Monday, 26 November 2012, there is a workshop on HIV/AIDS resurgence to take place at Imperial Royale Hotel starting at 8.30 a.m. This is from the Committee on HIV/AIDS. Thank you.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL- THE IMMUNISATION BILL, 2012

4.09
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, and this is moved under rules 110 and 111 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94(1) of the Constitution and clause 4(b) of Article 94 and Rule 110, which empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under objective 14(b) of the national objectives and directive principles of State policy sets out the State’s duty to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy access to health services, and objective 20 expresses the State’s commitment to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND ALSO AWARE that immunisation as an important component of primary health care continues to be one of the areas of the health sector that still faces a number of challenges, which has resulted in a big population immunity gap;

NOTING THAT immunisable diseases covered under the Public Health Act Cap 281 includes: Small Pox, Plague, Asiatic Cholera, Yellow Fever, Cerebral Spinal Meningitis, Typhus, Sleeping Sickness or Human Trypanosomiasis and yet immunisable diseases have since expanded to match the current disease trends and researches;

ALSO NOTING THAT presently, laws which specifically provide for immunisation of children at the local government of Nebbi District protection of health byelaws, the local government of Bushenyi District miscellaneous byelaws, the local government Bundibugyo District miscellaneous byelaws and only cover particular districts;

AND FURTHER NOTING THAT the existing legislation on immunisation is inadequate and scattered in various legislations and does not reflect the current developments in the areas of public health; 

CONSIDERING THAT according to the WHO and UNICEF reports, Uganda is among the countries with the highest number of unimmunised children in the Horn of Africa. The total number of unimmunised children being estimated at 500,000 over the last three years;

CONSIDERING FURTHER THAT the high number of unimmunised children has resulted in a big population immunity gap thereby exposing the country to vaccine preventable diseases and outbreaks such as that of polio in 2011 and the recent measles outbreaks;

COGNISANT of the fact that in order to curb the immunisation decline in the country, there is need to have a comprehensive harmonised legislation on immunisation of children, women of reproductive age and other target groups that reflect the country developments in the area of public health;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me - Madam Speaker, I need to make it clear that I am standing here on behalf of hon. Oleru Huda, Woman Representative, Yumbe District - leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill for an Act entitled: “The Immunisation Bill, 2012” - a draft of which is hereto attached - and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

This is moved by hon. Oleru Huda, Woman Representative, Yumbe District. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is it seconded? (Dr Twa-Twa and Mr Kasamba rose_) Okay, it is seconded.

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, as representatives of the people who elected us, we are very aware of the importance of immunisation. The President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has many times pointed out the improvements or the reductions in child mortality due to the improved access to immunisation; and also, with a view to reduce further child morbidity and mortality and to prevent the spread of cancer especially in women of reproductive age. And, in order to address the defects in the existing laws, which are a bit outdated - for example, the Public Health Act Cap. 281, which talks about Small Pox as one of the immunisable diseases, and yet it was eliminated. 

As it has been pointed out, some of the districts have got specific byelaws addressing immunisation, but at the national level we do not have a specific law addressing immunisation. 

That is the reason it was thought a good idea to bring this Bill so that it addresses the immunisation of children and women of reproductive age and other target groups, against vaccine preventable diseases; those which were known at the time the original Public Health Act was enacted, and those which have arisen over the years. We would like to have everything in one law.

The other idea is to come up with ways of addressing people who resist the use of this good tool of immunisation for, maybe, religious or other reasons. As of now, there is no way to address them apart from simply convincing them because there is no specific law currently, compelling children to be vaccinated. 

This Bill will also look at other ways in which immunisation can be expanded, for example, when children are accessing free primary education or other Government services. Those are some of the justifications, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.17
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the subject matter we are discussing this evening is very important. Of course, we know that prevention is better than cure, and we also know that among the tools we have in the health sector, which are very effective, is immunisation and the others are sanitation and hygiene, to mention, but a few. These tools once effectively used, can reduce morbidity and mortality.

As of now, we know that the immunisable diseases such as Measles, Polio and Tuberculosis are having a toll on our children. We are losing children; for every 1,000 children born in Uganda, between 70 and 100 die before their fifth birthday.  The causes of death have usually been one of these immunisable diseases such as measles and tuberculosis. 

Now, because these diseases affect the women and the children, they cause morbidity, and because of this death, they eventually affect our economy. Areas where there are lots of deaths of children, hardly work. If we develop a law, which if effectively enforced, could easily reduce the contribution of these diseases to mortality and morbidity. 

As my colleague has said, when you look around, the law, which is apparently available, is scattered in various laws and is very difficult to enforce. That is why we are looking forward to having a very consistent law and once implemented, can be followed by everybody. If we do this, we can contribute to the reduction of morbidity and mortality and eventually be able to attain our Millennium Development Goal, which we would like to achieve by the year 2015, if we implement this law starting tomorrow or right away. If we implemented it effectively, it would mean that we can reduce the deaths which are quite common. 

Enforcement of this law has also been very elusive. I can give an example of Yellow Fever. Because there is no proper law in place to apply, you find that instead of getting immunisation, people cheat by just getting the yellow books which they use for travel. I am sorry I should say this because I know it is going on. 

Parents are not taking their children for immunisation because there is no law binding them to do so. In the end, we get so many children who are not immunised against these diseases and they accumulate to form a continuous focal point to lead to a source of new infections which affect other children. 

There are diseases, which if they are immunised properly in one’s childhood, you can prevent later diseases like cancers, particularly Cancer of the cervix in women. If we put it in the law, so that we enforce immunisation against these diseases, we shall be addressing the problem and we can contain and reduce both morbidity and mortality and eventually, we shall also improve on our economy. Therefore, I support the development of this immunisation law to protect our children and our nation.

4.21
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion for seeking leave of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill in as far as immunisation is concerned.

Only mid this year, there was an African call for immunisation against various diseases. And it was very much disheartening that when statistics came out, Uganda was ranked just above Somalia in the Eastern Region. This caused serious concern to some of us who are still young and are still producing children, but are also children’s representatives in our various capacities. Children - in any one of the signs of a modern state, every bird should be protected. I appeal to colleagues and the Ministry of Health to give the necessary support to this Bill so that we can put in place a comprehensive Immunisation Act, which will galvanise all the loopholes which have been creating gaps for our system not to be able to facilitate immunisation comprehensively in our programmes.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I rise to seek information from him, because I recollect very well that not more than five years ago, Uganda was hailed, and actually, held as a success story in as far as immunisation was concerned. We actually received an award, and the GAVI money you hear of was a reward to Uganda for its outstanding performance in immunisation. 

So, where is this information that is coming now that in this short time, we are only beaten by Somalia, where there is no authority, there is lawlessness, and there is no one to provide any service? Where is this from and if I may find out, what is the veracity of that story; I would like to know?

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Some three months back, there was a World Health Organisation call for immunisation in Africa. We even moved a motion on the Floor of Parliament here, during which, the Minister for Health came up and responded very comprehensively, giving the real status of the health situation. 

Even the country representative of the World Health Organisation published a statement, which clearly stated how that situation was. And that is where, as Members of Parliament who were very concerned together with our forums - the Children’s Forum and the Immunisation Forum - we took it upon ourselves to make an aggressive campaign - which we have taken on - to make sure that we at least bring up a serious Private Member’s Bill, which will cause the very good strides we had between 1998 and 2005, when Uganda was ranked among the best. 

For that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I agree with you. We were star performers in those past years because we had the Uganda National Expanded Immunisation Programme (UNEPI), which is no longer funded. It was being funded by donors and I think they pulled out.  Now that our health system cannot have regular comprehensive immunisation outreaches on a weekly or monthly basis, and in some health facilities they carry out immunisation, maybe on Mondays, and there is also laxity as far as families are concerned. When families take their children for the first dose, they never go back for the second and third doses. That is why we need a comprehensive law which will facilitate the process of galvanising our very good past records of performance in as far as immunisation is concerned. 

I appeal to the House and to Government to assist the movers to make sure that we facilitate this process so that we are able to make a law, which will be able to facilitate the better results we used to have. I appeal to everybody to second this motion so that we can carry forward the enactment of this Bill into an Act. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a straight forward request. They are seeking the authority of this House to enable them go and draft a Bill to come here for first reading. So, I think it is really very straight forward. Let me put the question that this House do grant leave to the movers to move a Private Member’s Bill as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING 

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am seeking from you is that as we are going to the next item, our colleagues from the FDC have a very important function of electing their new leader. They have indeed been contributing a lot in as far as this Bill is concerned. 

In the spirit of moving and working together as Members of the Ninth Parliament, I request that we should wait for our colleagues because we have been with this Bill for quite long. We could wait for a day and once they are with us, we pass this Bill. This is because this Bill is very important and we have been together contributing a lot. It is my humble request, Madam Speaker, that in the spirit of working together, we wait for them. 

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssebaggala has indeed stated my thoughts. This House is made up of two sides; the Government side and the Opposition side. In our parliamentary procedure, FDC is the major Opposition party in this House. So, if they are not in, I think it is important that this House reconsiders the role of the major Opposition political party in this House when we are considering this motion. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas our colleagues may be having a point but in our rules, there is no provision for both or all parties that are enshrined in the Constitution or in the Rules. It is the quorum that is a requirement for us to continue.

Secondly, during the EALA elections, our brothers from FDC boycotted, but DP and UPC freely participated and we went on with business. It is my opinion, therefore, that that should not be an issue to deter us from transacting business today, unless there are other reasons that may deter us. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, one, I have been appealing to organisers of activities not to use Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday because that is parliamentary time. (Applause)

Secondly, when Members need leave from this House, they must inform the Speaker. But no one has informed me that they are seeking leave to be away from this House today. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling and guidance. Permit me, however, first, to appreciate the role of numbers in the business of this House. I can see that our brothers and sisters across are pushing so hard to move with business as usual and I can understand where they are coming from. (Interjections) I have, of course, never known the hon. Bakabulindi to be one of those who speak in chorus. 

However, Madam Speaker, you will appreciate that what we are making here is a law in which we have so far moved well by way of consensus. The Shadow Attorney-General is not in this House. Notwithstanding, the procedural issues of not seeking the leave of the Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is not here. There have been times when business has been suspended because of the absence of the Attorney-General, when NRM is in caucus –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order against my learned brother. Is it in order for him to raise the same matter on which you have just given a ruling? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we should encourage absenteeism, especially when you have not complied with our Rules of Procedure. (Applause) No one informed me that they would not be here today. So, you are out of order. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I just wanted to put it on record that this House is not composed of two sides; that is, the Opposition and the NRM. We are also here as Independents -(Applause)- and we should not be compounded in that group because we are here in our capacity as Independents. You know it very well that you are our Chief Whip. I do not see why you do not put it on record that we should not be bundled in the bandwagon of Opposition. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro, I want to assure you that your presence as Independents is well noted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this House arose last time, it was after a motion had been moved by the honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development for the re-committal of clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012. I, as the seconder, was due to make my presentation. Therefore, I rise to do so. 

In the debate that we had – I just want to be precise on three or four points. Many Members in their contributions talked about regulation – the role of the regulator that we had decided upon already - the Authority. They thought that this would be the same as the regulators that we had in place already like the Civil Aviation Authority, the Electricity Regulatory Authority and so on and so forth. 

I just wanted to make a point that we must make a distinction in this case because we are dealing with what I consider to be a strategic resource. Oil is a strategic resource because it contributes to economic opportunity and energy security on the global market. It also plays a very dominant role in meeting the world’s energy needs. 

Someone who wrote about oil being a strategic resource said that, “A strategic resource is one that is necessary for biological or economic survival.” To be strategic, it must also be easy to cut off supply. Air is a necessary element for biological survival – the air that we breathe in – but it is not strategic because the supply cannot be manipulated. We all know this because if the air supply in this room was stopped for only a few minutes, all of us would die. But it is because it is available and it is in plentiful supply, that we do not give it the value it deserves and do not, therefore, consider it a strategic resource. 

Oil is necessary for economic survival at this point in history, but unfortunately, its supply can easily be manipulated. Therefore, it is a strategic resource. And, as we know, because of that, countries have gone to war over oil, and some of them have survived or collapsed because of oil. And having discovered this strategic resource in our country, we must learn from history and treat it with the importance it deserves. 

The second point I wish to make is that there has been the question of whether licensing is a procurement or not. Our colleagues, especially hon. Katuntu and hon. Sseggona, made the point that this licensing is a procurement and, therefore, falls under the PPDA law. 

The answer to this question depends on what is being licensed. Under the Investment Code, CAP. 92 of our laws, investment means, “The creation of new business assets and the licence authorises the holder to make all arrangements necessary for establishing the business enterprise.” This is different from a procurement, even a procurement by licence of public assets. 

Licensing for investment, therefore, does not, in my opinion, fall under the PPDA. It is not a procurement in that it does not, therefore, fall within the definition - even of the PPDA Act - of a procurement . (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has stated that the question of licensing and bidding under the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 is not a procurement. I want to draw his attention to clause 53(4) which states: “The bidding process shall be carried out in a fair, open and competitive manner in accordance with procedures prescribed by regulation or by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 and any other relevant laws in Uganda.” So, this one rests the entire bidding and licensing process under the PPDA, and, therefore, it is –(Mr Werikhe rose_)– Any information to me? Please, go ahead. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Ssekikubo for that information, which is outdated because I will refer him to the Hansard. Clause 53(4) now reads as follows: “The bidding process shall be carried out in a fair, open and competitive manner in accordance with regulations made for this Act.” (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, are you taking issue with what we passed already?

MR SSEKIKUBO: No. The point I was trying to make is that once you go through the open bidding and competition, it falls under the ambit of a procurement. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, I will repeat myself, because we have had this debate in this House before, when we were talking about the NSSF and some of their crises -(Interjections)- just a second.

So, the simple point I am making is that licensing under the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012, for the purpose of exploration, for example, is not procurement in terms of the definition of “procurement” under the PPDA. Even if it was a procurement, it is a procurement for investment and that is distinctly different from the procurement under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act. 

So, I would like to put that to rest so that when you are debating it, you speak with confidence that this is law. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for accepting to clarify this issue. Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister saying that “procurement” as a word is synonymous with PPDA and it cannot be procurement outside the PPDA? Because what we are looking at is the competition bit of it, and if that is what he understands it to mean, and he says it means that, we have reason to recommit this particular clause as well, to ensure that there is a supervising body - a body supervising this procurement in the ordinary terms of procurement.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I am not using the word “procurement” loosely. I am using it in the context of legislation that already exists, and for which an effort was made in the presentation last time to relate this particular licensing to - and I am saying, that was not correct.

Thirdly; as we know, in Uganda, the Constitution provides in article 244 that all petroleum is vested in the government and that subject to that, Parliament shall make laws regulating exploitation. Under articles 98 and 99 of our Constitution, the President is the Head of Government, and the Executive authority of Uganda is vested in him. 

We all know that constitutional government requires a division of power among several organs of state. By dividing power between the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary; it insures the President of restraint and checks and balances, and the political system. And all laws must be in conformity with the Constitution. 

In this case, all Executive authority is vested in the President, as I have just said, which he exercises in accordance with the Constitution. The President appoints ministers and members of the Cabinet are politically responsible to him. In this case, he exercises that authority through the minister. So, relieving the minister is tantamount to removing the President from control of the strategic oil resource.  (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I beg to seek a point of clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I have heard you state, in effect, as you tried to justify your recommital of clause 9, to the effect that the minister has been removed from any functions related to the oil sector.

To my best knowledge and recollection, when we passed clause 9, we categorically left the minister with the function of approval of whatever has been done by the Authority. Do you mean to suggest that that, that approval in effect, is removal of the minister from the functions under the Bill? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am talking about functionality and actually, my next question - and I will respond to that in a moment - but here, I simply wanted to make the point, having said that oil is a strategic resource and all that, it is very critical that the leadership of the country, obviously, the President who is the one the people voted to be the head of the country for five years, is in charge and in control of a resource so strategic as oil. 

My fourth point; regulatory agencies are usually a part of the Executive or they have statutory authority to perform their functions with oversight. They enforce standards - safety - or generally enforce compliance with the codes in force. It is not usual for a regulator at the same time to be the one licensing. It is in fact wrong, because it is tantamount to checking oneself; performing two roles that are meant to check each other, performed by one office; it is wrong. [MR NIWAGABA: “Clarification, Rt Hon. Prime Minister,”] Just a second; I will take it, please. I will give you way.

Regulatory agencies perform their statutory functions outside Executive supervision. 

Clause 9, as it stands now, brings the proposed licensing of oil exploration into the ambit of Executive supervision, which negates the independence-  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Clarification

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to make his submission, then you can respond. Let him finish, even if it is fundamental. Let him finish first. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But I will give way to you to speak when I finish for that matter, so that you have all the time. 

I am simply saying that regulatory agencies perform their statutory functions outside Executive supervision. And here, let me be very clear. There are two choices we had to make; either a regulation within the Executive, for instance, within the ministry under the control of the ministry; or regulation which is autonomous of the ministry; which is independent of the ministry, whose functions are provided for by the statute itself. And, we have already made a choice that we will have statutory regulation, and that is why in clause 15, we have provided that this authority we are setting up will exercise powers autonomously independent of the Executive or the minister. 

Clause 9, as it stands now, brings the proposed licensing of oil exploration into the ambit of the Executive supervision, which may give independence of the Authority in the exercise of its duties. It contradicts clause 15. So, we have to make a choice; do we want it to be a statutory one - independent; or do we want it to be part of the Executive? And the choice we made already outside clause 9 is that it should be independent; and we support that. 

Point No.5 –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. I heard you talking about regulating and licensing at the same time as not being the ideal situation. I would like to get your take on this. Ordinarily, regulation would amount to control. And if I am not wrong, one of the tools of regulation, world over, is licensing. That is why, for example in Uganda, we have the Civil Aviation Authority dealing with air space; regulating the air industry in this country; licensing the players who want to use our air space, and especially, the airport. So, if this Petroleum Authority is regulatory in nature, why shouldn’t it licence as a tool of regulation? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said that the purpose of recommitting clause 9 is to make sure that they separate roles and create an authority that is independent. I know that in Uganda, the Uganda Communications Commission issues licences to radio stations, and regulates them perfectly well. I even remember when CBS was accused of airing wrong propaganda, they switched them off. 

Secondly, to deny that – 

Lt Col (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Member holding the Floor is, if CBS was a regulator, would it have switched itself off? 

MR TINKASIMIIRE: I am glad I gave him space to display his level of innocence in this matter. (Laughter) Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I was making another point of information to you. When you are an authority, you perform functions of administration, which of necessity are related to the Executive, because the Executive is the one that appoints and disciplines. 

In the circumstances that you have an Authority that is licensing wrong people, you discipline them. So, what argument are you trying to sell to us?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is true, but maybe my colleagues did not hear me when I made the point. Right from the beginning, I made the point - it was my introductory point - that whereas we have regulatory bodies in Uganda today like CAA and so on, which licence, they are first of all dealing with services; secondly, in most cases, it is delegated authority; and thirdly, now we are dealing with a strategic resource and we think the roles should be separated. 

Finally, whenever power is to be exercised, it is critical that those giving that authority must be clear. In this case, it must be clear who has the authority to grant or revoke licences. Is it the minister or the Authority? Supposing the minister refuses to approve and the Authority refuses to grant, what would happen? Supposing the Authority revoked a licence and the minister refused to approve the revocation, what would happen? So, my answer to hon. Niwagaba’s question is that we would have a gridlock in the oil sector; we would have paralysis. Therefore, it is paramount that the one with the final power to grant a licence is clear, to avoid a jam in decision-making. 

The original provision of the Bill, therefore, where the minister grants or revokes a licence with the advice of the Authority is in tandem with the Constitution of Uganda. Also, it conforms to the best practices in the oil sector the world over. Therefore, I urge you, colleagues, please, support the motion to recommit clause 9 so that we correct these grave errors. 

5.03
MR GADISON AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this is the third week we are debating this matter, if not the fourth. 

On the issue of a licence, honourable members, I would like you to listen to this very carefully. In the Lake Katwe Region, everybody knows there is a potential for geothermal energy. The Electricity Regulatory Authority has issued a licence to some investors to go and explore, to go and find out the potential, to find out whether it is commercially productive. The level of investment that is required is between US$ 2 million to US$ 5 million. There are investors who are prepared to put that money into this project. It has the potential to generate over 100 MW of electricity within 15 months. The same regulator that issues licences has put up conditions that have made it very difficult for these investors to move in. 

I am trying to build my argument based on what the Prime Minister said, that somebody must be able to issue a licence in case there is a gridlock. If the Authority says “no” but the minister says, “No, in the interest of this country, we need 100 MW as soon as possible”, the minister should be given that power to issue that licence. The Electricity Regulatory Authority, which is the regulator – Madam Speaker, I am sure the report on energy is going to come and you will see the problem that has been associated with having the regulator issuing licences at the same time. 

Honourable members, there has to be that distinction with the roles of the regulator and those of the minister being clearly spelt out so that we do not have a gridlock in the system. Oil is not different. Geothermal is not renewable energy just like oil, but we are bogged down because of this bureaucracy of ERA, which is giving conditions that are very difficult. Is that what we want in the oil sector? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move that you put the matter to vote so that the position of Government is adopted.

5.07
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the recommittal of clause 9. In that regard, I would like to share two issues with colleagues. 

One is about the matter of comparison as far as the other authorities in the country are concerned. The examples of authorities given, which generally issue licences in Uganda, cannot be compared to the authority that will work on a strategic natural resource like petroleum. In the petroleum industry, the licensing is not for a generic or common service; licensing effectively creates a partnership between the licensee and Government. So, it serves the purpose of the development of a nation. Accordingly, it requires multiple inputs from multiple institutional sources, each contributing specialised skills and subject to separate monitoring.

Natural resource development is a complex business with extensive impact and cannot, therefore, be compared to a single purpose or to traditional licences such as those issued for electricity generation, commercial banking or the communication licences of UCC. So, they have to separate powers. It cannot be the same Authority issuing the licence and at the same time going to do the regulation. 

I also would wish to inform my honourable colleagues, especially the Shadow Minister of Justice, about this issue of procurement. Licensing for a strategic natural resource should not be categorised as a standard procurement – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to complete.

MR NAKABALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like I was saying, licensing for a strategic national resource should not be compared or categorised as a standard procurement since one is not buying or disposing of a traditional public asset or a standardised product or good. Natural resource development is special and of a unique nature with public impact. 

Petroleum licensing is such that the title to the resource will still remain with the Government which holds it on behalf of the citizens of the country. Therefore, I would like to urge Members to support the recommittal of the Bill. Thank you.

5.10
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I strongly oppose the recommittal of clause 9. We had almost two weeks of debate in as far as this clause is concerned and we were all in agreement to have this clause deleted.

Those who are saying we were denying the minister, and indirectly the President, powers and responsibilities of having access to the sector, I think are misguided. This really poses a question that whenever we come to debate and discuss very pertinent issues, after some two or three days there is always another House that sits. Are we trying to say that this is now the House of Commons and we have the House of Lords that must really approve or disapprove what we have agreed on here?

Are you, Madam Speaker, in control to the extent that after we have taken a position on something here, after a week or two, another House sits and they turn round what we have discussed in the House –(Interruptions)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the Member holding the Floor is whether he is talking about workshops that we attend to harmonise issues from here or meetings called by the whips, because they are recognised by law and our Rules of Procedure. I would like to know what he is talking about because I have attended such workshops.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues must be reminded that on several occasions, we have passed resolutions in this House after agreeing on various positions, but when you go out of here somehow you come back changed people. That is what I am talking about. 

We had already agreed on this matter after realising that very many mistakes had been committed. The purpose for doing this was to ensure we cure all this in the oil sector, because we are not legislating for ourselves but - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, surely, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to come here and claim that he does not attend such meetings that harmonise and yet I have been seeing him attending those meetings? (Laughter) We have been together in the spirit of harmonisation of the laws we pass as legislators. Is he in order to deny and come here and twist and yet he is a beneficiary of such meetings?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I am not privy to the meetings. So, I do not know what you discuss there. Please, wind up. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the meetings she is talking about are organised by the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas and all these meetings are known and we are granted permission by you. The meetings I am talking about are the meetings where our colleagues, Members from the other side, after having a position here go and change their position and come back here with another position.  

Madam Speaker, are you in control? When we pass resolutions here – (Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, it is the second time my colleague is asking and doubting your powers. He has asked twice whether you are in charge. I would like to know if he is in order to doubt the Chair that you are occupying.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have no authority to question my Chair. (Laughter)

5.16
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Whereas this House may want to laugh about the matter that the hon. Ssebaggala has raised, I would like to weigh in and say that when this House perpetually engages itself in the habit of changing its own decisions, it will never be taken seriously. I would like to repeat; we have been here discussing this Bill extensively and reaching consensus, and even making decisions, and then we come back and want to change our own minds on a matter that has been extensively discussed. We will not be taken seriously. That is my first point. 

Secondly- (Interjections) - I will clarify later, honourable members. I rise to oppose the recommittal of clause 9. I waited in vain for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to clarify the point that he made that licensing for investment is not really procurement. I waited in vain for him to cite a clause in the PPDA Act or any relevant law and I think to that end, you let me down.  

Madam Speaker, I can only agree more with colleagues who are making the point that licensing is a tool of regulation. It is true. Members, it is a fact whether you like it or not.

We have taunted the issue of oil being a strategic resource, and I think this is being taken way too far. Strategic resources in this country are many and it is not only oil. Therefore, playing the escapism game about oil being so exceptional does not help us arrive at anything.

Finally, when we say the Authority does all the donkey work and then the minister finally endorses, I think the buck stops at the minister’s gate. That is not in doubt. I oppose the recommittal.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Considering that the Leader of the Opposition is not in the House, I would appeal to you to grant me a little more time because I speak for this whole bench now. However, that is with your permission and I am simply appealing to you.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has made reference to various provisions of the Constitution. I would like to deal specifically with Article 99 about executive authority, which in Uganda is subjected to the rest of the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. So, we are not pushing the President out of this oil business as the Prime Minister would like us to believe. 

We have provided for the role of the President in managing what has been described as a strategic resource through, among others, his Minister responsible for energy being given roles; and two, the appointment of a competent Authority to manage this strategic resource. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is inviting us to specifically spell out the roles of the President in a legislation of this nature.

Secondly, on strategic resource, I would like to know which resources in this country are not strategic. Coffee and cotton are strategic resources that have made this country survive for ages. The same with electricity; it is strategic. We use electricity to promote investment and to appeal to investors et cetera. Therefore, I do not think that argument still adds any value. We cannot say that this is a strategic resource because all resources are strategic in their own way. 

Also, when we are talking about “strategic”, we must contextualise it. Yes, it is strategic and that is why we want Government to participate through established agencies of Government, which include the Authority.

Madam Speaker, on licensing, if Government is bothered about the independence of the Authority and they imagine that independence connotes no role for the minister, we can concede that the minister be removed from doing the approval but maintain that a technical body of competent men and women manage this resource. The independence of the Authority must be contextualised. Every independent organ in Uganda is supervised and that is why we are saying the minister supervises the Authority. 

Madam Speaker, – (Interjections) - I do not think we can operate like this. I would like to be on record before someone brings in this motion; the public is watching what we are doing here and the goodwill that we have extended may be killed today. I will not say more. 

5.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The proposal is to recommit clause 9. We had overcome clause 9 by stating it under functions of the minister. We had amended and said the functions of the minister were to approve the granting and revoking of licences. The approval is a specific statutory instrument, it is a certificate. This means that without the approval of the minister, the licensing remains null and void, and we thought the minister there would have the final say in these matters.

Mr Speaker, when we move to have this recommitted, it is going to virtually affect more than 64 clauses in this Bill. We had put a notice that unless we look at all of them, we cannot recommit. By having the minister granting and revoking licences, we are letting the Minister stand alone and yet in our amendment, we had said that the approval would bring on board the Authority, Government and the President. 

So, it is not true that we are trying to exclude the President. We are only saying that it should be contributory. The President would, finally, through his directive, inform the minister not to issue a licence until he and Cabinet are satisfied. 

Madam Speaker, I have a proposal to make. Colleagues, you know by allowing clause 9 to go as it is, it means the efforts we had to have a special session of Parliament to reconsider the granting of licences will come to naught. If you remove this, it means we revert to the 1985 Petroleum Act because that is where the powers of the minister were abused right from Hardman, Energy Africa, Heritage, Tullow, CNOC and Total. Ugandans have come out as losers in all these transactions where direct licences were being issued. 

The essence of this is to restore sanity so that the resources of this country can come back to the owners of this country - (Member timed out).

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWEERO TRIANGLE (Mrs Rose Namayanja Nsereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have very attentively listened to both sides. I therefore beg to move that the question be put. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have been discussing this matter for many weeks and I think we need to bring the matter to a close in one way or the other. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, this is a new thing. We were discussing something else and we closed it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was moved earlier and you were in this House. You have already made your positions clear. You have objected to the motion for recommittal. This motion was moved by the Minister of Energy and Minerals and you have been aware of it. You have spoken for and against it and you are on record. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Some Members of Parliament thereupon withdrew from the Chamber.)

5.33
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 be recommitted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 of the Bill be recommitted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM ( EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

5.35
MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, you have made reference to the fact that this motion was moved the last time. The last time, I also rose to put notice that once we touch clause 9, we should be allowed to recommit several other clauses. I am moving that we also recommit other clauses like clause 10 – (Interjections) - You are proceeding in that way but you will realise that this is not the way we should proceed, so reserve your comments.

Madam Chairperson, may I also be allowed the opportunity to present clauses for recommittal? I gave notice and you said all the clauses to be recommitted can be brought here. Once you amend clause 9, which gives powers to the minister, it affects the entire Bill. Even the three weeks members have been talking about would be brought to naught. 
So, can I ask, Madam Chairperson, that I be allowed to move those clauses that are fundamental to this Bill but have been radically affected by this recommittal?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion we have is for clause 9. Let us finish with it and you can present your motion. 

Clause 9

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012 gives the functions of the minister. I beg to move that this clause stays as it was presented in the Bill without amendments. It reads as follows: 
“The Minister shall be responsible for-  
a) 	granting and revoking licences; 
b) 	initiating, developing and implementing oil and gas policy; 
c) 	submitting draft legislation to Parliament; 
d) 	issuing petroleum Regulations; 
e) 	negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements; (f) approving field development plans; 
g) 	promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector; 
h) 	approving data management systems; and 
i) any other function incidental or consequential to his or her functions.”

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chair, whereas a motion has been successfully moved for recommittal, I strongly disagree with the proposal of the Minister. I disagree on the principle that the amendments which had been passed came as a result of an intensive consultative process, which entirely is the major work of a Member of Parliament. After a very short time, the same people who took a decision without consulting our voters are returning – (Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I represent the people of Isingiro County North. I am serving my third term in this Parliament and I was appointed a minister because of my track record. I have not attended meetings which are outside the laws and regulations of this House. I also did not attend the meeting hon. Tinkasiimire is talking about, which did not go through the Parliamentary Commission. Is it in order for him to write a note to me and impute that I have been bought. I wish to lay it on the Table. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Let him read it, Madam Speaker.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, this note reads: “Hon. Bright, I am wondering why you should still be called ‘Bright’. Maybe we change the name to hon. Innocence but I am disagreeing with those who are saying that hon. Bright’s name should be changed to ‘bought’.”(Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, when I speak on this Floor, I am accountable to two groups; the first one is my constituents and the second one is my party, and I have been consistent. Is it in order for him to say that I am bought when he is the one who has been spearheading the campaign for the donors and oil companies?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know what to rule on this one. Unless he can prove that hon. Rwamirama has been bought, he should withdraw his letter.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to look at that piece of paper. If it does not contain an insertion of additional information, I want to state that I said, “I am disagreeing with those who subscribe to the view that your name should be changed from ‘Bright’ to ‘Bought’.” He cannot therefore come and ask the Speaker to rule me out of order and withdraw a statement that he has been bought. I did not say that! I said I disagree with those who say he is bought. (Laughter) What is he trying to tell the House? If his intention is to disrupt my submission, I suggest that you allow me to continue with my submission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you can use one minute to finish your submission, and do not write any more letters. (Laughter) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, your warning is heeded because he may end up continuing to insert more words and changing. 

I was only warning us of abusing the whole essence of representative democracy. I am certain that when things go wrong in the hands of the minister, the public outside there will say that some people stood up to oppose this. There was no due process to make sure that people were consulted. My people in Bunyoro are watching us. They are saying, “if things go wrong, did you consult us?” We are already losing billions, according to the submission of hon. Ssekikubo. (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am just seeking clarification from hon. Tinkasiimire. What if things went wrong in the hands of the Authority, won’t the people ask us what went wrong? 

MR TINKASIMIIRE: The honourable minister is asking for a clarification which is being cured by a provision we have inserted, that when the Authority grants a licence and revokes it, this shall be subjected to the approval of the minister. The minister’s powers are not touched, but he or she wants to exclusively handle issues of oil. What is he or she trying to cure by excluding all Ugandans- (Member timed out.)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is good that we are trying to bring amendments. I would like to propose an amendment on this clause 9 but before I move, I had a question in mind. The ministers always have people who work under them, like the PS and the commissioners, and they perform functions and duties that can give grounds for the ministers to append signatures.

The point that I want to raise is that previously, we found that the Authority has a role to play, the minister has a role to play and Parliament has a role to play, even the communities themselves.  Now, when I was trying to go through the Constitution, I came across Article 119(4) (b). I want to move an amendment in line with Article 119(4) (b). I will read it before I bring on board what I want to say. It reads: 

“to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest.”

I was trying to bring it in here as part of the functions of the minister in clause 9 (e), so that we would say, “The minister shall be responsible for - (e) notwithstanding Article 119(4) (b), negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements.” I think those who have the good and clear legal terms can borrow and bring this on board. It can help us to cure the mishap. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I do not think I have understood your amendment. Are you taking away the powers of the Attorney-General and giving them to the minister?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I know we are at committee stage but I want to sound a very serious caution because we must be seen to make laws that are in tandem. In revisiting this particular clause 9, this House must as of necessity also revisit the following clauses, among others: clauses 10, 11, 12(2), 16, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54-59, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75 , 76, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86. So, we may be required to actually reconsider the entire Bill, simply because we want to satisfy a small adjustment in clause 9. (Interruption) 

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, the Rt Hon. Speaker left that chair and came to the committee to sit on this chair. This was because of a specific motion that was carried, a motion that was moved by the minister that we recommit clause 9 for consideration, not others. Should you have others which you want to recommit, you can come and move a specific motion for recommitting those clauses. Let us be relevant in dealing with the current business, which is to consider the recommittal of clause 9. (Applause)

MR PETER NYOMBI: In addition, Madam Chairperson, Rule 127 (4) of the Rules of Procedure provides thus: “When the Bill has been recommitted in respect only of some particular clause, amendment or amendments, the Committee shall consider only that amendment or those amendments and any amendment which may be moved to them, unless the Chairperson in his or her discretion, is satisfied that the clause, amendment or amendments proposed are substantial and it is necessary or desirable to reconsider the whole Bill as provided in sub rule (3) of this rule.”

Madam Chairperson, the motion, as the Vice-President has said, was in respect to clause 9. The minister or the chairman has not alluded to amendments in other clauses. Should the Member wish to have other clauses amended, the Member is at liberty to bring a motion.

MR NIWAGABA: That is why, Madam Chairperson, I was inviting you to use your discretion judiciously and look not at political expediency but at us making laws for the benefit of Ugandans, today and for the future. Proceeding in the manner we are now proceeding, looking at clause 9 as if it has no effect on other clauses, would definitely be a dangerous move and I would not wish to be party to that. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The clauses which the honourable member is talking about would be consequential should clause 9 change. If clause 9 remains as presented in this Bill, then those changes he is alluding to would not impact on those clauses. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if they are consequential, then you have to list them in the Hansard. 

MR NIWAGABA: We should not be deceived. The manner of debate we held on almost all the clauses and what we passed was not merely consequential. There are some which are fundamental in nature that would need to be given a crosscheck. 

I have been in this House following clause by clause; it is not true that some of those clauses are mere consequential clauses. They are fundamental in nature and one would have to go back and look at the Hansard. You will find that if we tamper with clause 9 as we had passed it, you will definitely have to go back to the entire Bill.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What I propose is that if there are any clauses that are going to change consequentially when we change clause 9, then anybody is free to bring a motion and we debate it. However, as far as we are concerned today, let the minister read the amendment, the question be put and we pass the amendment. We can then go back later and look at the different clauses that have been affected. We can even postpone the debate to another day. 

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do appreciate the controversy that surrounds clause 9. I would like to propose a hybrid position that may help to build consensus. 

When you look at these provisions, the one that bears a lot of contention is (a), granting and revoking licences. I propose that we leave all the other functions of the minister, from (b) to (i), and transfer (a) to the Authority.– (Interjections) – This is because I see we are getting stuck because of the fear that the minister, who may not even be this current one but some other minister who will come, may abuse this clause. Let the Authority be the one to take control of provision (a) and the rest of them remain under the power of the minister. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support the minister on clause 9. We are recommitting; if the honourable colleague says that we transfer clause 9(a) to 11, it means we are going back from where we came from. The motion was to recommit, to which we agreed. We are now debating. 

I would like to clarify to this House also that when you look at clause 11, there are 20 functions clearly stipulated to be carried out by the Authority. One of the most important functions there is to monitor and regulate petroleum activities including reserve estimation and measurement of the produced oil and gas. We say that the functions of the minister must remain as per the original Bill because we must differentiate between regulation and licensing. The honourable colleagues have mentioned the different authorities we have, but if we carry out an evaluation of many of the authorities we have, you will find that they have erred a lot. 

Secondly, we are talking about a strategic resource; this resource is owned by Ugandans. The Constitution is very clear that power belongs to the people. The people have handed over their powers to you, the leaders of the people. Now at this stage, we need to look at how to manage this strategic resource. We do not have the money to do the exploration and production and that is why we are going into a production sharing agreement. 

In a production sharing agreement, you contract an entity to help you explore and produce and then you share; but, of course, you remove the recoverable costs. It would therefore be very prudent to leave the roles of granting licences and that of revoking to the minister – (Interjections) – Let me first finish this point, then you can come in. It would be suicidal to do this because it would be a problem which we cannot turn back.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to honourable colleagues. However, looking at clauses 9 and 59, I think the minister is not doing this alone. Clause 59 is very specific; it is about granting of petroleum exploration licences. Sub clause (1) says, “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Minister may in consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet, on an application duly made, grant, on such conditions as he or she may determine, a petroleum exploration licence in respect of any block or blocks.”

So, honourable colleagues, I think it is very clear that the minster will not act alone. That is the submission I want to make.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I listened to hon. Niwagaba and I have also followed this debate. What I can say is that it was quite extensive and in most circumstances, the minister made a lot of consultations to arrive at most of the provisions. 

It is unfortunate that hon. Niwagaba has left, but what I wanted is for either the Clerk or hon. Wilfred Niwagaba to give us a synopsis of those clauses and the issues and content that would be affected by amending clause 9. That would make it easy for us. He has enumerated over 10 clauses that would be affected by amending this clause 9. I wish we had him here to give a synopsis of the issues that would contradict. 

I remember that on clause 9, what was dropped were (a), (e), (f), and (h), if I recall very well - granting and revoking licenses, negotiating and endorsing petroleum agreements, approving field development plans –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that we never dropped it. Instead, in the amendment we said that the minister shall be responsible for approving, granting and revoking of licenses. So, it remained. 

Therefore, once you delete the word “approving”, then you are giving it another legal regime. Actually, you will be setting it entirely in the hands of the minister. These others, according to the minister, will be retained raw as they are without the rider of “approving”. So, they are still present.

At an appropriate time, I will rise to support hon. Aleper’s proposal that function (a) comes under clause 11. After all, even clause 59 recognises the consultation between the Authority and the minister, so it will not be ultra vires. We can as well reconsider this and once that proposal by hon. Aleper is accepted, it will put the matter to rest.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In 2008 when we passed the National Oil and Gas Policy, we had carried out a lot of consultations. We tried to find out and indeed we were able to discover that in many places, licensing was fairly distinct from regulation.

The best practice in many countries, and I can cite this – When you go to Denmark, the power to license is given to the Minister for Climate and Energy. In Netherlands, the power to license is given to the Minister for Economic Affairs. In the United Kingdom, the power to license is given to the Secretary of State on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen, but licensing is by Cabinet.

On the African scene, in Mozambique the power to license is given to the Council of Ministers, which is Cabinet. In Norway, the licensing is done by the Cabinet of the King in Council. In Sri Lanka, the licensing is done by Cabinet. In Thailand, the licensing is by the Council of Ministers. In Kenya, the licensing is done by the minister.

The recommittal, which we have granted, seeks to give powers to license and to revoke licences to the minister. That is the amendment that the honourable minster has moved. Honestly, why should Uganda try to reinvent the wheel? Why should we try to be so different in situations where we have clear knowledge and understanding yet what we are trying to cater for has already achieved desired results all over the world? I thank you.

MR AKENA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What I would really like to know, as a point of guidance, is whether the recommittal of clause 9 is not just going to create consequential amendments in the entire Bill. I am saying this because at committee stage, we really struggled to spell out the roles of the minister and those of the Authority. We went through endless debates before the Bill came to the House. So, altering what we agreed upon through consensus may unravel a lot of work that we went through. What I really need is an assurance that what we are doing here is not going to have far-reaching impact. 

From the nature of the debate, we need to tread carefully. We should not use our numbers and try to bulldoze everybody to accept. We have moved carefully to reach this level of consensus. I urge Members of the front bench; please, the whole nation is watching us, let us develop this consensus and let us assure the people that what we are doing is in the best interest of Ugandans, not only today but also in the future. So, can I seek that clarification from the Chair or any other person on whether the recommittal of clause 9 is not going to have far-reaching consequences on the rest of the Bill as raised by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba?

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to say that I have been listening very attentively. I listened to the submission by the Vice-President and why we are recommitting that clause. I have also listened to the contributions of the other Members. 

Some of us who have been here for some time have got to a stage of asking ourselves whether we are in Parliament or not, given the manner in which Members are behaving. Madam Chairperson, having got all the information, including the heckling from behind without authority, I think there is a procedure in this House that when we reach a certain extent – of course, this is democracy - the last resort is to put the question to the matter.

When I hear some people say, “for the good of the people”, I wonder whether the front bench and those who have debated in support of the minister’s proposal are not here for the good of the people. It beats my understanding when somebody says this is for the good of the people as if the presence of the Attorney-General and other learned people is not all about the good of the people – (Interjections) – I am more informed. 

Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that given where we have reached, without wasting more time let the question be put and we move on. I beg to submit.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. Members of this committee will agree with me, and as you are aware, Madam Chairperson, about the long time it has taken and the consideration it has given this Bill. Behind our back as a committee, we had national interests and we debated extensively, we consulted all the stakeholders, we benchmarked all other oil producing states and we had workshops. 

When we came to this position on clause 9, functions of the minister, we even stayed over it until we were sure that we were not going to take a decision while thinking about personalities, the people occupying offices, or who the current or future minister would be. We did it in national interest. To cure that, we were again conscious when we got to clause 80, renewal of petroleum production licences. After looking at clause 59, which compels the minister to consult the Authority, we said that even when renewing, the minister should be given that mandate. 

Having listened, having been here as we debated, - the rules did not allow some of us to continue coming in - having heard legal explanations and followed the Rules of Procedure and the rule of law, now that we are at committee stage and what has been recommitted is clause 9 only, I would request that we move – (Interjections)- Please! 

Madam Chairperson, I am saying that having heard from the Committee on Natural Resources at all stages, I would wish to move at this juncture that you put the question on clause 9. When the motion is moved, within our Rules of Procedure, and we go back to the whole House, whoever thinks that there are other clauses for recommittal will bring them and we debate again.  

I am saying this in the interest of everybody because we cannot just continue with an issue that we reached consensus on – (Interjections)– I have been on the Committee on Natural Resources for 13 years. Madam Chairperson, I move that the question be put. 

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson and all Members, we should agree that this is a popular clause in this Bill and that is why it has brought us back here to re-do what we had already done. We agree that there are reasons for doing this. However, the popular view from this side, which has also been stated by many Members, is that the debate on this oil Bill has gone through a long process - consultation and harmonisation - but this very clause we are handling today has not gone through the same. Our coordinator, hon. Otada, who was representing us in those harmonisation and concession meetings, also walked out because he has never been involved in the suggestion we are handling today. 

All the same, Madam Chairperson, I know that we are doing this in the interest of Ugandans. That is why I support everybody who is saying that we vote on it. However, I have an amendment to that. If we are the people’s leaders and we are doing this for Ugandans, we should be honest and transparent and more democratic. Madam Chairperson, I amend hon. Hanifa Kawooya’s motion that we vote and move that we vote by show of hands to show our interests to this country.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I think Members of this House are entitled to an answer on the point raised by hon. Niwagaba. As I may be the oldest Member in this House, as someone who has been here going through legislation for more than a quarter of a century, I just want to tell colleagues that when an amendment is proposed, like is being proposed on clause 9, if it is carried there is something we call, “consequential amendment”. This is not done in the House because that is a draftsman’s job, to make sure that the rest of the clauses cohere with the carried amendment. So, we should not be worried -(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)- Just a second, please. We should not be worried that if we carry clause 9, the consequential amendments must be done by the House itself. That is not the job of the House.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is true that we can have consequential amendments, but in this particular one we have to change clauses by infection and not consequentially. Clause 9 substantially infects other clauses. If it was merely consequential, it would be understandable but clause 9 fundamentally and substantially affects other clauses. Right from clause 9, clause 10, clause 11 – All those are very substantial. So, to say it is merely consequential is not the best explanation to this.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would love to benefit from the wealth of knowledge from hon. Ssekikubo, especially when he says that it is by “infection”. Can you be kind enough to identify such an infection for us to see whether it cannot be treated by consequential amendments? I would really love to benefit from that. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much. In clause 9, we talk about the functions of the minister - (Interjections) – Listen, honourable member. I know you know a lot but take this humbly.

Clause 9 is about the functions of the minister. By us saying “approve the granting and revoking of licences”, we had in mind clause 10 and clause 11, which provide for the establishment of the Authority. In view of that, if we grant the powers to the minister here under clause 9, we have to provide concrete safeguards as to how these functions can be exercised in accordance with the Authority. 

Likewise, if you look at clause 59, hon. Oboth –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am really at a loss because the motion was moved to recommit clause 9. Indeed, we have recommitted clause 9 and we are at committee stage but hon. Ssekikubo continues to inform us that if we recommit and change clause 9, it will affect other clauses. We have not yet changed clause 9 and so, in effect, he is speculating. If we do not take a decision now, what hon. Ssekikubo is talking about cannot happen.  

The procedural point is: can we change or vote on the motion, and then if there are changes they will follow according to our Rules of Procedure? Otherwise, are we procedurally correct to keep speculating that if we change such and such a thing would happen and yet we even do not know the magnitude of what would happen? Is it procedurally right? Can we continue and vote then the other consequential amendments can be handled according to our rules? I need your guidance, Madam Chairperson. 

MR BAKABULINDI: The motion was moved and seconded, and having seconded that motion, I would like to be guided. When we talk about voting in the House, what do we mean? If the majority of the people are saying they would like to go by voting and one or two people insist on saying it will affect other clauses, which are not mentioned, what are we supposed to follow? I need to be guided, Madam Chairperson, because a motion was moved and what is remaining is for you to put the question and then we move accordingly. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the views and the motion on the Floor for a vote. However, as hon. Ssekikubo stated, the amendment that was approved by the House was that the current functions of the Minister, which have been approved, would only give the Minister powers to approve. The Minister’s current amendment, however, is to reinstate the functions.

There are several other institutions and processes in this Bill, which mandate certain key institutions with certain power of either licensing or otherwise, which the Minister would have approved under what is standing right now. So, what I would want is what the record captured as we amended. The functions of the Minister under clause 9 would now read: “The Minister shall be responsible for approving...” and then you add the rest. That is what is captured in the record. But now you want to reinstate it as it is in your recommittal. 

What I am asking is: can we get what is on the record from the Clerk or whoever has the record on what has been approved, so that we know what substantially would be affected and what we should prepare ourselves to move amendments on for recommittal? What the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is stating is that it would be consequential amendment but surely, a consequential amendment may be a comma and other issues. 

We are interested in the fundamental substance that has to be recommitted, especially if what is approved now is that the function of the Minister is to approve granting, submitting and negotiating licences. It means that somewhere, the function of issuing in itself is for the Authority. In which case, if we approve what is recommitted we have to go back and amend substantially other functions of the Authority in respect to other issues related to not only approving. So, can we get what has been approved so that even if we approve what has been recommitted, we can know how to move a new motion for recommittal and which section? That is all we are praying for.  

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, our rules are very clear; they prohibit us from speculating. What we are doing right now is speculating what will happen after this has been passed. Procedurally, Madam Chair, I would imagine we pass or we do not pass - We have not voted on the motion. It is after we have voted on the motion that we shall know whether there are any provisions that are affected by what we have passed. For us to debate in anticipation, Madam Chairperson, I would imagine is wrong.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to begin by taking a decision, either “yes” or “no”, and then we shall see what the effect will be. I had already indicated to the honourable members that after we have taken the vote on clause 9, they can later bring their issues on the areas that are being objected to. Unfortunately, hon. Niwagaba did not speak to all these clauses. He just mentioned them and left them hanging. So, no one knows what is being affected or infected. So, let us deal with one and then you can later bring your issues. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I think at an appropriate time, I will be allowed. But we seconded the motion by hon. Nalubega that we vote on this by show of hands and indeed we took that –(Interjections)- Let us show hands if we have quorum; why do you worry? 

There is even no quorum in the Chamber, Madam Chairperson. Members want to use the ex-officios to be involved in this. We have our rules; rule 23 provides for the quorum of Parliament and it must be adhered to in this critical matter. We should not allow the ex-officios to get involved and vote on this important matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are taking a count. Give us a few minutes. Can the Sergeant ring the bell?

(A count of Members present in the Chamber is taken.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have 86 Members and yet we require 125 to take the vote. So we are short by a few Members. (Interjections) Yes, you are counted and you are number 86. Honourable Minister, please move for resumption of the House. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.44
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 9 of the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and did not conclude the discussions - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, we concluded discussions but we did not vote. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.46
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I want to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to appoint a specific time for this vote. I want to propose that the voting will take place at 3 p.m. on Tuesday next week. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
