Friday, 20 December 2013

(Parliament met at 11.32 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for coming back today so that we can try and finish outstanding work. We will try not to keep you for too long. 

I also want to inform Members that a few weeks ago, there was a notice to censure one of the ministers. However, at the close of the required period under the Rules of Procedure, there were only 20 signatures; they were unable to raise the 125 signatures. Therefore in the circumstances, the process has collapsed and the notice has also lapsed. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORTS AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

11.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the following district local government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereon of the Auditor-General: 
    • Kabale District Local Government; 
    • Kayunga District Local Government;
    • Kamwenge District Local Government;
    • Amuria District Local Government. 

TOWN COUNCILS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORTS AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): I beg to lay the following town council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereon of the Auditor-General: 
    • Sironko Town Council
    • Mbale Municipal Council
    • Bukedea Town Council
    • Katakwi Town Council
    • Bukedea Town Council 
    • Kayunga Town Council
    • Kakumiro Town Council
    • Wakiso Town Council
    • Nyahuka Town Council
    • Fort Portal Municipal Council
    • Oyam Town Council
    • Mpigi Town Council
    • Mitooma Town Council
    • Kabwohe–Itendero Town Council
    • Nsiika Town Council
    • Rubirizi Town Council
    • Rushango Town Council
    • Pakwach Town Council
    • Mayuge Town Council
    • Kiboga Town Council
    • Lugazi Town Council
    • Buyende Town Council
    • Yumbe Town Council
    • Dokolo Town Council
    • Kaliro Town Council
    • Budaka Town Council

I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. All are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for urgent perusal and report back within the constitutional provision.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 62/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Education here? Not yet? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministers of education are not present in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next item.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY, FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE SPEAKER: If the chair of national economy is not here - there are a number of items that belong to that committee - let us move to item No. 19. I am moving it forward so that we can complete it. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

Clause 32

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, I remember when we adjourned last time when considering this Bill, certain issues had come to the Floor regarding this Bill. The honourable minister was supposed to give clarifications as to whether this could be a cover up for the GMO Bill. So, could the honourable minister explain so that we understand what it is all about?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, thank you for reminding us. Honourable minister, please clear the minds of the Members so that we can move on.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Chairperson, yesterday there were issues raised and one of them related to the reference of genetic resources in clause 32 (2), on account of inclusion of genetic resources in that clause. Because of the confusion it raised, we felt we should be able to strike out that clause and replace it with a much clearer clause and phrasing that says, “The use of new plant materials for testing shall be restricted to research purposes.” Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you proposing that we delete the whole of clause 32(2) and create a new one?

PROF. NYIIRA: We amend. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Amend which one?

PROF. NYIIRA: We delete 32(2) and then replace it with the following: “The use of new plant materials for testing shall be restricted to research purposes.”

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My good friend, the minister, is on record to actually having conceded to what he has just said. He is now telling us to allow it and only restrict it to research purposes. How are you going to enforce it? What is your capacity to enforce? 

It is like we are accepting their being in the country and I foresee a problem because whoever will have them will say, “No, these are for research purposes.” So, what is your capacity to enforce that these are actually going to be restricted to research purposes? Once we have that clause, people will just say, “these are for research purposes” and they will be all over. What is your capacity to enforce what you are proposing?

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Chairperson, the problem yesterday was the confusion about genetic resources. It was felt that genetic resources were another way of expressing the genetic material. We said fine, this Bill is about the plant varieties protection, so let us forget about the genetic resources and we look at the new plant species - the new plant materials - that are being tested. If they are being tested, they shall be restricted only to research purposes. 

The capacity to enforce this is definitely within. The Ministry of Agriculture has plant inspectors and it has got laboratories at Namalere, which are equipped to be able to handle that enforcement.  

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, I must say, precisely that this is why there is a need for the biosafety law to be in place, mainly to protect such issues – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that is a different Bill. I think you will make that case when the Bill comes back. I gave you time to consult. You will make that case when the Bill comes forth. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I want to agree with what the honourable minister is saying partially. However, as a House, we have given tax holidays to companies under the assumption that they are going to do manufacturing in this country but they import finished products and put them on the market. Maybe I would propose that as you bring that idea, if I am to belong to your school of thought, then we should restrict importation to the ministry. You are importing for research purposes, so that should not be for everybody. So, maybe you can consider that. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, the minister is suggesting restriction for research purposes. I am sure, honourable minister, you know very well that research is done for a purpose and such a purpose should lead to development or outcomes that will be able to help the country in one way or another. Otherwise, it will not be proven to be worth investing in. In this case, you are suggesting restriction to research purposes for what?  

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Chairperson, let us go back to the origin of why this particular clause brought about controversy. The original clause read as follows: “Steps to protect the genetic materials of new varieties under testing shall be taken so as to prevent their use for non-research purposes.” 

The salient features of the original suggestion were to protect the genetic material that we have - the indigenous ones and those ones which are being produced by our researchers. Now, the objection was that when we say “genetic material”, this was not well understood. It was interpreted, or misinterpreted for that matter, to include GMOs, forgetting that our communities in Uganda have their own genetic material. They have kept it for years and years. Even before the seed companies were introduced in this country, the communities had their own seeds and these have got to be protected. 

The steps to protect that kind of material were to be undertaken and any new knowledge that would come out of the research being undertaken using this indigenous material would be initially, if they are being tested, restricted to research purposes. The objection was that genetic resources should not be used. So, it is fine. The researchers will still be using the same material and coming up with new varieties within the country; even then, we should protect those ones and therefore, we should protect them only for research purposes until we see that we are satisfied with their performance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34 

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 34(1), we propose to replace the word “office” appearing in the second line with the word, “committee”. 

Also, in sub-clauses (2),(3),(4),(5) and (9), we propose to replace the word “Registrar”, wherever it appears, with the word “Committee”.

Justification: it is the committee to be satisfied by applicants and grant or refuse plant breeders’ rights and not the office whose role is administrative. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to replace the word “office” with the word, “committee”. Justification: it is the committee to grant plant breeders’ rights and not the office whose role is administrative. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, clause 37 is on appeal against decision. We propose to redraft clause 37 to read as follows: 

“37(1) A person aggrieved by any decision made under this Act regarding an application for plant breeders’ rights may appeal to the minister within 60 days of such a decision. 

(2) Where an appellant under this section is not satisfied with the decision of the Minister, he or she may institute proceedings before the court in respect of the Minister’s decision.” 

Justification: to give both administrative remedies as well as underscore the civil right to find remedy in court. I beg to submit.

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, I just want to inquire from this committee whether there will be any mechanisms with which the minister can report to Parliament, since this committee can be abused by some people in terms of bringing in things which may not be acceptable to this country. I want to know whether there is a provision for the minister to, once in a while, lay before this House such developments in science in line with plant varieties?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member who was speaking insinuated that committees of Parliament are prone to abuse –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, committees established under the Bill.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sorry, I thought she meant committees established in this Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, please reassure hon. Amoding how Parliament will know about what is happening. 

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Chairperson, it is well known that whenever issues of this nature come about, the ministry is required to report. I would like to assure the honourable member that this will be done. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I seek the help of the minister in regard to the nature of rights. A few months back, we were treated to a situation in the Committee of Public Accounts where Government had put in money under the banana initiative to develop varieties. My vice-chairperson is here, he might help me with the figure, but the whole project was about Shs 40 billion plus. 

We thought those rights would be the rights of Government of Uganda that invested that money in that project. However, it turned out that we were battling with the scientist who did the work at the cost of the taxpayer. So, how do we protect our investment as a country if we put in money into such a situation under the nature of rights?

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Chairperson, that is exactly what it is; this is the purpose of this particular Bill. 

MR KASAMBA: I should make further clarification. Under the interpretation of who the breeder is, Government is the biggest breeder as far as Uganda is concerned because most of the research is done by NARO, which is funded by Government and donors. 

Unfortunately, we do not have a law that protects the breeders. Even an individual breeder can have exclusive rights. Under this law, even Government will have exclusive rights to pursue those rights from whoever they have engaged to breed on their behalf, to ensure that those rights are not abused so that we can protect the varieties which Government invests in. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 38 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit that we redraft sub-clause (8) of 39, which states thus in the original Bill: “The Registrar may refuse to amend the register in public interest”. We are proposing that it be amended to read, “The Minister may refuse a transfer of plant breeders’ rights in public interest.” Justification: the registrar is not vested with powers to determine what is in public interest. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, I sought clarification. We know that these plant varieties have their definitions within the communities; I would like us to have a clause under 39 where the communities’ rights are protected. I would like us to protect them, other than just protecting the breeders without having a clause that protects the communities that are going to consume and have their traditional ways of exchanging seeds. The breeders may come up with restrictions in terms of saving seeds; we should protect the communities so that they can plant the way they used to do it traditionally. 

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 15 of the Bill, we explain and take care of the interests of the communities and also under clause 17. If you allow me to read them, you will see that they explain very well the exemptions to the rights of the breeders, and this is where the protection of the communities is taken care of. 

It reads as follows: “Notwithstanding that the breeders’ rights subsist in respect of a plant variety, a person may – (a) propagate, grow and use plants of that variety for purposes other than commerce; (b) sell plants, seed and propagating materials of plants of that variety as food or for another use that does not involve the growing of the plants or the production of the plants of that variety.” All the other subsequent subsections also protect the community. 

Clause 17 is also on the restrictions to plant breeders’ rights. It says, “Where the Minister considers it necessary, in the public interest, that plant breeders’ rights in respect of a new variety shall be subject to conditions restricting the rights of the breeders, conditions may be imposed under the following circumstances: where uncompetitive practices in the rights of the holder are identified; where food security or nutrition or health needs are affected or threatened; where a high proportion of the plant variety offered for sale is being imported; where the requirements of the farming communities for propagating materials of a particular variety are not met....”

All these sub-clauses explain some of the provisions where the communities and public interest are well protected to ensure that much as the exclusivity of those rights are provided, in public interest Government can go ahead to protect the communities. The minister can waive those exclusive rights. I beg to submit.

MS KABAHENDA: Let me just add something little - In case such varieties prove hazardous to the health of the consumers, the breeder be held personally responsible. This is because they always give that disclaimer to evade liability.

MR SABIITI: Who is the breeder because I am getting confused? I am saying this because the minister stated that the breeder is Government and this is done in the laboratories of Government but now you are moving to an individual. So, can we have an explanation from the minister, because it seems we are likely to get into an area that we had rejected from the very beginning? We seem to now be expanding it to anybody, which means it will affect as many people as possible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are now moving away from the proposal. The proposal is that the minister may refuse a transfer of a plant breeder’s rights in the public interest. That is what we are dealing with.

Okay, I now put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I notice that we have the Patents Act, which was passed by Parliament, but now I do not see the Attorney-General in the House as we deal with such an important Bill. I am being tempted to think that from the way we are proceeding, we might be trying to in effect amend the provisions of the Patents Act. So, isn’t it procedurally right for us to call in the Attorney-General as we proceed with this Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if it is a conflict between the laws, the court will sort it out. I put the question that clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR KASAMBA: Under clause 42, sub-clauses (1) to (7), I propose that we replace the word “Registrar” wherever it appears with the word “Committee.” It is the committee to revoke the plant breeders’ rights and not the registrar whose role is administrative, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 42 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR KASAMBA: The amendment under clause 43 is equally about the replacement of the word “Registrar” with the word “Committee”. This is to make sure that the committee, rather than the registrar, revokes the rights. It is consequential.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chair, I beg to move that we redraft sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1), regulations made under this Act may also, subject to this Act, prescribe – 
    (a) the procedure for processing applications; 
    (b) the forms to be used under this Act; 
    (c) the fees payable in respect of anything to be done under this Act; 
    (d) what amounts to commercial use under section 15; and 
    (e) any other matter that needs to be prescribed.”

In paragraph (a) of sub-clause (3), we propose the insertion of the word “hundred” between the words “one” and “currency” in the second line. 

In paragraph (a) of sub-clause (3), we propose the substitution of the word “two” with the word “six.” 
According to the original document, under sub-clause (3) (a), any contravention of the regulations may be punishable with a fine of not exceeding one currency point or imprisonment not exceeding two months or both, and may prescribe higher penalties for repeated contraventions. The penalty of one currency point was so low, considering that one currency point is equivalent to only Shs 20,000. So, we are trying to increase the penalty. 

The justification is: for clarity and also the proposed sentence of two months was considered too low. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had stood over clauses 7 and 15 and of course we have not done the schedule. I put the question that the first schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chair, after consultations and given the fact that we did not carry the amendments in clauses 5 and 6, which were passed, it remains as it is stated in the clause. So, we are not deleting anything.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are not making any deletions?

MR KASAMBA: We are not making any deletions and I beg to move, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If it is remaining as it is, I now put the question that clause 7 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We also stood over clause 15.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We also stood over clause 15.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Chair, this is the clause that I think hon. Kabahenda and hon. Bitekyerezo were talking about. They asked about how we would protect the public interest and I think I ably explained it. So it remains as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything new in this clause? Have we made any changes to the interpretation section? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Plant Variety Protection Bill and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

12.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

12.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010” be read for the third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed.

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I express my gratitude for the passing of this Bill, which has taken quite a bit of time. It has been passed just in time because the international convention that required this Bill to go through gave us only nine days to pass this Bill before the end of this year. It is only important that we did pass it in good time.

I wish to thank you all for the support that you have given us. I thank the Speaker for the great support you have given us. I also thank everybody else who has supported this Bill. I believe with this spirit, we should be able to move forward and get the agricultural economy moving forward in good shape. Thank you very much.

I have been reminded that we may not have another time to meet before Christmas; the ministry and I, together with all my colleagues, wish you a merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. 

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for giving us the support to make sure this Bill is passed. It was already long overdue and we thank you for the input. We hope that if there are any considerations for improvement, we are still around to make the necessary adjustments as we move on. Thank you very much and I also wish you a wonderful Christmas and a prosperous New Year.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for completing that task which had taken a bit of time. I urge the committees to handle whatever is remaining so that we meet our timelines.

Now, honourable members, the chairperson of the legal and parliamentary committee reported that all his outstanding Bills are ready. So I propose that we handle one of them, and I invite hon. Mwiru to present the Anti-Homosexuality Bill because it is ready. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY BILL, 2009

12.17
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a member of the committee, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee on the meetings held to consider the Anti-Homosexuality Bill.

THE SPEAKER: I am very sorry; I think we start with the mover for the second reading. So, I accordingly alter the Order Paper.

12.17
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several members of the House. It is seconded.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implication for this Bill.

Madam Speaker, this House will recall that in September 2009, a Private Member’s Bill entitled “Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009” was tabled for first reading in this House. It has taken quite a while before we could consider this Bill. However, a lot of consultations have been made; the committee has done a lot of surgery on the Bill and amendments have so far been proposed.

Today is going to be a very good determinant for Ugandans, at this time when they have been expecting this Bill to have already passed. Ugandans have anxiously been waiting; I remember last December, we promised Ugandans that we would pass this Bill before Christmas but alas, we did not. I believe this time round, we are going to pass it.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is meant to provide for marriage in Uganda as contracted between only man and woman, and that is the way the Creator really intended it to be. This is one of the reasons why this Bill must be considered - there is an attempt to redefine marriage. The family is also under attack and it is our role, as Members of Parliament, to protect what we know as the family. The family is being redefined and we need to protect what we know, as Ugandans, to be a family.

There have also been a lot of arguments that same-sex attraction is something which is innate or inbuilt, which we want to really disagree with. We know that homosexuality is a learned behaviour and therefore can be unlearnt. 

Madam Speaker, since 2009 when we proposed this Bill, a lot of our young children have been abused in a homosexual form. Our newspapers have been awash with a lot of stories about those youth. Some of them are in court but some of them go unnoticed; there are so many of our young people who are suffering silently. We believe that if we pass this Bill today, it will help us to save many young people who are suffering quietly. 

I am not going to belabour to explain the obvious- the anatomical implications of being a homosexual and the health effects that come with it. There are a lot of arguments against this vice and our role today is to make sure that we debate this Bill and pass it and give it to Ugandans as a Christmas present. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Can we hear from the committee. 

12.22
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for meetings held to consider the Ant-Homosexuality Bill. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. There is a minority report and ordinarily, we start with the minority report -

THE SPEAKER: No, start with the main report.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Anti–Homosexuality Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 14 October 2009 and it was referred to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Bill was re-introduced in the Ninth Parliament by way of a resolution of Parliament on 31 October 2011. 

Methodology 

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: 

THE SPEAKER: Those ones they can read.  

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to establish a comprehensive consolidated legislation to protect the traditional family by prohibiting- (i) any form of sexual relations between persons of the same sex; and (ii) the promotion or recognition of such sexual relations in public institutions and other places through or with the support of any Government entity in Uganda or any non-governmental organisation inside or outside the country. 

The Bill aims at strengthening the nation’s capacity to deal with emerging internal and external threats to the traditional heterosexual family. 

The Bill further aims at providing a comprehensive and enhanced legislation to protect the cherished culture of the people of Uganda and legal, religious and traditional family values of the people of Uganda against the attempts of sexual rights activists seeking to impose their values of sexual promiscuity on the people of Uganda. 

There is also need to protect the children and youth of Uganda. They are made vulnerable to sexual abuse and deviations as a result of cultural changes, uncensored information technologies, parentless child development settings and increasing attempts by homosexuals to raise children in homosexual relationships through adoption, foster care, or otherwise.   

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that:
(i) 	The Bill provides for a death penalty to a person who commits aggravated homosexuality. The death sentence, if executed, does not make the offender feel the punishment for his actions.

(ii)	The Bill provides for “attempt to commit homosexuality and aggravated homosexuality”. However, it will be difficult to prove that a person attempted to commit the offences.

(iii)	Any person who gets knowledge about a homosexual activity taking place has to report within 24 hours. This will cause problems especially to professionals whose ethics include confidentiality in order to be able to carry out their functions, for example doctors, lawyers and counsellors. 

(iv)	The Bill intends to extend its jurisdiction over Ugandans who violate its provisions while outside the country. This will be difficult to implement because of the state’s limited capacity.  

(v)	The Bill provides for nullification of inconsistent treaties, protocols, declarations and conventions. This is against the provisions of Article 287 of the Constitution, which obliges Uganda to fully subscribe to all its international treaties obligations ratified prior to the passing of the 1995 Constitution. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair. Honourable members, in the public gallery we have a number of religious leaders. They have come to observe the proceedings. We welcome them. (Applause)

I do not know who will present the minority report. Members, you have listened to the main report of the committee; do we really need to debate or we go to committee stage? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I am alive to the fact that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide for a minority report, which is actually a right. I seek your indulgence that as a committee, since we are doing this work on behalf of this committee, for fairness sake we present the minority report so that as the debate ensues, Members have an opportunity to look at what we have presented as the committee and what is in the minority report, so that we take a decision on them. 

Madam Speaker the reason as to why I am doing that -

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone willing to present on behalf of the minority? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the minority report is attached and the chairperson of the committee has informed the House that there is a minority report, and Members have copies and it has been captured as part of the record. So, I think we can continue with the process of the Bill since members have the report. It is part of us.

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, there is a minority report and for us to have this report valid, let the committee read the report as it is presented to the House and then we will with it after. Reading it does not mean we want it, but reading it is a formality of Parliament. Later on, we can deal with it. I think let us follow that. 

THE SPEAKER: Since there is no one willing to present for the minority, let me ask the chair to also present it, for fairness.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, as I present the minority report, I want to go on record that I am presenting it for purposes of natural justice because the authors of the report are not in the House. Since, Madam Speaker, you are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure, I want to proceed under such circumstances. 

THE SPEAKER: The matter is not provided for, so I have made a ruling.

MR MWIRU: I am humbled, Madam Speaker. This is a minority report by hon. Sam Otada and hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, who have appended their signatures to this report –(Interjections)-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen, please.

MR MWIRU: The Anti–Homosexuality Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 14October 2009 and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Bill was re-introduced in the Ninth Parliament by way of a resolution of Parliament on 31 October 2011.

Rt Hon. Speaker, some members of the committee present this minority report in line with rule 194(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which provides that: “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a Committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the Committee.” 

Points of Dissent from the Committee Position 

A citizen loses the right to his or her citizenry the moment the state intervenes in the affairs of his or her bedroom. To that end, that Act offends provision of Article 27 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which comprehensively provides for the right to privacy of persons. 

Madam Speaker, the signatories to this report primarily disagree with the principle of having this Bill. What two consenting adults do in the privacy of their bedroom should not be the business of this Parliament. It is not right to have the state allowed in the bedrooms of people. 

Further, matters of sexual intercourse between consenting adults neither be restricted nor reduced into a hard rule as to what is allowed and what is not allowed; for example: 
    • oral sex in some societies is a taboo; 
    • there are also some men who have consensual anal sex with their wives in a marital arrangement; 
    • there are some men who use fingers, sex toys and other contraptions on their wives in a consensual arrangement; 
    • there are some women who will not reach a climax or get an orgasm except when they are whipped and engage in games of Bondage, Dominance, Sadism, Masochism (BDSM). 

The key words in this argument are “two consenting adults.” 

While the Members agree that there is a need for children to be protected against recruitment by homosexuals, the Members disagree that this is the law to protect the children since a close analysis of the Bill also reveals that there are no specific clauses that provide for protection of children against recruitment. The Members argue that in that regard, there is a need for a comprehensive law to protect children against more than just homosexual recruitment and sex. This other law can protect children against child labour, violence, sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation, slavery and trafficking.

It should be noted that Uganda belongs to an international polity and cannot afford to exclude herself from the rest of the world by way of enactment of this law. The introduction of this law contravenes many international conventions and treaties which are already ratified by Uganda, such as: the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights (the Banjul Charter) ratified by Uganda on 10May 1996; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). 

The Bill is discriminatory and rather than prosecute the homosexuals in our society, the state should be trying to find ways to help them reform. In the wise ruling of Justice Mulenga in the Supreme Court, in the case of Andrew Mwenda and Charles Onyango Obbo vs the Attorney-General, he states that the duty to protect those we do not agree with is a duty we have over and above protecting those we agree with. 

“If there is any principle of the Constitution that more imperatively calls for attachment than any other, it is the principle of free thought- not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the thought that we hate.” In the same spirit, a child who has been a victim of this recruitment, funding and other acts of homosexuality that this House is attempting to legislate against should be protected rather than sending him or her off to rot in prison for the rest of his or her life. 

The laws in Uganda as they are currently already prohibit homosexuality. The new law does not add any significant value. The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is already very clear on the matter of homosexuality. Article 31(2a) prohibits marriage between persons of the same sex. Sections 145 to 150 of the Penal Code Act are also very clear against homosexuality and other unnatural acts. The Penal Code Act provides as follows: 

“145. Unnatural offences 
Any person who- 
(a) 	has canal knowledge of any person against the order of nature; 
(b) 	has canal knowledge of an animal; or 
(c) permits a male person to have carnal knowledge of him or her against the order of nature, commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for life.”

Recommendation

The Members recommend that the Bill be rejected by this House and no further consideration of the same be done. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move and restate my earlier position that I was presenting this minority report on behalf of the committee members who were not in the House.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes. For the record, hon. Mwiru was only fulfilling the role of the chairperson in the absence of the other members. So, honourable members, let us have one or two comments or should we go to committee stage? [Hon Members: “Committee stage”] – Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 1 is the interpretation clause; is there any amendment to the interpretation?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we will do it last. 

Clause 2

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we delete clause 2(1)(c). The justification is that the graveness of the offence would be difficult to prove. 

Two, we propose that clause 2(2) be amended by replacing the word “life” in the second line of the provision with “fourteen years”. The justification is that the sentence is more appropriate to the offence. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the whole clause on the offence of homosexuality, if we delete that part (c), the whole clause will lose meaning. I object to the deletion.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to oppose the amendment from the committee. In the interpretation section, the committee has actually proposed that we will be deleting certain words, for instance “lesbianism”. Should we not make reference to lesbianism, the only provision that –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with clause 2. We have not done it.

MS ALASO: I am just using it for arguments’ sake, Madam Chairperson. Should we do that, it would mean that we have no other reference that allows us to get at sexual activities where females try to relate to each other. The moment you remove, “he or she touches another with the intention of committing the act of homosexuality”, it is actually this which lesbians do. 

So, the moment we remove this one also, then you kind of literally kill the whole possibility of females doing indecent things on themselves. So, I would like to agree with hon. Mudimi that we stay (c) in the Bill. 

MR MWIRU: Honourable members, what we are saying as a committee is that if we are supporting the position in the Bill as we are saying, once there is a commission of an offence, there are ingredients you have to prove. If someone was murdered, for instance, you must prove that someone died and that the offender was the one responsible. You must prove this. 

Now, here when you say, “…he or she touches another with the intention of committing an act of homosexuality”, how are you going to prove that? That is why we thought that maybe if we delete it, it would be easier to proceed in that respect. That was the spirit. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee but I want to give him information. Recently, a cousin of mine was in Bugoloobi, and he happens to take alcohol. So, while he was at the bar, a man came and started caressing his thighs. That shows that the man actually had an intention of committing homosexuality acts. The way he was talking to him and touching him was too close, and he came and told me at home. So, this clause should be stayed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the only one we have to deal with is the issue of the sentence. Okay, I put the question that clause 2 be amended in respect to the sentence as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was a proposal from the chairman –(Interjections) – He made a proposal of 14 years. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, initially, we thought we are first dealing with 2(1)(c) and then we would go to the next sub clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish clause 2; there is no harm. That was a specific amendment that he proposed. Clause 2(1) (c) – (Interjections) –Did you oppose his amendment? 

HON MEMBERS: Yes 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, if you oppose the amendment, we go to 2(1)(c) – (Interjections) – You want to it stay? So, everything stays? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 3(2) be amended by substituting the words “suffer death” with the words “imprisonment for life”. Justification: to harmonise the provision with the penalty under the Penal Code Act on aggravated defilement. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 4 be deleted. The justification is that “attempt to commit homosexuality” may become too hard and difficult to prove, which may cause absurdities. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairman of the committee to help me out. When court says there was attempted murder, what happens? Does that mean the person dies or that they survived? I need help so that I can apply that scenario on this proposal you are making. 

MR MWIRU: Honourable members, hon. Alaso, has helped the situation. When there is attempted murder, the section provides for ingredients of the offence of attempted murder. What we are saying here is that this clause has a bearing on clause 2(1)(c) because we are talking about the intent. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose to redraft the headnote to read as follows: “Payment of compensation to a victim of homosexuality”. Two, delete sub-clauses (1) and (2). The justification is that those sub-clauses are redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is redundant?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we redraft the headnote to read as follows: “Payment of compensation to a victim of homosexuality”. Two, delete sub-clauses (1) and (2). The justification is that the sub-clauses are redundant. We are just redrafting the headnote. 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, I know that the effects of homosexuality can never be compensated, so I would like to propose another word - “Payment of compassion”. This is because there is no way you can compensate one for the effects of homosexuality. I wonder what we are trying to compensate, because some of them even lose their lives. So what are we compensating? Maybe we can say “compassion”. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we want to create punitive measures for people who participate in the same. The original Bill referred to protection, assistance and payment of compensation to victims of homosexuality. We are talking about compensation because it is punitive. That is the spirit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, he is amending the headnote – 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee. If we are going to delete sub-clauses (1) and (2) as suggested, then we can amend the headnote. However, if we are not deleting (1) and (2) as I hear from Members, then we do not need to amend the headnote because then the victims will not be protected and the victims will not be helped to present their case. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I agree with her because amending the headnote has an effect on (1) and (2). Once you amend, then you delete. If you do not amend, then they stand.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, does it stay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that in clause 6(2), we delete the words, “…outside the presence of the media” at the end of the provision. The justification is that the words are redundant. Proceedings in camera exclude the media. 

In clause 6(3), insert the words, “the victim or” between the word “of” in the sixth line of the provision and the word “court” in the seventh line. Justification: to protect the victim. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 7 be deleted. The justification is that it is provided for under clause 13. 

MR LOKII: Madam Chairperson, while the chairperson of the committee is trying to relate clause 7 with clause 13, what would happen in a situation where someone had information relating to this act? In which part of this Bill do we provide for that person to provide information? If you have information and you are not allowed to give it, then you are aiding this form of crime. So, where is this provision? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, aiding and abetting is promotion. Once you aid and abet, you are promoting homosexuality. Clause 7 is talking of aiding and abetting and clause 13 is talking of promoting homosexuality and we are saying that it is the same thing. 

MR KATOTO: Madam Chairperson, when you are guarding against water spillage, you make sure that every hole is sealed. So we should leave it as it is to protect our people. 

MR BENSON OBUA: Madam Chairperson, as movers of the Bill, we consulted widely and we want to agree with the committee and concede that we delete this since it is provided for in clause 13. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What harm will it cause if it is stated? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, when you read clause 13(b), for example, it says, “funds or sponsors homosexuality or other related activities”. The committee thought that this would mean the same, but we do work on behalf of the entire House – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Madam Chairperson, what is wrong in stating it?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, once the punishment is in the law, whoever has information is supposed to report it to the Police. So, we do not have to put that provision here. Whoever has any information regarding any crime can report to the Police.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chair, when you compare cause 13 with clause 7, you will realise that many of the things that are in clause 13 (1) (e) are in clause 7. Clause 13 (1)(e) says,  “A person who – (e) acts as an accomplice or attempts to promote or in any way abets homosexuality and related practices, commits an offence…” I think it covers clause 7.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what harm does it cause if it stays? I now put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 8 be deleted. The justification is that the content in there is already provided for under clause 13.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 9 be amended by deleting the words “etc” in the headnote. The justification is that it makes the headnote appear vague. 

We also propose the deletion of the words, “either in Uganda or elsewhere; or” appearing at the end of sub-clause (1) (a) and (b). The justification is that the words are redundant. 

Further, we propose an amendment to add at the end of sub-clause (1) (a) and (b) the words, “commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment of seven years.” The justification is: to perfect the provision by creating an offence and a penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Chair, I rise on a point of procedure because I was not aware that this Bill was on the Order paper for today. If I had been aware, I would have informed the House, as we had indicated before, that we have a few issues on which we are still having consultations – (Mr Katoto rose_) - Procedure has priority over a point of order. 

Madam Chair, if I had known it was on the Order Paper, I would actually have talked to you separately to say that we would like to conclude that process of consultation. That is point one.

Two, this Bill is such an important Bill, you should be very careful that you pass it with quorum – (Interjections) - Please, these are not things to joke about. Therefore, I would like to raise that point and to say that certainly, I would like to see a quorum realised in this House to pass this Bill. So, I therefore rise on a point of procedure – one, on the point about consultations, which we had raised before, and two, on the question of quorum.

MS AOL: Madam Chair, I think all of us take this Bill as very important like all the other Bills. So, it is incumbent upon all of us to be here to deliberate. I get really disturbed that the Leader of Government Business is not only frustrating Government business but also deciding to take us back, saying that he did not know that this important Bill was coming to the Floor of Parliament. That means he chooses what he should come for and the rest is just ignored. So, are you really in charge of this Government and its business?

Madam Chair, you know all of us must be serious. When we do not come here, we should not blame this House. The House should just move on, especially right now if there is quorum, we should move on. Since you have raised that point of procedure, I believe that if we try to check, maybe we have the quorum. You should allow us to pass this Bill. The Bill is very important for Ugandans and we are doing it for Ugandans. (Applause) Uganda’s motto is, “For God and My Country”, which must also be reflected in what we deliberate on here. Thank you.

MR KATOTO: Madam Chair, we passed several Bills yesterday and he was around, why didn’t he stop us on the basis that there was no quorum? We passed several Bills, why are you stopping this one? Madam Chair, we should continue and pass this Bill to save the people of Uganda. What is your worry about this?

MR AYOO: Madam Chair, I wish to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the clauses he still wants consultation on because it cannot be on the whole Bill. This will help us to proceed and consider some clauses as we leave out those that still await consultations. 
Secondly, I would like to say that all the Bills that come to this House are very important. We had therefore agreed, as Parliament, to move on and we have just done one now. 

MR KATOTO: Our kids are not protected, yours are protected because they move with escorts. Do you want other people to sodomise –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the opportunity to consult over this Bill has been there –

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It has been there for many years. The second opportunity will come at the time of assent. Let us do our work, the Executive can object later. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I have raised a matter of quorum. You cannot raise a matter of quorum and it is ignored. That is a fact. So, I have raised it and I want to repeat that this House does not have a quorum now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 10 be deleted. The justification is that proving intention to commit acts of homosexuality would result into absurdity. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I said that the justification is that proving intention to commit acts of homosexuality would result into absurdity. This is because we are trying to deal with the intention. That is the justification, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 11. I now put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.


Clause 12

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 12 be amended by replacing the word “life” in the third line of the provision with the words, “14 years.” The justification is: to harmonise the provision with clause 2 of the Bill.

Further, we propose that clause 12 be amended by inserting a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “A person or institution commits an offence if that person or institution conducts a marriage ceremony between persons of the same sex and shall on conviction be liable to imprisonment for a maximum of seven years for individuals or cancellation of licence for an institution.” Justification: to prohibit celebration of same-sex marriages.

Madam Chair, I think having rejected 14 years earlier, the amendment in reference to (2) collapses, but the second one stands.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 14 be deleted. The justification is that the offence will create absurdity and the provision will be very difficult to implement. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to

Clause 16, agreed to

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I seek your indulgence on clauses 15 and 16. I had amendments to make but the speed at which we moved was fast. So, I seek your indulgence that we go back to clause 15.

We proposed deletion of clause 15. The justification was that it is a consequential amendment. The committee proposes to define “court” in the interpretation clause; defining it in the main body would be a repetition. So, it is a consequential amendment because we are going to deal with this in the interpretation section. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you mean it will come under clause 3?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have deleted.

MR MWIRU: No, you did pass it before. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 15 be deleted because it is coming in the interpretation clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 16 be deleted. Justification: the practical enforcement of the provision will be very difficult.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 17 be deleted. Justification: the practical enforcement and implementation of the provision will be very difficult.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is happening?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, extradition would mean that we would be going to another country to extradite a person who has committed this offence. We are saying that our jurisdiction is within. What if another country does not have the same law, how can we get that person? That is the point we are making.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about countries we have extradition treaties with? I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 18 be deleted. The justification is that it is not necessary to put such a provision in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, deleted.

Clause 19, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go back to clause 1, interpretation.

Clause 1

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, we propose that clause 1 be amended by deleting the following words: (a) bisexual, (b) gay, (c) gender and (d) lesbian. The justification is that the words have not been used in the Bill.

Two, we propose to define the word “court” as follows: “‘Court’ means the chief magistrate’s court.” Justification: to provide for jurisdiction. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.06
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto, Alebtong): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009” and has passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.08
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY BILL, 2009

1.08
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2009 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY ACT, 2013”

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, as a committee, we want to take this opportunity to thank the members of this House for the support you have accorded to the committee, not only in this Bill but through all the Bills. May God bless you abundantly. Happy Christmas and happy New Year. (Applause)

MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the movers of this Bill, and most especially on behalf of hon. David Bahati who has been with us, I thank Members for the overwhelming support for this bill. I thank you all who contributed. This is a landmark Bill and we have done our part; we believe the authority that is supposed to assent to it will play his part. Otherwise, Ugandans have waited for very long for this Bill. Thank you all. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy here? Let us go to item No.9 on cotton. Yes, hon. Namayanja?

1.11
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural point. The Bill, which we have just passed, has been long awaited by the public. I would, therefore, like to inquire whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed without thanking you so much for being so bold and for standing strong, and thanking the committee for the commitment they have shown. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion that we support and thank you so much, as Members of this House and on behalf of the people of Bukoto East whom I represent and the entire Masaka District and all Ugandans. We thank you so much for being a strong woman and standing strong on your feet. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I put the question that that motion be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON A PETITION FROM AGAGO DISTRICT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INTERVENE IN THE DECLINING COTTON PRICES

1.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Madam Speaker, before I present the report of the committee, allow me also to congratulate honourable members and you, the Speaker, for such a wonderful Christmas gift in as far as the Anti-Homosexuality Bill is concerned. I congratulate you and I pray that we appeal to everybody to assent to it and we make sure that it becomes law in the very near future. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to present to the House the report of the committee on a petition from Agago District to Parliament demanding that Government intervenes in the declining cotton prices. Allow me, before I go into the details of the report, to lay on the Table the committee reports and the findings of the investigations it conducted during the interface with the cotton farmers and the agencies thereto. I lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, on 10 November 2011, on behalf of the cotton farmers in Agago District, hon. Franca Akello, Woman Member of Parliament for Agago, presented a petition to Parliament urging Government, through the Cotton Development Organisation, to increase the prices of cotton to at least not less than Shs 3,000 per kilogramme, considering the then inflation rate which had affected the cost of the farm inputs. She argued that the set indicative price by CDO of Shs1,600 was too low. 

The petition was referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for investigation and report back to the plenary. In accordance with rule 41(1), 133(c) and 161(a) and (b) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I now report as follows:

The petitioners raised their complaints summarised as below: 

(a) 	The cotton farmers in northern Uganda, specifically in Lango and Acholi sub-region, petitioned Parliament to intervene in the low prices of cotton during the season of 2011/2012. The prices were fluctuating between the CDO indicative price announcement of Shs 1,600 and Shs 1,000 compared to the Shs 2,800 that was being offered the previous year, the 2010/2011 season. This was in light of the high cost of inputs incurred by the farmers due to rising inflation that was running at 25 per cent then; high bank interest rates in the region of 27 per cent and 28 per cent; and the depreciating local currency during the season.

(b) 	It was alleged that the farmers acted on the CDO pronouncement that a kilogramme of cotton would be bought at Shs 3,000 in 2011/2012. This prompted them to grow more cotton at a higher cost than previously due to the rising inflation that prevailed during the first half of 2011/2012.

(c) 	Hon. Akena asserted, on behalf of the farming communities of Lango sub-region, that he had anticipated that the depreciation of the local currency would generate more local currency from exports, leading to better local prices in domestic currency terms. However, this was not the case. 

(d) 	The petitioners, on behalf of the farmers, also anticipated that global challenges faced by the world cotton processors would continue to affect production, international prices, leading to local cotton attracting higher international prices. 

(e) 	Finally, the high market prices of inputs like spray pumps, insecticides, fungicides and the high costs of cultivation, planting, sorting and marketing were a disincentive to cotton production as farmers are not making profits. 

Prayers by the petitioners

The petitioners concluded by praying that Parliament urges the Government of Uganda, through the Cotton Development Organisation, to  increase prices of cotton to at least not less than Shs 3,000 per kilogramme in view of the current inflation rates and the cost of farm inputs. 

Parliament’s resolution on the above

Part of Parliament’s resolution called for an assessment of the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation and a review of Government intervention in the cotton industry. Government should guarantee prices of up to 75 per cent of the international prices in order to protect farmers from external shocks.

The Methodology 

THE SPEAKER: That one the members can read.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA: Terms of reference

The committee developed and adopted the following terms of reference to handle the petition and Parliament’s resolution as shown below:
    • Criteria used by CDO to establish a season price of cotton-methodology required to understand the underlying assumptions of the price setting mechanism. 
    • Determine the profitability of a cotton farmer- either with application of fertilisers or not. 
    • The current world international prices of cotton and international cotton market events in other cotton producing countries.
    • Requirement for evidence on the allegation of the pronouncement made by CDO about the Shs 3,000 price for the 2011/2012 season. 

The committee also analysed the resolutions which arose from the motion on cotton by hon. Akena James Michael Jimmy of Lira Municipality, which were referred to the committee by the House for scrutiny on 14 December 2011. The resolutions were that:

    • Parliament urges Government to review its intervention, bearing in mind the success and the challenges of the cooperatives;
    • Government reviews the performance of the Cotton Development Organisation in view of the Auditor-Generals’ report on the mismanagement of the Cotton Development Organisation;
    • Government intervenes to ensure that farmers are protected from internal and external shocks and it maximises alternative pricing mechanisms;
    • Government convenes a meeting of stakeholders in the cotton sector with a view of addressing all the challenges in the sector and report to Parliament.

Committee findings

The committee investigated the matter, as already stated, and the following were the findings: The committee established that:
    • The middlemen were exploiting the farmers by buying the cotton crop at a price ranging between Shs 600 and Shs 800. 

    • The allegations were correct in as far as the cotton prices were found to be declining in all the areas we visited. 

    • Whereas the initial indicative price of cotton set by CDO at the beginning of the 2011/2012 season was Shs 1600, due to the cotton price fluctuation on the international market, CDO had revised the Uganda cotton prices to Shs 1,200 per kilogramme, which was below the previous year’s (2010/2011) price of Shs 2,800 per kilogramme.

    • Following the impressive cotton prices of 2010/2011, the cotton seed dealers, farmers and other players in the cotton industry speculated that cotton prices were bound to increase in the following season in order to entice farmers to increase the cotton production. 

    • However, the committee could not establish the origin of the price pronouncements of the cotton price of Shs 3,000 as alleged in the petition. The same view was confirmed by the farmers of Dokolo District in a meeting which the committee held at the Dokolo District Headquarters on 16 February 2012. 

    • Almost all farmers visited indicated that they received subsidised farm inputs from CDO and ginners.

Farm Gate Pricing Formula (Annex 3)

The domestic cotton farm gate prices are dependent on the international price of lint; domestic costs of ginners and their respective margins; the price offered by seed oil millers to ginners for the seed cotton; CDO Statutory charges and the exchange rate being used. 

Exchange rate 

The depreciation of the shilling generates better farm gate prices, assuming other factors or variables of price are fixed. However, in this case, the cost of seed and the international cotton lint prices were volatile during the season, leading to farmers not benefiting from the depreciation of the shilling. 

International Price of Lint
A change in the international price will affect the shilling equivalent of the domestic price, holding other factors fixed. In this case, the international price of cotton lint increased, the exchange rate appreciated, while the price of seed cotton to the ginners increased, hence eroding the benefits of increased international prices. 

Seed price per kilogramme

This is the price of seed offered by the millers to the ginners after the ginning process. This price is about Shs 300, as indicated in Annex 3. 

The CDO cess

This is fixed at two per cent of the international price of a kilogram of lint after ginning. This price is paid by the ginner to CDO. This varies depending on the international prevailing price. 

The Cotton Development Fund (CDF) 

The CDF, which was established by the ginners, charges Shs 200 from every kilogram of cotton entered into their ginneries for the provision of farm inputs. 

Government input

This represents the government subsidy of price, but since the cotton industry was liberalised, government does not subsidise prices anymore.

Bank interest 
This is a fixed cost of the ginner with a bank loan. It varies with market interest rates.

Ginning costs

These costs are fixed at Shs 800 per kilogramme and are included in the ginners’ cost of ginning seed cotton.

Ginners’ margin

This is also a fixed cost of US$ 15 per bale produced. This represents profits of the ginners that remain in business.

Transport costs

This is fixed at Shs 100 per kilogram for cotton and deducted from the price to be offered to the farmer. If the farmers were organised, they would be transporting cotton themselves to the ginners without paying this amount or the broker’s commission, which is explained below. So, there are various deductions in the process of determining the margin of the cotton price. 

Bankers’ commission

The assertion is that farmers do not sell directly to the ginners but they do so through agents. Therefore, this fee is fixed at Shs 50 per kilogramme of cotton and deducted from the price to be offered to the farmer.

Loading and unloading

This is also a fixed cost of Shs 10 per kilogramme of cotton. It is deducted from the price to be offered to the farmer. 

Observations

1. 	The cotton industry was liberalised, prompting the private sector to get involved in ginning and export of lint. There are over 35 ginners countrywide engaged in this activity, employing more than 100 workers per ginning facility. This demonstrates the importance of this category of stakeholders in the production of cotton. As the private sector, their motive is profit maximisation and therefore, the farmers will need support from both ginners and Government to also enjoy economies of scale commensurate to their input. 

2. 	After the ginners have offset their costs and determined their profits, the remaining amount is paid to the farmer. The chain continues to the next cotton season, enslaving the farmers to the ginner. This amount may be small but it is decided upon by the cost of inputs subsidised by the ginners and CDO and the international market fundamentals.

4. 	The only way this remaining amount, which translates into the farm gate price, can be enhanced is through organising farmers into farmer institutions to the level of ginning their own cotton. 

5. 	It was also observed that farmers are not involved in ginning. 

6. 	The farm gate prices of cotton are a reflection of the costs of the ginners since they are the only buyers in the cotton industry. The cotton industry prices are driven by, to a larger extent, the events experienced on the international market as well. 

7. 	The CDO is mandated, under the Cotton Act, to announce the indicative prices for ginning, production and lint but only one price, the farm gate price, is announced. However, the lint price of cotton is not announced since CDO has no influence on its determination as it is determined by external factors and not by the domestic economic fundamentals.

8. 	The bank interest payment of the ginners affects the price they offer farmers. However, it is not clear whether all ginners have contracted debts from the domestic economy whose interest costs remain high. 

9. 	The CDO mobilises farmers to form groups but they continue to pay brokers commission on their produce.

Recommendations

1. 	In order to overcome high interest rates in the domestic financial market experienced by ginners, other sources of financing that offer cheaper credit like that of UDB, which is only 10 per cent for agro-processors, should be considered in the price formula to compel ginners to exploit the existing financial incentives provided by Government. This will bring down the borrowing costs and transfer a lesser burden to the farmers. 

2. 	There should be a deliberate effort by Government to have farmers reorganised into formal groups for production and marketing to maximise farmers’ returns, other than losing income through middle men. 

3. 	The CDF charge on farmers’ produce should be a proportion or percentage of the season’s price rather than fixing it. 

4. The committee recommends that the role of cotton buyers and cotton seed dealers, who are a menace to all sides, should be regulated.

5. 	The Committee on Trade and Industry should get interested in the value addition chain and its corresponding regulation requirements. 

6. 	As part of value addition, farmers should be availed with knowledge and affordable credit to develop a cottage industry and start with ginning through the value chain. 

Profitability of cotton growing: the cost of production in the cotton sector 

Yield assumptions per acre of land 

This is a detailed presentation of the analysis of the profitability of the cotton sector. Allow me to move on to page 13, item 6.3, the stakeholders’ meeting.

All cotton stakeholders’ meeting 

The all cotton stakeholders’ meeting was organised by Government at the Royal Suites Hotel, Bugoloobi, on 31 January 2012. Members of the committee attended the meeting. In that meeting, it was resolved that the committee examines the possibility of Government’s participation in the management of the Cotton Development Fund. 

The Cotton Development Fund 

The Cotton Development Fund was established by the Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters Association (UGCEA) in 2003/2004-2004/2005 and was reviewed in 2010/2011. This was done in order to boost cotton production and ensure sustainable ginnery operations through the provision of production inputs and extension services to cotton farmers. 

The establishment of the fund envisaged provision of high quality production inputs to improve cotton yields. Due to lack of organised farmers’ institutions, farmers have not exploited this intervention to its full potential. 

During the 2010/2011 season, all ginners of UGCEA agreed to contribute Shs 600 per kilogramme of seed cotton they purchased from farmers. This implies that from a total production of 77,643,707 kilogrammes of seed cotton in 2010/2011, UGCEA collected Shs 46.6 billion. 

The CDF proceeds were utilised as follows: 
    • Shs 12 billion was placed on a fixed deposit account for use to support production in terms of provision of production inputs to farmers in 2011/2012; 
    • Shs 11 billion was used to support production during 2010/2011; and 
    • The balance of the Shs 16.4 billion was returned to ginners to cushion them against the effects of falling international prices that started at the end of the previous period. 

It should be noted that this is an incentive for ginners to offer better prices to farmers, or else prices would have been worse, to the disadvantage of the farmer. Details of the expenditure is highlighted on page 15. This was provided by the Uganda Ginners Cotton and Exporters Association. The expenditure of the CDF in 2012 was on provision of planting seed, provision of fertilisers, provision of pesticides, provision of spray pumps, provision of extension services and monitoring of cotton activities. 

Observations on CDF 

This is a fund, which is galvanised and contributed by the farmers and utilised by the ginners. It should be noted that while the CDF was established to provide production inputs and offer extension servicers to farmers, Parliament also appropriated resources to CDO to supplement the above efforts. 

The cotton industry was liberalised and is currently on private sector led. Therefore, the establishment of the fund was done to support farmers and ginners in the industry. The fund is a private sector led initiative, which is used to cushion the ginners from low international prices. In turn, it is used to stabilise the gate farm prices of the farmers. 

The provision for government innovations through CDO have been proved insufficient, necessitating the private sector through the CDF to provide additional support to supplement Government efforts as indicated below. 

Cotton production expenditures using the CDF are provided below. You can see the items, which were provided. From the table, CDF expenditures amounted to Shs 24 billion compared to Government intervention of Shs 4.5 billion for similar activities. This illustrates the insufficient funding by Government to maintain the same activity level in the industry. 

The CDF was established by Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters Association by pooling funds together and utilising funds to fill gaps in order to increase production and productivity. Since the ginners do not produce their own cotton, the farmers who grow the cotton indirectly contribute to this fund. Therefore, this is an embedded cost passed on to the farmers through deductions from the farmers’ sales. 

The formation of UGCEA was promoted, as required by law in the Cotton Development Organisation Act, section 5, to harmonise input distribution, coordinate marketing systems and have a buyers and ginners’ forum for discussing issues related to production and marketing. 

With regard to the legality of CDF, it is neither a levy nor a tax because it is not imposed by and/or payable to Government or a government organisation

Recommendations on CDF 

1. 	Government must review the Cotton Development Act, 2000 to address the developments in the subsector. These include defining the new roles of all the stakeholders in the value chain.

2. 	The functional relationship between CDO and the Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters Association should be enhanced further through legislation to guide their mandate. This is because they all play a complementary role, as spelt out in the Cotton Development Act, hence the linkages in the efforts and thus the relationship. 

3. 	Government should establish a cotton price support/stabilisation fund in the name of the Cotton Development Trust Fund to protect farmers against world-wide price fluctuations in the world market. 

Performance of CDO and the cotton sub-sector

On the performance of CDO, a review of the audited accounts, as prescribed in Parliament’s resolution, should be undertaken by the relevant accountability committee charged with the responsibility as provided for by the Rules of Procedure. 

The committee looked at aspects like output against programme targets with regard to performance of the organisation as discussed below:

The role of the Cotton Development Organisation is to ensure development of the cotton subsector through provision of cotton planting seeds, seed multiplication, farmer mobilisation and sensitisation, provision of pesticides and spray pumps and mechanisation of land openings. 

The Cotton Development Organisation planned the planting of 300,000 acres of cotton nationwide and production equivalent to 250,000 bales of lint. They planned to do this through distributing 4500 metric tonnes of cotton seed to farmers; producing 3600 metric tonnes, recruiting 120 extension workers, procuring and distributing 1000 ploughs while farmers would provide themselves with oxen. 

The cotton season starts from 1st November to 31st October the following year, overlapping the fiscal year of June to July when funds are availed to the CDO for cotton activities. This has implications on the output being reported following the financial year format. Whereas the cotton season begins in November and ends in October, the financial year is between June and July. This affects the release of funds to carry out the CDO activities. 

During the first half of 2011/2012, meaning the season ending October 2011 and the new season starting November 2011, CDO received Shs 1.9 billion as non-wage recurrent funds for the following outputs – They are indicated in the table below. 

From the table, CDO received 67 per cent of the programed amount for its non-wage recurrent budget of the first half of 2011/2012. The under performance of the releases to CDO was largely due to less release allocated to land opening, which performed at 23 per cent. On the contrary, releases for the provision of pesticides and spray pumps over performed at 117 per cent. This was to match the cotton season and due to high demand by the farmers. 

Starting 2011/2012, cotton seeds are no longer provided free of charge to farmers. This costs a farmer Shs 3000 per three-kilogramme bag. Field results indicate that this arose due to wastage by some farmers and the need for CDO to use part of its resources to repair machinery for processing seed meant for planting. 

In relation to the above, the committee established that a cotton development project, whose code is 1291 in the national budget, was established during the course of the financial year and received Shs 3.025 billion for the half-year period during 2011/2012. It was to establish CDO premises on which the machinery meant to dress seeds would be transformed from the ginners’ premises and fitted seed processing. These resources are part of the CDO approved budget, implying a reallocation of resources from its recurrent activities to development activities. 

This suggests that during the 2011/2012 budget allocation, CDO was funded inadequately to maintain its activities while at the same time increasing investment in the cotton industry. Such reallocation changes in the middle of the financial year distort planned activities in the sector. 

One of the priority actions to improve the cotton sector performance was to establish the price support fund to protect farmers against price fluctuation on the world market. In addition, CDO was to develop a public private partnership for setting up a price stabilisation fund. In the absence of a PPP legal framework, implementation of the above becomes difficult. Instead, Cotton Development Fund was revived to protect stakeholders, including farmers, from severe shocks in the subsector. 

Recommendations

1. 	Government should organise farmers into associations or groups for better negotiation of prices and farm inputs and tools. 

2. 	Government should also support the construction of farmers’ ginneries to enhance value addition and thus better prices. 

3. 	Government should consider reviving the value addition factories (spinning mills) so as to encourage local consumption, which will help in boosting the cotton prices. 

Global international prices for cotton and the respective global market events - 

THE SPEAKER: Just tell us what you want us to do.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, let me move to the observations and conclusions. 

The farm gate price of cotton for the season 2011/2012 announced by CDO on 12 October 2011 of Shs 1600 per kilogramme of seed was subsequently revised to Shs 1000 in December 2011 and finally to Shs 1100 in January 2012. This was done based on external and domestic factors in the industry. This price is not fixed but it is a guiding price to help farmers negotiate with cotton buyers. 

In order to benefit from a better price, farmers with young cotton were advised to obtain pesticides from CDO field staff. This was done to ensure that their cotton is not destroyed by pests and to enable them obtain high yields and good quality. 

However, prices offered to the farmers was well below the CDO announced price, and these prices largely originated from middlemen and unregistered agents. They were offering prices as low as Shs 800 per kilogramme of cotton especially in the Lango sub region. In Aduku, Iceme and Kitgum, the cotton had moisture hence affecting its quality. It should also be noted that poor quality lint that is exported can compromise the grading of Uganda’s cotton on the international market. We would fetch much lower prices or even face an export ban of Uganda’s cotton onto the international market.

Fertilizer applications will double the yields of the farmers and they will be able to earn much more income than those not applying it. Therefore, fertilizer application needs to be encouraged among the farming communities.

Cotton is mainly grown by small-scale farmers in Uganda. This implies that for growers to add value to their cotton, they must get organised into groups. The group members would then bulk their cotton and gin it using mini ginneries or contract ginning. In the case of mini ginneries, cotton growers’ groups would require financial support to acquire and set up the mini ginneries. On the other hand, contract ginning would entail groups paying a fee to have their cotton ginned. 

Value addition by farmers will generate various benefits including higher income from sale of lint as well as the sale of seed, and better management of quality since growers would directly handle their cotton. High quality, contamination free lint would earn the growers a premium. 

We noted that cotton growing is less likely to be profitable for farmers who do not own land as the cost of hiring land is high compared to farm gate prices offered in the market. In such instances, the farmers could organise themselves into formal groups and acquire big chunks of land to realise higher returns from their crop.

The assessment of the physical performance of CDO based on a fiscal year approach is misleading, as the cotton season is different from the budget period. Retaining this approach only overstates the performance of CDO as the physical outputs recorded in the previous period are captured in the current financial year outputs. This has to be rectified.

Government should review the entire policy of its agricultural sector liberalisation efforts, as farmers have not benefited from the envisaged benefits. This is because Uganda’s agriculture is dependent on small scale farmers who are not part of any formal grouping that is business oriented.

In the long run, Government will have to stick to upgrading seed treatment plants and regulations as interventions in seed provision to famers, among others, is phased out. That means Government’s subventions to CDO should follow a trend of reducing the budget allocation and later on phasing out CDO budget allocation as long as a minimum production limit is guaranteed to enable CDO collect sufficient revenue to regulate the sector adequately.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit on behalf of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you talked about the cotton sector but the prayers of the petitioners were specific. They wanted Government to raise the price to Shs 3000. I wish you had answered that. What do you say about the prayer that the cotton price be raised to Shs 3000 because that is they were praying for? That is the prayer.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I submitted the costing and the trend of the cotton sector as it existed, and with the liberalization Government does not fix prices. Cotton Development Organisation gives indicative prices but because this cotton is managed by international lint exporters, Government could not reinstate the price of Shs 3000 in essence. That is why we went into the details of breaking down the approach the ginners use to reach the indicative prices that are categorized at the end of the day. 

The farmers are very weak because they do not own the value chain; they only sell at the gate of their farms. The middlemen and the ginners are the only ones who are organised. So, we pray that we organise the famers so that they can own the value chain – they can produce, process and market the cotton rather than being mere recipients of the prices.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. However, I would like to seek some clarification from the chairperson of the committee.

In this report, you talk about organising farmers into groups. Why were you not bold enough to say that the co-operative movement must be revived? Don’t you think that the farmers have lost their collective ability to bargain? You gloss over issues of forming groups; are you talking about village groups? 

I come from a cotton growing area, Bukedi. The famous South Bukedi Cooperative Society died the other day. The poverty in that region is highly attributed to the collapse of co-operatives. It is high time a committee of Parliament and all of us stand collectively to say that we need the revival of the co-operative movement.

Our farmers are too poor to negotiate. They do not have the leverage to negotiate. They do not have what the negotiators call “the best alternative to a negotiated agreement”. Here we are putting them at the mercy and whims of international dealers. You say they give you the parameters of how much – they know what you have used in ploughing and planting. 

Why were you not bold enough for the Ugandans who grow cotton? The Sir Hesketh Bell and others introduced cotton growing in the more strong regions - northern and eastern Uganda. I do not see it in the central. Maybe you should just advise Ugandans who are growing cotton to stop it. You see people getting a profit of Shs 100 or Shs 200; why can’t Government come out to say that these people are making losses, they are wasting time, they are not even aware, they can grow other crops. 

When the colonialists introduced cotton, probably there were better ideas because cooperatives were there. Mr Chairman, would you be kind enough to be bold and say that Government must enact a law to revive the cooperatives. It should not be a song; it should be an actual provision that can empower our people in all areas, not only in the cotton sector?

1.48
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about cotton, it is also very difficult to tell our people to leave growing cotton and grow other crops. That is very difficult because the reasons as to why they grow cotton are very many. Sometimes it is about preparing gardens for millet growing. Sometimes, it is about food security - you sell the cotton and keep your food. Otherwise, we would have told our people to just abandon cotton growing. The men also rely on cotton. 

The only issue here is the killing of the cooperative movement. Why can’t we revive the cooperative movement? I stand with the honourable member on this. Yes, you did a lot in coming up with this report, but you have not answered the prayers of the petitioners. 

It is very important that we listen to our people. I interacted with some elderly people who operated cooperative societies. I think we still have some knowledgeable people in that field. So, why can’t we take initiative? We cannot rely on these people to organise themselves into these cooperative societies; it must be an initiative of Government. Government killed the cooperative societies and now Government should revive them and allocate resources to them. It is very unfortunate that we allow our people to swim in abject poverty yet we have some ways to bail them out of that poverty. 

I also think CDO has its tricks. I am sure that the CDO is also benefitting a lot in a way best known to them. Why is it that they cannot design something that is better? The organisation has been given to them so that it also benefits our people. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a lot of intellectual content in this thing but it has not answered what the people wanted. So, I do not know whether we are helping the farmers with this debate.

1.51
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have rightly stated my concern. The prayer, as paraphrased by the committee on page 2 of the report,  says,  “The petitioners concluded by praying that Parliament urges the Government through Cotton Development Organisation to increase the price of cotton to at least not less than Shs 3,000…”

Madam Speaker, this prayer comes as a result of what CDO has been pronouncing as indicative prices. For you to say that the price of cotton will be Shs 3,000 this year and it drops to the level of Shs 600 or Shs 800, it means there is a problem. You raise the price to encourage me to grow cotton and then when it comes to time of buying, you drop it significantly, and this has been repeated year in, year out. 

I would have really felt that the amount of effort that the committee put into coming up with all this literature should have been dedicated to resolving this prayer. But again, when you come to the recommendations, the one on page 9 says, “In order to overcome high interest rates in the domestic financial markets experienced by the ginners…” Now, you are talking of ginners who are exploiting the farmers; do you want to say that the farmers do not get loans to cultivate the cotton? Don’t the subsidies eat into their profits? 

I think this committee could have done better by addressing the prayer of the petitioners other than focusing on other players. The committee chairperson should clarify to us how useful this report has been to the petitioners.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable members, I do not know whether we should really spend time on this matter because we have not answered the prayers of the petitioners; we have spoken about different things. Do we need to spend more time with this debate?

1.53
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, while Iagree with the observation that the prayers of the petitioners have not been taken into consideration, I also think that the committee spent more time listening to the Cotton Development Organisation, which was giving them information while defending their position.

Now that the report is before the House, I think it is imperative to the House to find the best way to proceed. Referring this back to the committee might not even answer the question. Madam Speaker, we need your help; what is the best way we can cause Government to comply, for the sake of the future of Ugandans involved in cotton growing and the high rates of poverty? We cannot just sit here and say, “Let Government restore co-operatives.” I think we should have capacity to cause Government to comply so that we can save Ugandans from this poverty.

I will give one example. This House has ever handled the question of the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in western Uganda; it has dealt with the outbreak of East Coast Fever (ECF) and we have always responded. Why are we not responding to the cry of cotton growers? Are these not Ugandans? Must we all become Karimojong to have cows in order to live in this country? Must we all go to western Uganda to become cattle keepers so that we can survive? Must it be cows for Ugandans to have rights? 

I think it is important that we look at the future of cotton farmers. If CDO is becoming an exploiter, then we must get an option. Why are we emphasising on pumping money into SACCOs in the name of replacing co-operatives societies, which were supporting cotton production? I think it is high time we turned around and moved the money of SACCOs to support the formation of cooperatives in order to save Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, in our financial statements of the 1960s, the statement on what cotton contributed to this economy is clear. Today, we are merely carrying the rhetoric of the failure of cotton production. So, what are we really discussing? I think it is not fair for us to spend time prescribing what Government has done because it has failed; this report just confirms it. What do we do, as Parliament, to help our people? (Member timed out.)

1.56
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for doing some work on this report, although he failed to answer the petitioners’ prayers.

According to what is pertaining, this economy has been liberalised, not only the cotton sector but even the coffee sector. Prices are now determined by market trends. There is no way this Parliament can force Government to revise prices and fix them because the economy is liberalised. Unless the policy of liberalisation is revised, there is no way we are going to work on this.

When you look at the responsibilities of the CDO, all its responsibilities have been delegated to UGCEA, which is managed by the private sector. Private exporters only look at the market prices and increase their profitability. So, there is no way we are going to force them to fix the prices. We only need to look at the liberalisation policy and maybe revise it.

1.57
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree that we seem to be lamenting, but for the last seven years that I have been in Parliament, we have had reports year in, year out that bring out challenges in the cotton sector. I actually de-campaigned cotton and tobacco growing in my area and those companies were not pleased. But I told them I could not allow poverty to be multiplied as my community is being exploited.

I want to agree with hon. Deo Kiyingi entirely; I have been with him in the export sector for some time. Whereas our farmers’ gate prices are low, the companies involved in this export of liberalised products are not doing badly. The buyers abroad are doing good business while the ginners are also doing good business. So, basically, it is the citizens who are the losers in the liberalisation policy that we introduced.

Unfortunately, when you also look at CDO, they do not look needy; CDO as an institution is very rich and have even kept some money of a levy, which was introduced, from the producers. So, basically, as Government and Parliament, we have been superintending over cheating citizens. That is basically what it means. (Dr Bitekyerezo rose_) I hope, Madam Speaker, will give me more time because – 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Mukitale and the House that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is one of the ginners in Northern Uganda. It is unfortunate that she is not around because she would have told us if she is among the people eating money in Northern Uganda while the rest of the farmers are poorly paid.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is not fair.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, even mentioning names of particular ginners is not going to help us. What we should do as Parliament is to engage the wrong policy of liberalisation that did not protect farmers. Even a seed policy is lacking. The seeds were given to these ginners but they crash the same seeds for soap and for cooking oil, without even looking at how much-  

We need to understand the cotton value chain if we are to discuss it in its entirety. Government has been making piecemeal interventions to just a few people; you will hear Christex or the company that took over UGIL have got an intervention. What we need in the cotton sector is a strategic value chain intervention right from the cotton growing, seeds, tractors, crop finance, and value addition. If we chose that, it would require an import substitute. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just close you remarks.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, if the government decided today to review the liberalisation policy and Uganda produces uniforms for its army, the Police and schools, we can produce our cotton at a price we want. The oil and gas industry that we are going into has a very big component of importing cotton products. This is where we can do import substitution and local content and this cry would end. But because there are some big people who benefit from this bad policy, we are not going to see this intervention.  

So, I want to appeal that we look at a strategic policy review and we do an import substitution. We look at what this country will require in the next few years and we start funding our citizens to produce for our local market and also participate in local content in oil and gas. That is how we shall save our citizens from this suffering. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Kabakumba, I just want, for the record, to clarify that hon. Ogwal has been coming to follow up this matter on behalf of the farmers. She has been coming to appeal to me to put this matter on the Order Paper so that the plight of the farmers can be addressed.

2.02
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To me, cotton is a unique crop and it is really strategic; so, Government cannot afford to ignore it. 

There is a lot of shifting of goal posts. When it comes to pricing, you say it was liberalised. I want clarification from the minister: what is the import of the indicative prices by CDO? Cotton Development Organisation is turning out to be like this Meteorology Department in Entebbe. They explain that it is going to be a rainy season but you only see drought. Then they say there are going to be storms or sunshine then it will all of a sudden rain heavily. 

I have also been involved in the cotton and tobacco sectors but the farmers are being ripped off. I do not think that Government should leave it up to them; it cannot work. I have not heard Uganda Coffee Development Authority giving prices, but it is because anybody can buy coffee and export it but with cotton you sort of have to sell to the ginners. You cannot pretend to say Government cannot intervene and help farmers. Honourable minister, I really need serious clarification.

To hon. Aol, I do not think it is right to continue growing cotton when they are also making losses perpetually. We must find alternatives. I will tell you the farmers may lose in the short run but the Government ultimately will be the biggest loser if these cotton farmers decide not to grow cotton anymore. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.04
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. 

I would also like to join Members who have contributed on this report and say that one of the reasons why cotton, like any other crops grown in Uganda, is being affected is due to the fact that the economy has been liberalised. It is very difficult for Government now to come in and start looking at certain crops and intervene. 

We also have a problem in our area of banana wilt. Very soon, bananas will be wiped out by banana wilt and we shall also be coming here to complain, asking for Government intervention. So, Government should look at intervening in this area by looking at various crops, not specific crops.

Secondly, specifically for cotton, something can be done, Madam Speaker. As one Member has said, we need to revive co-operative societies to be able to negotiate prices for farmers and to supply cheap inputs to farmers. One of the factors that affect the price of cotton is the supply of expensive inputs. 

I will give an example. The Government of Zimbabwe is supporting the cotton sector by supplying inputs to the farmers at cost price. Here, as the committee has indicated, there is a tendency of middlemen, who are overcharging the farmers. So, if Government can revive the cooperative societies to look at supplying farm inputs at cost price, it will go a long way in addressing the issue of the prices.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of value addition. However much we pay the farmers, as long as we are not adding value to our products, we shall not be doing anything to improve the welfare of our people. We have a local market - we have secondary schools and primary schools. If we were selling lint or finished products to our own market, this would go a long way in addressing the cotton prices. Unless that is done, we shall not be assisting our farmers. I thank you very much.

2.09
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for raising this matter and the committee for the report.

When we talk about cotton growing, we are talking about the greater North. The greater North is composed of many farmers who are growing cotton. I got involved with some of the officers from the Cotton Development Organisation and I asked them how I could get involved at my personal level as a leader and see how I can mobilise farmers. I think they have a lot to hide. They are hiding something that they are not telling Parliament or the farmers because they vanished. We organised very well and agreed that I was going to get involved in mobilising farmers and how we could go on radio but when the time came, the man never came back; he never called me and they just vanished. 

Madam Speaker, the farmers are complaining. It is not only this time; these are farmers that started growing cotton from the colonial time up to now. Why are they complaining now? Because they are not getting the services; they are not getting the benefits of the farming they are involved in. 

One of the complaints that the farmers are raising is that the cotton now seems to be GMO cotton. It is not heavy. You grow a lot of it, you even get a big bundle but then you get very little; it is very light. So, we want to also know from the Minister if the seeds the farmers are getting are not the GMO type. What is the way forward for these farmers?

Much as the sector has been liberalised as honourable colleagues have said so, Government has the authority to protect the farmers. (Member timed out_)

2.09
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When it comes to talking about cotton, I feel so saddened. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when the debate on cotton became so contentious and you told us to go and meet the Prime Minister to find out what we could do to sort out the issues of cotton. The meeting ended not even with a single solution or way forward from Government. Without shame, Government, in the name of Cotton Development Organisation, mobilised ginners in broad daylight to come and speak on behalf of the cotton growers in this country. It was ginners speaking on behalf of the cotton growers. We moved out of the meeting disappointed. 

I think it is a Government policy to choke the sector. There is now no way you can talk about the original cash crops of this country. At least, for the case of coffee, amidst the problems it can still fetch about Shs 5,000 a kilogramme. What about cotton that has reduced to Shs 600 a kilogramme? Therefore, I think Government has a deliberate policy to choke the cotton growers. 

Moreover, cotton growing covers a very wide area. You talk about Bunyoro, West Nile, the whole of Teso, Lango and Acholi. I am even perplexed that the committee decided to limit its scope to only Acholi and Lango and left out Bukedi region. Of course, I know in Teso, we grow cotton but Bukedi region has even outsmarted us now. So, there is no way they could leave them out. 

When you move through Budaka and that area, you even get very annoyed. One time, the people from Bukedea burnt down all the cotton in the gardens when they were discouraged. Can’t we feel for these farmers, really? 

Madam Speaker, to me, the way forward is: we still have the structures of the ginneries where the cotton used to be ginned; what is Government doing about those valuable structures that are in place? Government cannot sit and fail to feel ashamed when those structures are still there in every region of this country. What is Government doing about those? If you cannot erect new ones, then why are you not using those that are already there?

We cannot claim the issue of world prices. What about cotton? Why hasn’t it failed to go beyond the threshold? We definitely cannot compare the two crops, but there should be something that can be done about cotton. You cannot leave this to chance; we cannot leave cotton to fate in the country. 

I have told the people of Kaberamaido to stop growing cotton painfully, because they were benefiting a lot out of it. So, Government, we want to see something done; in fact, when we come back, we want a fresh debate to handle cotton. We are not going to solve this question during this debate this afternoon; we want a fresh debate with a full House, with ministries lined there - ministry in charge of cooperatives – to tell us what they are doing. 

We want to see the money they are giving to SACCOs put in the ginneries that used to be used for the cotton ginning and processing. Otherwise, we are not doing any justice to this country. You cannot let farmers grow cotton when you claim the prices will be between Shs 2,000 and Shs 3,000 and when it is ready, they are paid Shs 600 or Shs 300 a kilo without shame. 

I remember even Busoga used to grow a lot of cotton and that is how we used to earn a living, that is how most children went to school. Now, we are relying on selling foodstuffs and selling land to send children to school. At the end of the day, what do we fall back to? 

Government, you have been very unfair to this country. Be good to Ugandans who have made you what you are. We are very disappointed as regions where cotton was one time grown and as a benchmark to most of the development – (Member timed out.)

2.14
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, following your wise guidance, the committee only failed to come up with the right answer to the prayers of the petitioners. However, I see a lot of good recommendations in the report, which we could actually build on. 

On page 18, the committee suggests that Government should establish a cotton price support/stabilisation fund in the name of cotton development trust fund to protect farmers against worldwide price fluctuations. 

I think we can build on this recommendation. The government decided to liberalise the whole country, even the education sector has been liberalised; anybody who wants to start a school can charge whatever prices they want, and the cotton sector has also been liberalised. So, can we come up with a fund like this where Government puts in money? 

Since CDO gives us the stabilisation price for that following year, if we have money in this fund, Government would be able to pick money from that fund to stabilise the prices. In the case of that year, when farmers petitioned, there was evidence – Honourable members of this committee, I remember when you came to the district, you can bear witness that farmers were testifying before you and even some agents of the ginners were actually there. So, they were testifying in the district, confirming the price was promised to them and it was fixed at a minimum of Shs 3,000. By the time you went to the district, it was being sold at Shs 800 and that is why –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Take half a minute to conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.I wanted them to go to Paimol Subcounty where cotton farmers decided to set their cotton ablaze. They burnt their cotton because of anger. Imagine the effort you took to cultivate and at the end of the year, they give you a low price, even below half of the price that was promised. 

Madam Speaker, I really think enough is enough. I have heard Members who come from coffee growing areas say that they have been getting coffee seedlings, but we, who come from cotton growing areas, hear about nothing. We do not have any programmes from Government to support cotton growing. (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have listened to the report and the recommendations and you have also heard the debate. Do you have solutions for today or are you coming back to tell us what you are going to do?

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I thank honourable members for the wise debate you have had about this issue. 

First of all, I will come with a comprehensive statement on this matter. Secondly, I would like to clarify and give an indication on the matter of pricing. The prices that we get here on cotton are not controlled by Government. Equally, the Government cannot fix a minimum price because it does not control the cotton price. 

The debate seems to be swinging towards saying that Government should subsidise, because that is the only way you can make sure that there is a minimum price. But Government is not in a position to subsidise and it cannot only subsidise cotton; there will be other crops and many other areas, services and so on. I wanted to clarify on that. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am only wondering whether the minister would be proceeding rightly by the statement he has made. My understanding was that the reason people petitioned was because the would-be surplus for value is actually taken away by the ginners and the middlemen and the citizenry go away empty handed. If he says that he is not going to address that but he is going to come with a paper, is it academic? Would it be procedurally right for him to proceed in that direction when he does not seem to address the concerns within and then he says he is going to come with a paper? Is it for academic purposes? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the minister has taken away the only hope I had. I do not see any reason why he should even come back here. What can be comprehensive if he is not giving hope to these Ugandans who are growing cotton? Honourable minister, are you a sadist? (Laughter)

PROF. NYIIRA: Madam Speaker and Members, I did indicate that definitely, I will come with a comprehensive statement on these matters. What I was trying to indicate is that the debate has given good input to what I will be making as a statement. I was giving some of the clarifications to these matters but in this particular case, I think I will come up with a statement. Thank you. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, the minister made a very fundamental statement here, actually indicating that he has already pre-empted this report that he is going to send to this Parliament. He said that there is no other way Government can subsidise, because this debate was trying to tend towards advising Government to subsidise. 

If there is no other way, since the market is already liberalised and the world market cannot be controlled by Uganda, you are actually telling us, honourable minister, that this Government is not able to support cotton growers any more. Are you trying to tell my people of Agago District, who have not been growing cotton for the last two years waiting for an answer from this petition, to completely stop growing cotton? If so, what other alternative are you giving us today so that my farmers can also do something to earn a living?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the question that honourable members are asking is: is it worthwhile to continue growing cotton? Should Ugandans put their efforts in cotton growing? Tell them so that they can decide what to do.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, before the minister speaks, I want to say that I went to Agago, the district of my sister, and I saw the pain of the people. I wondered, “Is our Government really in charge?”  I have to tell you this. 

If you look at the amount of PRDP money, which has been going to Northern Uganda – This is a question of organising farmers; it is not the price. Leave alone the price; you and I should work together. 

It is good that I am the chairman of the Parliamentary SACCO and I have to give a test case.  I have a SACCO, which is almost the best in central Uganda. We need to organise our farmers; that is the fundamental issue. The price will always be determined by the market trends; the farmers cannot determine the prices. However, if we organise the farmers to own the production - they graduate into processing and we enable them to go into bulk marketing – then you will manage the ginners. As of now, we have a system where the exporters and ginners – (Interruption)

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you, chairman, for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also went to Agago and the question was: should farmers continue growing cotton? As we speak, farmers are at a disadvantage. 

The information I would like to give the House is that CDO and the ginners subsidised the farmers –(Interjections) - Yes, they did. There is a lot of money going into subsidies for farmers in form of seeds and other things, but these farmers are not organised. So, by the time the subsidies reach the disjointed farmers, they can no longer make much sense. So, they are at a disadvantage. 

I would like to state that despite the fact that it is not profitable to the farmers, cotton, as we learnt from China, – thank you, Madam Speaker, for sending us to China – is one of the crops that has pushed that economy. The problem is that we do not know how to handle it their way. The solution is correcting the value chain.

THE SPEAKER: So, what is preventing us from organising the farmers? 

MR NYIIRA: Madam Speaker, when I came here, I was going to give a way forward. There are many good ideas and many people seem to know what ought to be done in the cotton industry. The hon. Member from Agago did indicate that there are good observations and recommendations in this report which we can build on. So, it does not help us much to lament on what must be done about issues that cannot be achieved. 

The report has given us clear recommendations on issues of liberalisation of the economy and how it impacted the cotton industry; there is a need for strategic policy interventions to review the subsector so that we can come up with a straight forward direction. I believe this is the way we should be going, rather than looking at what is impossible. Let us build on the good ideas put forward here and the good ideas out there to help the industry go forward because we need it.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, in view of the fact that the cotton growers of this country want to know what to do, we urge you to come and report to us on 4th of February. Come with a strategic plan. Otherwise, we do not know what to tell the people during Christmas. Honourable members, let us now leave that subject. The minister will report on the 4th of February together with energy. 

The Minister of Finance is not yet here, so can we deal with resettlement? We had that debate earlier; we were only waiting for responses from the Minister of Lands, who is here. I think let us deal with that item and then we go to state of the economy. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMPENSATION AND RESETTLEMENT OF THE WOMEN AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED GOVERNMENT’S PLAN FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE OIL REFINERY IN BUSERUKA SUB COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

(Debate continued.)

2.28
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, you instructed us to go back and prepare clear responses to the issues that had been raised in the petition, which has been tabled by hon. Nyakikongoro and hon. Tophace Kaahwa. We have been working very closely with them. As a matter of fact, about a week ago there was a field visit in which they participated. It involved interaction with people on the ground in order to ascertain what was happening on the ground, detect areas of improvement and ensure that the right things are done. 

I had requested that copies be availed to Members, because it is a very detailed report. I know Members may want to make reference to it but I do not know what has happened. We availed a copy to the Clerk’s office yesterday and it was supposed to be circulated – 

THE SPEAKER: You are supposed to come with your 300 copies not just encroach on the budget of Parliament. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, some of us are operating on shoestring budgets and we thought we could get a lifeline from Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Did you, by any chance, post it on our website?

MR MIGEREKO: Yes; we were working with the office of the Clerk to Parliament and the Department of Communication and Public Affairs. It should be accessed on the iPads. Madam Speaker, this technology you have introduced and new ways of doing things, which are in tandem – (Interjections) – No, the iPads are working; at least, I know mine is working.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk says she does not have sufficient copies. But are we able to access it through our iPads? Okay, let us defer it and go to the status of the economy.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I am normally very audible and I can communicate very ably.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is fairly detailed and I thought members may want to study it. Let us defer it.

MR MIGEREKO: I will make sure that copies are organised for Members so that we can dispose of this now.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, for now, let us go to the state of the economy.

MR MIGEREKO: I am extremely sorry about this.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving the committee an opportunity to present this very important state of the economy report.

The Committee on National Economy, among others, is mandated to make reports and update the country on the state of the economy, the state of indebtedness - As you can see, it is another item pending on the Order Paper. The report is a bit voluminous but I will try to summarise it. The report we are giving captures data for the period of FY 2012/13. We should actually have had this report as far back as August.

THE SPEAKER: Has anyone called the Minister of Finance?

MR MUKITALE: I have just got information from the Government Chief Whip.  (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, hon. Kajara is on his way here.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much. This state of the economy report comes on the background of earlier challenges of double-digit inflation. This country had challenges including paying off salaries of teachers and other civil servants and some of its property being attached.

Objectives
The overall objective of this report is to document critical information on the performance of the economy during the financial year 2012/13. In particular, this report is intended to inform Parliament on the state of the economy in order to make a case to Government as to why the current economic challenges facing the country need to be addressed with more commitment in order for the country to recover fully from the harsh economic situation that was experienced during the financial year 2011/2012, both in the medium and long terms.

Much as we are easing from the double-digit figures, it is important that we look at these specific objectives of the report: 
i) 	To measure the performance of the economy during the last financial year; 
ii) 	To enhance the engagement between Parliament and the key players in the economy; 
iii) To assess the concerns of the various stakeholders in the economy and come up with recommendations to address the way forward.

The committee collected information through the review of publications from the Ministry of Finance, the Parliamentary Budget Office and Bank of Uganda. We would like to thank the Parliamentary Budget Office for the work and the Bank of Uganda for always being cooperative in giving us the data.

Consultations with the key players in the economy were conducted with the respective stakeholders – Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda. Madam Speaker, during this time we also interfaced with the Uganda Chamber of Commerce, the Private Sector Foundation, Uganda Manufacturers Association. We are also still doing some consultations with Uganda’s local content service providers to the oil and gas sector. That is a separate report, which will follow later.

Background

This report provides an analysis of the performance of the economy for the financial year 2012/13 as at June 2013, unless otherwise stated. An analysis has been made on key accounts of the economy. In particular, this report is intended to inform Parliament on the state of the economy during that period by providing a summary of the latest global, regional and domestic economic developments. The report also provides key policy issues that need to be addressed for the economy to attain and sustain its full growth potential.

The macroeconomic objectives for the financial year 2012/13 were to stimulate economic – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you reading it verbatim?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, after this introduction, I will have to skip and go to observations.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MUKITALE: The objectives were to stimulate economic growth and begin to close the negative output gap, reduce high unemployment and poverty while maintaining macroeconomic stability. So, how do you have a stimulus without causing inflation?

Government planned to stimulate economic growth through a fiscal stimulus package of increased investment in infrastructure; modernisation of the Central Bank’s monetary policy; – of course, this infrastructure stimulus was three years back. I must mention that – and continued structural reforms to the budget intended to increase the efficiency of public spending and enhance its contribution to economic growth.

The envisaged structural policies included reforms to improve government project implementation capacity, promote productivity and reduce the cost of doing business with the private sector, including the use of an intensified fight against corruption.

However, government plans to stimulate economic growth through a fiscal stimulus were weakened by the suspension of budget support by development partners. This support was equivalent to US$ 282 million or 1.3 per cent of GDP. So, many government suppliers were not paid and even some salaries at some point were delayed. This resulted in the failure to achieve the intended goal.

In turn, Government responded by accommodating the shortfalls of budget support through a combination of cuts to budgeted expenditures and additional domestic borrowing of 0.7 per cent. Domestic borrowing is a very ugly thing because you will be denying citizens to create jobs and employ more people, let alone for the economy to grow.

Despite several shocks to the economy, economic growth recovered from 3.4 per cent in the financial year 2011/2012 to now 5.8 per cent in the financial year 2012/13. Inflation was brought down to 3.4 per cent as at the end of June 2013. This was a plus and a success. It was within the policy target of 5 per cent and the balance of payments was restored to a surplus of US$ 341.12 million.

Fiscal policy saw the overall deficit reach four per cent of GDP compared to three per cent of GDP in the previous financial year and slightly below the projected level of the last financial year, 2012/2013. This arose due to shortfalls in tax revenue and grants, higher than expected current expenditures, and unplanned re-capitalisation of Bank of Uganda equivalent to 0.7 per cent of GDP. 

In addition, the fiscal policy was characterised by a shift in the composition of spending in favour of current outlays following the approval of supplementary budgets. You remember the multiple supplementary budgets we had here.

Private sector credit growth averaged nine per cent for financial year 2012/2013 compared to 11 per cent for the financial year 2011/2012. This credit growth is largely due to foreign currency lending. In contrast, domestic currency lending has stagnated because of a combination of high lending rates and structural factors, including the closure of the land registry during the financial year 2012/2013 - you remember that, I do not know whether I can call it a scandal – which administers land titles needed for loan collateral.

The banking sector remained profitable because of high net interest margins. Non-performing loans have edged up to 4.2 per cent of total loans as at April 2013 from 3.4 per cent in March 2012, although the commercial banks’ capital position remained strong, with a statutory increase in the minimum paid-up capital of banks from Shs 10 billion to Shs 25 billion that took effect in March 2013. Colleagues, here you should remember that even when Bank of Uganda was reducing the bank rate, the commercial banks were not reciprocating. That actually leaves banks at a greater advantage and not necessarily those of you who are banking.

You will also realise, and we have talked about this, that the increased credit was only with those who were getting foreign currency. When you read through later, you will see a chart of the local currency – it is not the agricultural sector or the manufacturing but the traders who are borrowing because their areas remain profitable. How I wish it was the agriculture sector, which gives our people jobs.

Poverty and inequality

The national poverty headcount declined from 56.4 per cent in 1992/1993 to 24 per cent in 2009. That was the latest, as indicated in the table. I will now start skipping parts of the report after that. The table here shows the poverty, inequality and employment indicators. You can see this is from collaboration of UBOS and UNDP.

Poverty has reduced largely due to an increase in more secure and productive forms of employment. If current trends continue, Uganda is on course to achieve the national target to reduce the poverty rate to 10 per cent by 2017.

Inequality, however, remains a concern. The poorest quintile – the bottom 20 per cent of the income distribution - accounts for only 6.2 per cent of national consumption, although this has remained stable over time. The Gini Coefficient for Uganda is 44, meaning the country is unequal in terms of individual income distribution. The disparity between the rich and the poor – between the haves and have-nots - is increasing compared to other countries in the region like Tanzania at 37.6, Burundi at 33.3. They have more equal societies in terms of income distribution while Rwanda is the most unequal society with a Gini Coefficient of 53.

The poverty gap ratio, which measures the depth of poverty by establishing how far individuals are below the poverty line, has declined faster than the headcount index. This implies a rising average consumption among Uganda’s poor, meaning that individuals below the poverty line are less poor today than in the past. 

This really takes us back to the pro-poor challenges, including the just concluded cotton debate. Those chronically poor areas, if we do not make interventions to help them, will continue being poorer while those who are making money in bigger sectors like telecom continue being richer. So, Government has a responsibility, even in this liberalised and privatised environment, to provide interventions that are pro-poor so that the disparity does not worsen.

The ratio of the employed to the population is rising, meaning those above 25 years or older are getting into employment. Overall, unemployment is rising – at 3.6 per cent in 2010 compared to 1.9 per cent in 2006. The largest contributor to the rise is urban unemployment that stands at 8.7 per cent while youth unemployment is at 5.4 per cent during the period of 2005-2011. So, the rate of unemployment is alarming and actually, this is from captured data but you can imagine those who were missed due to the challenge of capturing data. 

Global and Regional Economic Developments

Global economic developments

After a general slowdown in the global economic growth since 2008, growth appears to be picking up slowly. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the world economy is projected to grow at 3.3 per cent and 4 per cent in 2013 and 2014 respectively, which is a modest increase in the overall trend. This outlook is driven by greater investor confidence in financial markets following decisive policy interventions to improve monetary conditions and fiscal sustainability in advanced economies. This has led to unprecedented low policy interest rates and the use of non-conventional monetary policy instruments, called quantitative easing and printing money, which have fuelled strongly increasing equity prices in Europe and the United States. This was after the challenges both in the US and Eurozone.

However, this has resulted in only very slow improvement in the availability of credit and a modest expansion of real economic activity. An accelerated economic growth is therefore still subdued by weak domestic demand, continued fiscal consolidation by European countries and debt reduction to sustainable levels.

In emerging markets, growth fell from – 

THE SPEAKER: Committee chair, I thought you had an executive summary; now you are reading word for word.

MR MUKITALE: Okay, Madam Speaker. Can I say something on the regional economic development before I go to the charts on page 8?

In 2012, 14 out of the 30 fastest growing economies in the world were in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, real GDP in the region grew at 5.1 per cent with over a third of countries growing at more than 6 per cent. Economic activity in sub-Saharan Africa has, therefore, managed to withstand the global economic slowdown in 2012, mainly supported by the benefits of sustained economic reforms.

Colleagues, I will now skip and go to 5.21 - East African Community GDP Developments

The comparative analysis of annual GDP performance across the East African Community countries illustrates that Uganda’s real GDP growth of 5.8 per cent in the financial year 2012/2013 is only slightly higher than that of Kenya of 5.3 per cent and of Burundi of 4.5 per cent. Rwanda registered the highest growth of 7.6 per cent among the East African Community countries, followed by Tanzania which grew at 6.7 per cent in the same financial year. I thought this was important.

The next chart graphically illustrates that point. Now that we have iPads, I am sure you will see the colours. Right now, what we are seeing is a black and white photocopy.

On page 10, we have the performance of the macroeconomic sector. The diagram clearly brings out the select macroeconomic variables by sector - the real sector, the fiscal sector, the external sector and the monetary sector. 

On page 11, we give details on the real sector. The point I was making earlier on private sector credit is represented in the chart on page 12. It shows that 36.4 per cent of that credit growth is actually in the area of trade. They are the ones who are able to manage the bank interest rate.

You can see the household loans, including the salary loans, are charged 30 per cent interest. The commercial banks are finding it less risky to lend to salary earners and that is why they are more willing to give you a salary loan and not a mortgage. Unfortunately, agriculture is only at 10 per cent. How I wish it was more because it is the agriculture and manufacturing sectors where we expect the economy to grow more. Below the chart, the graph shows the growth trend by sector. 

On page 13, we give the GDP sectoral share in the chart. You can see that 53 per cent by services; agriculture is increasingly dwindling to 13 per cent; and industry is 25 per cent with adjustments of nine per cent.

Let me say something about agriculture. The agricultural sector grew by 1.5 per cent during the financial year 2012/2013, slightly above the 1.2 per cent growth in financial year 2011/2012. Cash crops grew by 4.9 per cent during the financial year 2012/2013 compared to 8.2 per cent in the financial year 2011/2012, and contributed 10 per cent of the total value added in the agricultural sector. 

Food crops contributed 52.4 per cent to the total value added in the agricultural sector, but recorded dismal growth during the last financial year of 0.2 per cent only. This highlights the largely subsistence nature of Ugandan agriculture. So, this is not a good sign. It is a sign of subsistence agriculture hence the urgent need to invest in commercial production and productivity enhancement. 

The livestock sector grew by 2.8 per cent. I am reading this because this is our lifeline; it is important that we know our challenges. The livestock sector grew by 2.8 per cent during financial year 2012/13 and the same growth rate was registered in the financial year 2011/2012. The fisheries sector continued to grow at the same rate of 1.9 per cent during the period under review. You know what is happening in the fisheries sector. I hope Madam Nankabirwa will succeed. 

Industry sub-sector

During the financial year 2011/2012, industrial production surpassed the average for the last five years and almost three times the growth rate. The industry sector grew by 6.8 per cent during the 2012/2013 financial year, compared to a modest growth of 2.5 per cent in FY 2011/2012. This was largely on account of very strong performance of the electricity sector. Both construction and manufacturing accounted for 8.7 per cent value added to the sector. 

Energy Sector

At 215 kilowatts per capita, Uganda’s electricity consumption is low even by sub-Saharan standards. We are competing among the failures. This is mainly attributed to insufficient power generation, energy losses and low access due to high power tariffs. The high cost of electricity is a key constraint to growth. 

In this regard, during the FY 2012/2013, the significant growth in electricity that arose was due to increased generation capacity at Bujagali hydro electricity dam with a capacity of 250 megawatts. This was in addition to the completion of small hydro power projects in Buseruka - Kabalega is the right name – of nine megawatts and Nyagak I of 3.5 megawatts. However, the Kabalega project transmits only three megawatts out of the potential nine to the national grid. The remaining six megawatts remain undistributed. A lot of these issues have been brought out in hon. Oboth’s energy sector report. 

Under rural electrification, a number of district headquarters were connected to the main grid. These included Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Amolatar, Ntoroko, Alebtong, Moroto, Napak, Kiruhura, Kyegegwa and Katakwi. The dominance of hydro in electricity generation mix presents a challenge of availability, as witnessed by the period 20006-2009 when Lake Vitoria witnessed the lowest water levels in the last 50 years. During this period, the electricity generation reserve margin was low and the drop in the reservoir level of the lake brought about widespread load shedding and hiring of high-cost rental diesel power plants.

However, the current generation capacity of the country is unable to meet the annual 10 per cent electricity demand growth rate - national peak demand is actually at 480 megawatts - so as to improve the living conditions of our population. In addition, the high electricity tariffs are constraining demand to improve the living standard of the majority population. The average electricity tariff paid by customers is about US$ 27.2 cents per kilowatt compared to the average of 4 to 8 and US$ 13 cents per kilowatt for developing countries and sub-Saharan Africa respectively. 

The electricity tariff code came into effect in October 2012. It provides for monthly tariff adjustment to allow reasonable returns to investors while passing on some of any savings to the end user customer, to enable utility companies to have necessary resources for effective operations and maintenance of their assets. This, however, has not helped much to bring down the electricity tariff. Instead, this has relieved the government of subsidies that were meeting operating costs of the electricity companies. 

The average technical and non-technical losses of the electricity distribution network are about 24 per cent compared to 16 per cent for neighbouring Kenya. You are aware that countries like Korea and Japan only have two to four per cent. So, we need to compare with the best practice in the world.

As a result of the above, the access rate has remained very low in Uganda and very costly. The average national access rate is about 13 per cent compared to 24 and 40 per cent for sub-Saharan (excluding South Africa) and low income countries respectively. So, if low income countries are at 40 per cent and we are at only 13 per cent, that can tell us if it were part of a race, we are running out of a dark continent.

Oil and gas

The oil and gas industry saw capacity building and institutional development initiatives undertaken during the course of the financial year 2012/2013. Institutions, including the Directorate of Petroleum, Petroleum Authority of Uganda and the National Oil Company, were underway to be fully established. Government also kick-started the acquisition of the 29 square kilometres of land for the oil refinery through the implementation of the approved Resettlement Action Plan. I think that is what hon. Migereko was about to present.

However, the committee notes with concern the slow implementation of the existing legal and institutional framework that was passed in Parliament. Whereas we passed the Bills, we are yet to see the regulations and the institutions. Therefore, we want to urge Government to move faster. In addition, lack of regulations required to implement the above legislations is hampering implementation, hence the country is unable to collect signature bonuses. In addition, the delay by Government to establish the required infrastructure is a key factor likely to delay commercial production that is slated for 2017. 

Madam Speaker, at a later stage, we intend to have a much more comprehensive report on the oil and gas sector,which will include: the infrastructure deficit; what Government must do; what oil companies must do; what we would want other stakeholders to do, including Ugandans. We passed an important legislation that included 48 percent local content but there seem to be some circles against that 48 percent, saying that we lack the capacity. So, I think as Parliament and Government, we have to do something to make sure that the good spirit of Parliament,the 48 percent, is actualised by the necessary capacities required. 

Services sub-sector

The services subsectorcontributed over 53 percent to the total value added in the economy, and recovered to grow at 6.5 percent during the financial year 2012/2013 compared to 3.6 per cent in the financial year 2011/2012. The key drivers of this recovery included transport and communications, which grew at 13.5 percent; public administration and defence at 11.6 percent; and education services at 8.1 percent. However, health services continue to decline, at a rate of 3.3 percent in the financial year 2012/2013.

Road, rail and water transport grew by 3.4 percent, leading to improvement of the national road network and improvement of ferry services on Uganda’s major water bodies. This can be compared to the dismal performance of the rail transport system, where the standard gauge railway line is still at design stage. Of course, it was after this report that we have had UPDF and some contractors who were doing some work in Gulu launching the long forgotten railway line to Packwach through Gulu. 

ICT

In a bid to harness the potential of ICT, government has enhanced its intervention in the promotion of ICT to improve service delivery and promote investment. The key interventions included the establishment of the National Information and Technology Authority (NITA-U) and the installation of –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, really, why are you reading everything? Some of these things are well known. Can you go to the recommendations so that we discuss what to do next? These are in the policy statement.

MR MUKITALE: Okay, Madam Speaker. The report talks about skills development. We are concerned as a committee that we have a lot of lip service – if I can call it that – about skilling Uganda but the committee does not find matching funding for skilling Uganda.We are saying that we wish more effort is put into that. We even identified some needs in terms of human resources, instructors, technical schools. I hope that will help us.

On tourism, colleagues, as you heard yesterday, tourism has great potential in this country. Tourism will help this country create jobs, but we are not committed to funding tourism.You even saw yesterday that when a little drop falls in the ocean, there is a fight about where that money should go. So, I think as Parliament, we should put in effort in fighting for tourism funding -when there is a small loan of US$100 million, only 10 percent is going to tourism. We should find money from our national coffers during budget appropriation to put money into that important sector. 

Inflation developments

Clearly, the Bank of Uganda has done a very good job because macroeconomic stability is very important. If you do not fight inflation, you lose everything. So, everybody should support the Bank of Uganda in their efforts to fightinflation. 

We recovered from double-digit inflation and we have now moved at least to - I want to read from page 18.As inflationary pressures subsided, the Central Bank Rate (CBR) reduced gradually in February 2012. It stood at 12 percent between December 2012 and May 2013 and reduced to 11 percent in June 2013. The chart above shows you how inflation has been going down. 

On page 19, we mention the government sector, domestic revenue and non-tax revenue. Madam Speaker and colleagues, we think that we can get a lot of money, and one of the projects discussed in yesterday’s loan request was a Geographic Information System (GIS). If every urban authority and municipality knew every plot number, it would be very easy for the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, and even the national ID project that is coming up, or even for KCCA to get its own money without being funded. Even Jinja Municipality and other municipalities would be able to collect their own money. So, we really need help. 

Currently, we have a problem. We talk about decentralisation but I think it is more of delegation and de-concentration because none of these local governments raised serious non-tax revenue. So, it is a challenge if we really want decentralisation as devolution instead of delegation and de-concentration. 

On page 20, we discuss government expenditure and net lending, external and domestic development, recurrent expenditure, interest costs and external debtservice. Colleagues will go through all that. We have requested a soft copy to also be sent to your iPads so that you can read it at your comfort, thanks to the new technology.

At page 21 we have pension payments. We regret what befell our pensioners and we congratulate Parliament for the pension regulation Act, which we passed, and we also look forward to the liberalisation. 

In the conclusion on page 21,we say that budget execution in financial year 2012/2013 faced three major challenges.On the resource side, two major shocks were encountered. First, external grants were Shs306.6 billion lower than programmed due to suspension of disbursements by development partners, as I earlier mentioned in the introduction. Secondly, there were shortfalls in tax revenue collections due to a reduction in import volumes and non-tariff barriers imposed by the Kenyanport authorities.The total shortfall in government revenues for financial year 2012/2013 therefore amounted to Shs135.2 billion. 

The third challenge was the procurement delays for Karuma hydro power project, which I had earlier mentioned, which reduced the domestic development expenditure by Shs1,229.8 billion compared to the programmed budget.However, we had earlier mentioned in the report - I hope I did not skip it – that we are disappointed by the delay of a lot of projects, even from the loans we get.Many projects, including the technical schools, the hospitals, even our much applauded Neonatal Mulago Women Hospital which the Speaker and UWOPA were very happy about, are still pending. So, we are really concerned about the delay of the delivery of those projects. 

The financial sector

In July 2011, Uganda’smonetary policy framework was reformed (transitionto an inflation targeting life monetary policy framework). I want to encourage Members to read more about inflation targeting as a tool, which the Bank of Uganda has used to arrest the vice called inflation. 

I talked about the interbank interest rates. The Governor and the Bank of Uganda have really been recording and informing the country about the reduction of the interbank interest rate. However, the commercial banks did not respond. That leads to a lot of problems in the area of consumer protection and how much more Bank of Uganda can do - even if we have a liberalised sector - in terms of supervision to make sure that the banks do not cheat. So, whereas borrowers were losing properties, banks were registering a lot of profit.That is a matter, which needs to be pursued. 

You can read about the total assets of commercial banks at page 24 and also sector credit and bank profitability. You will see that banks remained profitable with returns on assets at 3 percent and return on equity at 20.4 percent in the same period when borrowers were complaining. The volume of customer deposits was at Shs10.42 trillion as at end of June 2013, a growth of five percent,from Shs9.89 trillion at the end of June 2012.This implies funds were mobilised to boost the level of intermediation.

Under capital adequacy, we again continued discussing the Central Bank Rate and how it dropped. There is figure 7 on page 25, which shows the trend in shilling dominated interest rates.The source is the Bank of Uganda. We continue to figure 8 on page 26, which shows the next trend of shilling foreign currency dominated private sector credit annual growth rates. 

At page 27 we a table, which shows the monetary aggregates annual growth rates. The source is the Bank of Uganda.At page 28, we a figure which shows the monthly nominal effective exchange rate. Here, we are talking about the exchange rate. The external sector is expounded on, on page 29. At page 30, we have the income account and current transfers. I encourage Members to take time and read this. Let us go to the observations on page 31. 

Observations and recommendations

Observations on Monetary Policy and Financial Sector

1. 	The committee observed that the Ministry of Finance stopped providing treasury bills for monetary liberalisation sterilisation, curtailing availability of policy instruments to the Bank of Uganda. As a result, the central bank had to rely on very short-term repurchase agreements while bearing the cost of sterilisation on its own balance sheet.Despite the introduction of a 30-60 day deposit facility in March 2013, the maturity profile of sterilisation securities remains short, creating uncertainty about the central bank’sability to sustain large scale liquidity operations. 

2. 	The sterilisation operations used to stabilise the exchange rate illustrate the need to improve institutional arrangements for liquidity management and monetary and fiscal policy coordination. 

3. 	Lending rates have been shown in the recent past to move much more quickly upward, comprising growth objectives as evidenced in financial year 2011/2012, while remaining rigid to bring the interest rates downward despite improved economic conditions. 

4. The large corporations and rich individuals benefitting from foreign currency lending account for nearly all the increase in private sector credit growth, as I did mention earlier. This has resulted in some banks breaching the 80 percent limit on the loan to depositratio in foreign currency. 

5. The banking sector remains solvent, liquid and profitable although non-performing loans are increasing.Moreover, with nearly new credit over the financial year extended in foreign currency, indirect credit risk is likely to increase in the periods ahead. 

	Every time you increase non-performing risk, the banks will keep the interest rates high. But now with the credit reference bureau, we can check on that. However, what is disturbing is that because we do not have national IDs, some people are still operating in different names. So, I think we need the national IDs to make the credit reference bureau even more credible. 

6. 	The accommodative monetary policy stance has led to a downward trend in interest rates since 2012.The adjustment of market interest rates in response to changes in policy rates is expected to be reflected with some lag. Madam Speaker, I have to read these because they are core issues; they are the recommendations. 

	However, the impact of monetary transmission mechanisms has been different on various sections of the financial market while the transmission mechanism has been more visible in the money and Government securities. Colleagues, you will read through the rest.

7. 	Weak economic performance, especially during the financial year 2011/2012, tended to increase non-performing loans. I think I have already talked about that. 

8. 	Expansion of US dollar denominated credit risks macroeconomic and financial stability, particularly following a currency depreciation. Both rapid foreign currency denominated loans growth and excessive appreciation of the exchange rate distort the resource allocation within the economy. 

9. 	Bank of Uganda’s response in the financial market has been to stabilise the exchange rate volatility but with no discretional preference. However, exchange rate intervention may have an allocative effect on the economy between exporters and importers.While exchange rate stabilisation can prevent a contraction of tradable production below the efficient level, it may also influence aggregate demand through terms of trade and hence increase macroeconomic volatility. 

	Madam Speaker and colleagues, it is so tempting at times to speak of a better dollar rate because most of our traders depend on imports. However, we should be mindful that a country cannot grow by just promoting imports; we need to protect the exporters who need the high dollar rate. So, in economics, that is one of the major battles. The importers would want a low dollar rate but we need to protect the exporters who are more productive for the country. 

10. 	Bank of Uganda’s success in conducting monetary policy is dependent upon its ability to properly adapt its analysis in line with the rapidly changing environment, taking into account, among other things, the potential impact of financial innovation on the monetary policy. Colleagues, I hope you will read the rest since the report will be accessible on your iPads. 

Recommendations on Monetary Policy and Financial Sector

    • Private sector credit is skewed towards foreign currency loans. We have mentioned that.

    • Bank of Uganda should strengthen its regulation of the financial sector (supervision) to reduce non-performing loans in the banking system. We should not go back to the old days of non-performing portfolios. 

    • The decision to recapitalise the central bank is important but follow-up legal arrangements are needed to bring Bank of Uganda capital in line with its liabilities, guarantee independence of policy instruments. 

    • Government should rein in on commercial banks or financial institutions which do not respond to the monetary policy stance. If the central bank has reduced its rate, why don’t commercial banks also comply? 

    • Bank of Uganda should analyse developments in areas such as external prices, international trade, financial flows and the exchange rate. 

    • Long-term growth must be driven by private investment and improvements to labour productivity and competitiveness. Therefore, Government should exercise prudent monetary and fiscal policies, ensure a sound banking sector and a combination of bold public and private investments in infrastructure, skills and technology. 

    • Government should guard against the effects of another global slowdown by building fiscal buffers while taking care of the on-going productive investments.This is just in case there is an occurrence of another meltdown. 

    • Bank of Uganda should intervene in the foreign exchange market in both directions in the case of unhealthy exchange rate behaviour. 

    • Government should expedite the national identity card project as I earlier said.It will greatly contribute to the financial sector development. 

Observations on Fiscal Policy 
Interest rates have become a major component of the budget, primarily because of the large stock of government securities which have been used as a tool for both monetary management and fiscal purposes. Although the reduction of the CBR has led to slight reductions in commercial lending rates, interest rates, including on government securities, remain high, raising the cost of financing. 

Let me rush through to page 35 -The central bank is not sufficiently capitalised to service its own debt instruments or it is unable to meet debt service on bills it issues. 

We can go on to observations and recommendations on the real sector, No. 7.5: 
    • In order to boost the real economy, bank business models should be modified to increase service to SMEs as the availability of financing and leasing facilities are not available to them. 

    • Export performance is welcome, as evidenced from export growth, though mainly volume based. We should not only be interested in the volume base, we should also be interested in the value.This translated into substantial export diversification. The degree of export concentration is lower than in the previous financial year by the GDP per capita level. 

I hope you will read the rest and the Hansardwill capture the whole report. 

Under 7.6, we have observations on the external sector and we discuss the current account deficit.We move on to page 38, still on the external sector. Current account deficits have risen sharply.The challenge with current account deficits is that they tend to be long-lasting and a market-driven process to correct the imbalance may lead to overshooting.This is a situation in which prices and quantities, demand and supply, cannot persist at existing levels without increasing the risk of abrupt changes in flows of trade and finance. 

With the rising debit stock, it will be important for non-concessional financing to be sought for only projects that have high economic returns, in order to ensure medium-term debt sustainability. In addition, the national debt strategy needs to be revised to manage new debt options like infrastructure bonds, contractor financing, among others. 

Madam Speaker, we have another report, which is pending on the Order Paper;it goes into details about our debt stock. One point, which we have been making for the last two years to the Ministry of Finance, is that our debt strategy 2007 expired in 2012. The Ministry of Finance should give us a new debt strategy. 

I say this because the IMF/World Bank team has been here and we have been assessed on our performance. What is in conflict is that whereas Government has been advertising our roads for contractor financing, whereas we are looking for money for Karuma – of course contractor financing is commercial borrowing - it seems our development friends, the IMF, seemto be giving us a ceiling in as far as how much we can do in public investment through commercial borrowing. Now, this is at a time when we are talking about more than 20 roads to be worked on. We want the railway line to be constructed and this is the time we need investment in the oil and gas sector. So, there is a disagreement between the IMF and World Bank and our Government plans. 

I would like to request the Ministry of Finance to bring this debate to the Floor of Parliament so that we avoid rumours from the corridors. It would be useless to limit Uganda to US$1.5 billion of commercial borrowing when Karuma, Isimba and Ayago alone require up to US$2.4 billion. So, it is completely out of place and somebody has to come out to tell us the truth. Otherwise, we may be discussing hot air, and our report will also bring out these issues. 

I wish Ministry of Finance would move proactively to give us details, but we are also requesting Bank of Uganda, as an advisor to Government, to help this country understand this matter. We already have a contractor for Karuma.The bill is over US$2.4 billion and we needed it yesterday. However, our doctor in financial terms, IMF, is already saying we are overshooting. So, who is not telling the truth? We need to exhaust this debate.

Recommendations on the External Sector
    • Going forward, Government should embark on the promotion of both goods and services export volumes, to grow more strongly as global demand is projected to recover, through productivity improvements by investing in infrastructure, energy, health, education, tourism, ICT, governance and agriculture.

    • In an effort to correct the current account imbalance, Government should establish a policy in preventing the market from overshooting or should at least smooth the adjustment process and ensure it does not take an abrupt course with damaging effects to the economy.

    • For Uganda to remain solvent, Government should generate sufficient current account surpluses to repay what it has borrowed. To do this, borrowing should finance investment that has higher marginal product than the interest rate that the country has to pay on foreign liabilities.

Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, the other report that is also on the order paper is on the debt stock, the performance of loans – We want to really urge Government to improve on the implementation of loans.We borrow this money and after three years, we do not have a hospital or a technical school and yet we are also paying it back. I think details will come in that report. 

Before I complete, Madam Speaker, allow me to add that we are in the last financial year of the National Development Plan I. So, if we are talking about moving ahead to Vision 2040, we should avoid the mistakes that were committed in the last Parliament, where Parliament did not participate in the design of the National Development. Remember the scandal where the book was laid on the Table after it had been launched? 

We would want Parliament this time to be part of the process. I think by now, the National Planning Authority should have a draft for NDP II and that is what we should be engaging in. The developmentson the standard gauge railway, for example, and the refinery, the processing unit, the pipeline and the many roads we want to construct, should be seen in the NDP II draft. Parliament should debate this to avoid that scandal where we requested somebody to lay the plan on the Table after the NDP had been launched. It is important that this document is brought here so that we can move together.

In conclusion, during the financial year 2012/2013, the reduction in the inflationary pressures and gradual improvement in the macroeconomic environment led to easing of the monetary policy, stimulating lending to the private sector and overall growth of the economy.Despite the various economic shocks to the economy, the economic fundamentals remain strong to trigger sustained improvement of the economy. Going forward, Government should consider the key fundamental issues arising from the performance of the economy to improve economic management. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving us this opportunity. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. I hereby instruct the Clerk to Parliament to reflect the entire report in the Hansard for our record.  

We shall be very brief because you know today is Friday. We will start with hon. Amongi but only two minutes. Members of the committee should not contribute.

3.26
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive work they have done in assessing the performance of the national economy. 

Madam Speaker, I realise that while the committee notes that the growth of the economy in Uganda is improving, with the 2011/2012 assessment standing at 3.4 per cent and 2012/13 at 5.8 per cent, when you look at their they articulatethat the poor are getting poorer while the rich are getting richer. (Interjections) – Yes, they have stated that in their assessment. They say that the poor are getting poorer, and that is in this report. 

Secondly, when you look at the assessment on which areasare contributing to growth, it explains why the poor are getting poorer. According to the report, the areas that are contributing to growth are services (6.5 percent), industry, telecommunications, construction and manufacturing. Those are the areas that are contributing to growth.

Minister of Finance, – the Prime Minister is not here – we really need to start refocusing on the growth of this economy. How can growth be growth for the population of this country, for the poor who are the majority? How can we ensure that we invest in areas that will ensure that growth stimulates the poor to get out of poverty? I think that is very vital and important.

(The Speaker exits the Chamber.)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, presiding_)

MS AMONGI: I hope that with this take over, I will be added another two minutes. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I was just starting to contribute and thank you for giving me two minutes.

In all this, when you look at the analysis of the committee, even on the banking sector, the committee recommends that we need to start refocusing on small and medium enterprises. We need to ensure that issues to do with interest rates are dealt with so that small and medium enterprises can get access to affordable credit facilities. This would enable them stimulate growth; otherwise, the growth will remain in the urban areas and among the big people. 

Even you, Members of Parliament, will not contribute to growth with the current interest rates on loans and with the current climate. It will be the corrupt to build the economy. They are the ones that will build all these apartments and malls – (Member timed out.)

3.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Building on what hon. Amongi has said, and which was really forms the core of what I want to say, I would like to find out from the chairman of the committee – Maybe I can go to another issue as the chairman consults with the Speaker.

There is also this issue of lack of access to agricultural loans, which would really benefit the poorer communities. Committee chair, I have not heard you bring this out. That is the core of what would form the income that would boost growth at especially the village level.That is a very key point and I am sure it should have formed part of your report.

On page 34, the committee clearly indicates that despite the reduction in the CBR, we have continuously failed to understand why interest rates, especially on business and salary loans, are not coming down. I remember, Mr Chairman, you held several meetings with the central bank; I want to find out from you where the problem is. What do you think this august House can do to help your committee? We have always seen you interacting with them on this. 

If it isadeliberate intention of the central bank to fail this economy – You cannot imagine the central bank reducing the CBR to 12 percent but the banks are still charging between 20 to 30 percent interest, depending on the kind of loan you are getting. They are now the ones frustrating the economy.

Lastly, since I do not have enough time –(Member timed out.)

3.33
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the report and I thank them for the work they have invested in writing this report. 

On page 12, and in other recommendations that they are making, they tryto urge the private sector to increase financing to the agricultural sector. I am perturbed as to why the Ministry of Finance does not urge Government to invest in this area in terms of financing. Out of the 25 banks that we have registered in this country, none is owned by the Government and neither do we have shares in any of those banks.

I expected the Ministry of Finance to tell us why the countrycannot even have shares in these banks. How do you expect the agricultural sector to attract financing? Nobody wants to finance that sector. I think we need to go back to a point where we have to re-visit our economic policy. That is what I expected this committee to come out with, and I was looking forward to this report. 

I acknowledge that Uganda is still pursuing the policy of liberalisation and we have just come out from the structural adjustment programmes, which thenation resurrected from.I honestly think that the country needs to re-think the type of economic policy we have. If ask myself why Government adopts these fiscal and monetary policies, and I think it is to addressthe liberalised market. I think that is why we are increasingly seeing the number of poor people rising. In Uganda today, you will see a poor person who you used to see in the 1980s –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee chairperson and members for the good work done. However, I have some issues to present. 

I would like to know from the committee chairperson and the Minister how far they have gone with the contract financing, which His Excellency the President has kept repeating in his speeches. We thought this would be rescue infrastructural development. Why is the Ministry of Finance and the World Bank frustrating this initiative? Secondly, why does the Ministry of Finance refuse to give finance guarantees to the people who have money and would like to invest in infrastructure development?

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that in order to avert this biting poverty in Uganda, we could re-capitalise Post Bank and Uganda Development Bank and maybe review their operations. Since they are indigenous and pro-government banks, they can help the agriculture sector by giving loans at low interest ratesbecause we have general biting poverty.

I would like to seek clarification, maybe from the Minister, on what plans they have to alleviate this biting poverty. I have heard even those who say they are rich crying –(Member timed out.)

3.37
MRS OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee chair for their elaborate report. 

My concern, like it is with others, is on the growth of the key sectors and it is directed to the agriculture sub-sector.According to the report, the very low growth in the agriculture subsector has been attributed mainly to the subsistence nature of Uganda’s agriculture. However, I think one key aspect that is affecting the sector has been left out. If we are to give good recommendations to the government, we need to capture some of these things affecting the different sectors. 

According to me, the key factor that was left out is the weather patterns.Some areas have been experiencing extreme weather conditions – too much drought or floods. That is why, if you look at what has come out in this report, even the growth of cash crops reduced from 8.2 percent to 4.9 percent. I think we cannot attribute this to the subsistence nature of our agriculture, since most of the people who go into production of cash crops are not subsistence farmers. So, we really need to take this into consideration. 

That is why I would strongly advise that Government tries to invest more in the livestock sector as far as agriculture is concerned. (Member timed out.)

3.39
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to add my voice to those of my colleagues in thanking the committee for this good report. 

I would like to congratulate Bank of Uganda and the government for reducing inflation from 18 percent to 3.6 percent and also for strengthening the shilling. However, we know that this may not necessarily be because of the efforts that Government has made. If we were to experience drought now, for example, I am sure we would still have inflation rising. So, like my colleague has said, we would like to urge the Minister of Agriculture to tell us what he has done in the area of commercialised and mechanised agriculture. For how long are we going to continue depending on nature for food production? If that is not changed, then we have not learnt anything. 

On page 19, the committee reports that domestic revenues have fallen short by Shs 135 billion.This is not surprising because we were toldthat one of our major cash crops – cotton - is operating in the doldrums. So, we continue to urge the Ministryof Agricultureto put more effort into promoting cash crops.

Domestic arrears have reduced. We congratulate the Government on this. However, they are still high and this affects the productivity of our local businesses and companies and renders them less competitive. So, we urge Government to ensure that they make good their debts to our Ugandan companies. 

Unemployment is high. I personally support infrastructure development, especially in the area of electricity because it will spur small-scale industries.However, we still need to- (Member timed out.)

3.42
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

I would like the chairman to give me his comment about on the policy advice. On page 3, it is indicated that the government’s fiscal policy intention was weakened by the suspension of budget support. However, as a result, what do we see? I seethat actually, there was economic growth from 3.4 per cent to 5.8 percent. There was also a reduction in inflation rate to 3.4 percent, which is within the policy target.This means that actually, the reduction in the budget support reduced the money supply and because of that, the economy is doing well. 

Now, I want to ask you: What policy advice do you give Government? Should we keep on clinging onto the budget support or do we do away with it, strengthen the management,and then the economy will keep on growing?

Two, you actually indicated that we managed to restore a balance of payments surplus to the tune of US$341 million. However, for me to appreciate that, I would have wanted you to make a comparison. What are you comparing it with? Did the position improve? Did it reduce? What happened? 

Three, the objective of the committee was to inform us of the status quo of the economy for financial year 2012/2013, but on page 4 the figures you are showing us of poverty and inequality are outside the financial year. (Member timed out.)

3.44
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a comprehensive report. 

My concern is on the oil and gas sector. The country was veryexcited when we got this resource, and we were put on pressure to pass the Bill into an Act. However, the committee is saying that there is slow implementation of the existing laws and the institutional framework has not done enough.This has made us unable to collect signature bonuses so that the responsible companies could start investment. 

I would like to find out from the Government, particularly Ministry of Energy, what has made it difficult to ensure that this law is implemented. Countries that have discovered oil of recent are going ahead of us,who discovered the oil much earlier, and we keep on lamenting over these poverty issues. I thought if this project was implemented, we would not be crying about poverty. 

I would alsolike to comment on the high power tariff, which the committee is bringing out as something that is hampering development. Of recent,Umeme has been thinking of increasing the power tariff again. If we continue like this, I wonder ifwe are going to spur development, as hon. JovahKamateeka has said, or development will just godown.

The committee reports that the remaining six megawatts on this Buseruka project remainundistributed.  What is going to happen to this, and yet the country is crying because of lack of sufficient power? (Member timed out.)

3.46
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 4, it says there has been a decline in poverty from 56.4 percent in 1992/1993 to 24.5 percent. This is more than half and yet this is not reflected on the ground. It is not reflected.You say poverty has reduced and yet here, on page 6, you say that our country is among the least developed - that Uganda is ranked 161st in human development. I know if we have human development, then definitely, even the poverty – indicative - will always go down. I think we should have all these figures related.

You talk about the youth. Usually, if our youth are employed and they are productive, then definitely,growth will go up. However, you can see a lot of unemployment of youth. Let us relate this to our own homes and houses; sometimes, you are two employed adults with seven unemployed youth, and they are just consumers instead of being productive people and yet they have a lot of energy. What the youth focus on now is sports betting. Is sports betting productive? 

I think we need to also find some strategies to solve this unemployment. While we say there is economic growth, we really need to rethink –(Member timed out.)


3.48
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you, chair and members of the Committee on National Economy, for the report on the performance of our economy. 

I would like to speak about interest rates of the banks, SACCOsand other lending groups. An organisation running a SACCO can get a loan from the central bank at an interest rate as low as 12 percent but when it comes to lending to the people at the grassroots level, they do so at a very high interest rate. 

In Kole, you find women paying loans with interest of 36 percent, which is even above what we pay on our loans as Members of Parliament. Can we come up with some restriction, for example that if you borrow from the central bank at 12 percent, you should not demand for interest that exceeds five percent, if possible?

Another issue, which has come up is the issue of small groups that have come up in the villages. In my area, they are called Bolichap. It is a small group that comes together and they collect money and begin lending to members and people around. Their interest rates are very bad- 15 or 20 percent per month. Some even go up to 25 percent per month. Why can’t we find a way to regulate these groups, or put in place a law that can guide them so that they becomeuser-friendly? The idea was to run away from the high interest rates from the bank. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee members for the report. 

I have gone through this report and the committee seemed to ask: the central bank reduced the interest rate, why aren’t the commercial banks reducing their interest rates? Why are they still charging highly? It is simply because commercial banks mobilise money within. Some people just save money and others put it in fixed deposits. 

So, I think there is no way the committee can say that the inflation is going down because the central bank has reduced the rate. What about the prime rate on the market? It is still high. I think as a country, we should strengthen reserves and ensure that the central bank also lends to these commercial banks or on-lending to other banks. Otherwise, there is nothing, which can come out of that.

There is food inflation. Why is it that last year there was a bumper harvest but the prices remained high? It is simply because most Ugandans sell food to pay for necessities - utilities, school fees, medical bills and others. Some even sell land to pay school fees. So, I think the onus is on Government to invest in infrastructure like schools, hospitals so that the peasants can have at least enough land.

There is low agricultural productivitybecause the cost of inputs is very high and we do not have credit for that. As a country, we have been pushing to have at least an agricultural bankbut I do not know what is happening. (Member time out)

3.53
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman and his committee for this very good report. I do not know whether the minister at some point will come here and inform us to what extent he has really complied with the good recommendations that are herein. 

Mr Speaker, when the chairman was concluding his address, he talked about the National Planning Authority.I see here on page 2 they mention the consultations that were made, and I think they did not consider it fitto meet the National Planning Authority. I just wantto also mention that from the way things are, it looks like the National Planning Authority is either irrelevant or does not work with the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.Unless the minister assures us that there is that collaboration, we do not see. That is why before you came, Mr Speaker, the chairman said that the report from the NPA came here when the process had already moved very far.

Mr Speaker, I wish to support the committee on exports and also say that we need to – (Member timed out.)

3.57
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Chairman, for the report. 

I have three comments to make and I will start from page 6, where they talk about the unemployment situation in this country. You have observed in your report that youth unemployment in this country is at 5.4 percent. I wonderwhether with these statistics that you are indicating here are right in stating that 5.4 per cent of our youth are unemployed. 

Economists say that every economy should have some level of unemployment to allow for labour mobility. I think 5.4 percent is not a very bad situation; however, it is contrary to what I seeoutthere. In fact, we have statistics which show that about 80 percent of our youth are unemployed. So, I am wonderwhether this figure is really true and should be relied on, considering the situation in our country.

On page 35, the committee states, “The Central Bank is not sufficiently capitalised to service its own debt instruments or it is unable to meet debt service on bills it issues.” When I read this statement, it is saddening and I am wonderwhat the implication of this statement is. I know that revenue collected is channelled to Bank of Uganda, but what is the implication of this situation, where Bank of Uganda is unable to meet the bills that it issues itself, on our economy?

Finally, I seem not to have heard the chairman talk about service delivery to our country. Recently, a report was produced and Uganda was shown to be one of the most corrupt countries in the world – (Member timed out.)

3.59
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. However, I have some observations to make. 

I will start with a question to the Minister of Finance. As we budget and appropriate funds, there is a rumour that the absorption rate of the appropriated funds is very low, which definitely has effects, first of all on the liquidity and secondly, on the performance of the sector.Can the Minister of Finance tell us what the current absorption rate of the appropriated funds is?These are the funds that trickle down and cause an effect on the economy.

Secondly, when you critically look at the report, you will see that we are doing badly as a country or as an economy. One of the reasons is that Government wholesomely privatised and privatised even strategic sectors.Government put the economy in the hands of the private sector, which is more profit-driven than driven to provide services to our people. 

You expect the private people to be looking at sectors that can bring money to them very quickly other than looking at sectors that can actually trickle down to cause economic development. So, that is why you hear that one of the sectorsdoing very well is the service sector. People are making a lot of money in sports betting because it is very easy to make money in that sector. So, we urge Government to adopt a policy mix as we – (Member timed out.)

4.01
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in appreciating the work of the committee and I support and appreciate their recommendations. 

I would like to appeal to Government to increase funding to UDB, for example, by utilising the funds, which are lying idle and are being lent out at commercial rates by other banks, which is very dangerous for Africans. You hear about Exim Bank, for example, which supports all these investors coming here; why can’t we increase funding for UDB to support local entrepreneurs? They are very many.

Secondly, I would like the Government to invest in the agricultural bank to support these youth so that they can be attracted to agriculture.They are educated - universities are pouring out these youth –but they are not employed and yet if there was easy funding to support these youth, they would be attracted to agriculture.Some countries are doing this. 

Mr Speaker, today I read in this report that the service sector is growing, but it is not making an impact on the growth of this economy. Instead, it is sucking money ­from Ugandans, which is not a good sign for the Government. I have heard the opportunity to ask the Governor of Bank of Uganda – he writes good articles on supporting agriculture - why we do not support agriculture, which can employ many youth.

I want answers from this committee and from Government. I want to see the budget for next financial year support agriculturecommercialisation, mechanisation, irrigation, so that we can move on and talk sense to the people of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.01
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on the tourism sector. 

Tourism is an export product that is the most unique of all the exports we have because it is consumed at its point of origin. The committee has observed that the tourism sector has a potential to grow this country. 

I want to correct an impression; in the first instance, not all arrivals are tourists.We must distinguish this. We want to come up with a policy that will turn all arrivals into tourists, to the effect that every high-level meeting at the national and international level embeds a component of tourism. We do not want these people to be holed up in Munyonyo for two weeks because they have meetings and that, they are flown back and they go back with all their dollars. 

Mr Speaker, we need a national carrier, not this talk of buying shares in a private airline. We need a national carrier if this country is going to grow the tourism sector. Our VIP Lounge at Entebbe is actually a comfortable prison; there is no newspaper, there are no refreshments, there is nothing to show that we have any tourist sites.It is just the seats and the toilet. While in there, you just pray that your people will pick you up and take you because there is nothing that holds you there. We need to improve on the way we market our country. 

Our hotels have no grades; where are the five-star hotels? Why can’t we invest in grading these hotels so that the tourists are comfortable and are sure of what they are procuring?(Member timed out)

4.04
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for their report. 

In economics, there is a relationship between unemployment or employment and GDP growth or poverty reduction. The committee says that poverty has reduced because of the increase in employment opportunities created in this country. My question to the committee is: by how much has the increase in employment resulted in a reduction in poverty? We should have scientific ways of doing things; we should stop assumptions. We should be able to say, scientifically, that the increase in employment has led to reduction of poverty by this percentage. 

Again, on page 6, the committee says that there is an overall increase in unemployment, at 3.6 per cent in 2010 compared to 1.9 per cent in 2006. What are you trying to say? Are you saying there has been a reduction or increase in unemployment? 

The other issue is that you have been comparing the performance of our economy globally and regionally, but in the report you do not compare our economy in terms of our national regions. How does the western region compare with the central region, for example, or the northern region with the eastern region? We can then know which regions are lagging behind so that we can have a kind of affirmative action. (Member timed out)

4.06
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. 

My comment will be on the services subsector. We talk about the key drivers of the economy like health, education and defence, but my concern is on the health sector where services continued to decline at a rate of 3.3 per cent in the financial year 2012/13. I appeal to the minister to consider this sector for an increase in funding. We know that a healthy population leads to increased production. 

We can also tap into other plans or programmes like public private partnership in the health sector, and insurance. Why don’t we consider such programmes to increase health sector funding so that in 2014/15, we see an increase in this sector’s contribution to GDP?

My other observation is from page 16, the electricity subsector. The report has mentioned that low power supply has affected development. They say that the power generated was unable to meet the annual demand. So, as Government, how are we going to ensure that we meet the demand of the population in the electricity subsector?

There is also the question of losses. The average technical and non-technical losses are at about 24 percent compared to Kenyaat 16 percent. Why don’t we borrow a leaf from our neighbouring countries so that we learn how they have managed their power? I urge the minister to consider how to increase production and increase access to – (Member timed out.)

4.08
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi Country, West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report.

I want to concentrate on the crucial sectors.  I want to commend Government for those sectors where performance is good. However, the agricultural sector is lagging behind, as the committee has rightly observed. There is a Government policy, which was introduced some time ago, the policy of liberalisation. In some sectors, it has performed well but when it comes to the agricultural sector, it has made it worse. If we are not careful, this sector may have a huge problem. 

Look at livestock; many of the vets have decided to give up their work and they have gone home. As we talk, our livestock sector is actually surviving on God’s providence. If a disease struck today, it would wipe out all the livestock in this country because we decided that farmers should do whatever they want. In the process, they are getting adulterated drugs, which cannot treat diseases and ultimately, we have a huge problem. 

Mr Speaker, isn’t it possible for Government to get directly involved to make sure that this sector performs? Farmers should be helped in producing and marketing. Other countries are doing it; why should we think that –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Mr Chairman, please respond to the issues that have been raised. 

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr AstonKajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee on National Economy for presenting such a well-researched report. However, I would like to say that some of the information in this report needs to be updated because the report was generated some time back. 

Much as I will attempt to respond to a few of the issues raised, I want to request that you allow Government to come up with a detailed response to the issues the committee raised. This is due to the fact that most of the issues are of a technical nature and they need to be responded to technically.

Having said that, I would like to thank the committee for rightly observing that the overall growth rates in the financial year 2012/13 were higher than those of the previous years.We had inflation, which went down from 18 per cent to 3.6 percent, the CBR which reduced from 23 percent to 11 percent, the increase in customer deposits in the banks; these are just a few of the aspects that have seen positive change. I also believe that this growth will get higher in this financial year.

Mr Speaker, as I said, some of the data has been revised since this report was written, though many of the observations are factual. Also, some of the recommendations, if not most, are already being implemented. The establishment of a Treasury Single Account (TSA), which was recommended,was already operationalised with effect from October 2013. 

In addition, the committee said something on the debt strategy; I want to say that this is already being addressed. The debt strategy for 2013 has been finalised. A few issues on the limitations on non-concessional loans will be applied only to projects with higher returns.

Government has also renegotiated the limit of non-concessional borrowing from US$1.5 billion, which the committee mentioned, to now US$2.2 billion for the next three years. This will enable us to borrow for projects such as Karuma and Isimba.

On the issue of contractor-facilitated financing, first of all, was introduced in the other year’s budget. The framework is being developed to ensure Government exposure is minimised. Contract-facilitated financing means that the contractor sources for the funds. The funds may not necessarily be cheap for Government, especially if Government can borrow on concessional rates.This is a complicated financing arrangement because the contractor may source more expensive funds that may not enable us achieve the desired results. Anyhow, a framework is being developed to implement this.

The issue of youth unemployment is certainly real. That is why Government took a deliberate step to invest in infrastructure.Infrastructure is a tool for creation of a conducive atmosphere for industrialisation by way of roads and energy. Once you generate more power and attract industries, it can result in job creation. 

Government has also taken deliberate steps to invest; for example, yesterday, we passed a loan request for a land registry. This is intended to reduce the cost of doing business. We have also considered the companies registry, which also leads to ease of doing business.Once this is done, we can then create jobs.

There is also a policy for skilling Ugandans, which has been adopted by Cabinet. As you know, when we skill Ugandans, there will be a higher likelihood of creating jobs.

Mr Speaker, let me make a few responses on the monetary policy and the finical sector. The committee reports that we stopped providing treasury bonds to facilitate the conduct of our monetary policy. What we have done or what Government has done is accelerateits effort to restructure public debt management in a bid to tap domestic financial markets as a source of budget financing. So, as part of this process, Bank of Uganda cannot issue new debts for monetary policy purposes for the primary market. This can only be done on the secondary market through the use of repurchase agreement (repos). However, the central bank may use previously issued securities on the primary market.

Mr Speaker, the lending rates are a concern to Government. However, we realised that a lending rate is a function of policy rates other than operational costs by commercial banks. We have been engaging commercial banks to lower their lending rates, especially now that Government lowered the central bank lending rates. So, Government will continue to work with banks to reduce the costs associated with doing business because that is the reason banks give higher interest rates. This will result into further reductions in lending rates.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of foreign exchange related lending, I would like to say that indeed this is an issue of concern given the associated risks. This shift in foreign exchange loans during the year was attributed largely to high rates on shilling-dominated lending as a result of the volatile macro environment particularly high inflation from the previous year.Now that the annual inflation rate is under control, and with the reopening of the Land Registry that had been closed for some time, we think emphasis will shift to shilling-dominated lending. We hope to see it rebounding because the risks are now much less. The central bank continues to prudently supervise financial institutions in line with international best practice, to ensure they do not cheat on their customers.

On the issue of increased foreign direct investment was largely attributed to the liberalisation of the capital account. Introducing capital account controls will be construed as a reversal in policy and will send negative signals to international investment. This may result in the reduction in the flow of capital into the country. It is, therefore, important that the capital accounts remain open.

On the issues that were raised on fiscal policy, Government continues to prioritise improvement in the revenue effort as the main source of budget financing.A number of reforms, including tax rates and administration, have been implemented to improve revenue collection. Of course, there are underlying factors; for example, why we had shortfalls in tax collections last year.

On alternative sources of financing the budget, Government continues to balance availability of alternative financing with financing requirements with a view to minimise risks to the budget.Government will also continue to focus on improving the capacity of sectors to plan and execute public projects.

Mr Speaker, what is the current rate of absorption of disbursed funds? We have been monitoring the rate of absorption of all the sectors of what we have appropriated to them.As of early December this year, the absorption rate was 85 per cent for Government expenditures - that is excluding donor-funded projects. Details of this can be provided; as I requested, at an opportune time Government will come out with a detailed reply to what the committee has raised regarding what we have implemented so far and what we intend to do.

Mr Speaker, concerning the central bank, there is an intention to re-capitalise it to enable it adequately conduct the monetary policy.This is very important, and we are doing it in a phased manner for purposes of sustainability. 

Like I promised, we shall come back to this House with details by way of reply to the issues raised by the Committee on National Economy so that Members are kept abreast with what Government is doing to ensure that the economy can perform very well. The committee mentioned the gap between the poor and the rich; it is true this gap is not healthy but Government is trying all it can to lessen this gap. In our reply, we shall include measures that Government is implementing to ensure that this gap is lessened. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. In the statement that you intend to bring, you may need to explain to this House so that the country can understand why we have only short bonds in this country. Is there a possibility of issuing longer bonds – infrastructure bonds – like is happening in Kenya and in the United States? Even sovereign bonds; is there a possibility of issuing them? 

The problem with short bonds is that they cannot guarantee to the investors that our economy is stable and yet we are always being told in this House that our economy is stable. What is there to show to the rest of the investors that this economy is stable?If you issue long bonds – 30-year bonds like in the US – people will trade in these bonds with the guarantee that the economy is going to be stable. Why are we doing only three or five years? We even do not have infrastructural bonds, which Kenya has already adopted and they are using to great effect. Why are we not exploring these possibilities? You may need to come here and explain to us.

It is because of the shortage of these issues – fiscal policy and monetary policy issues to bring to the House - that leaves the House with nothing else but to discuss politics. (Applause) You should be guiding this House; 90 percent of our discussions in this House should be on economic issues because that is what people live on. Instead, 90 percent of what we discuss is politics and yet it does not put food on people’s tables. So, please, help us with this, honourable ministers, so that we can begin moving on the right course as a country. (Applause)

4.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, you know, the Rt Hon. Speaker is not just a “learned friend”; he is actually is an economist, with whom I was with for three years in Makerere studying economics. So, when he speaks with that authority, he is proving what exactly he is. (Applause)

For you who have been engaged in the fight against the structural adjustment programmes – divestiture, retrenchment, privatisation, and so on –you will know that he was actually the fiercest fighter of the year against that Bill, which came up when we were still in Makerere. You must have heard of the strike in Makerere – that was the man who was in charge. (Laughter) I think he is now vindicated. 

After 18 or 20 years, I think we have to review liberalisation and privatisation. I think, honourable minister, it is not about policy reversal but policy review.After 20 years of liberalisation, what has happened? Ethiopia has local banks and it is constructing more than we are doing; what happened? So, I think let us not call it policy reversal; it is instead policy review.A policy is meant to run for sometime. For 20 years it has worked, what has failed? Can we now intervene and see how we can review it?

I want to thank Members for the important input you have made; I largely agree with you. We now have a tradition that when we come up with these reports, the minister should also make a written response so that when we engage each other, we do it comparing notes. 

However, honourable minister, let me request that the debt strategy you say you have worked on be laid on the Table. Currently, we have proceeded for one year without a debt strategy. I would like to remind you that we need the NDP draft so that Members of Parliament participate; we do not want to be shocked, like the way you did with the original NDP. That is how we will know if the PPPs you are talking about are real and not just verbal as has been.

We also want to say that the US$ 2.2 billion negotiated commercial borrowing is not in tandem with what Government has already promised to Ugandans because Isimba, Karuma and Ayago alone is US$ 2.4 billion. So, when you are given US$ 2.2 billion, it means that the oil and gas refinery is out, the pipeline is out, the standard railway gauge is out and the 22 roads that you advertised are out. So, can we really get something serious, if we want to take this country to the next level? 

I entirely agree that we need to seriously focus on water for production, - to stop this rain-fed agriculture– mechanisation, all the inputs and also tourism as we did mention. The committee earlier agreed that pension funds, with liberalisation,would be good savings for investment in the country instead of looking outside.

Finally, we have been waiting from Cabinet for the tier IV law to regulate the microfinance institutions. I think for the last four years, we have made reports as the Committee onNational Economy requesting for these regulations. Bank of Uganda does not currently have a legal framework to regulate and supervise the microfinance institutions that fall under that category. We look forward to the minister’s statement and then we can engage at that level. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson, thank you, honourable minister, and thank you, all Members, for this. I now put the question to this motion, which is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the economy in the financial year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two urgent matters that we might need to deal with.There is one, which was already discussed, the report was presented. That is the one on the petition on the construction of the oil refinery in Buseruka Sub-county in Hoima District. There is also this petition, which I received myself sometime back, on East Coast Fever. It was by the livestock farmers of Kiruhura District. But this is not only for Kiruhura District but everywhere where cattle are kept. 

We might have to deal with these two at least if we cannot deal with anything else today. They are short issues but they are very important for this country. So, let us go to item No. 11.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMPENSATION AND RESETTLEMENT OF THE WOMEN AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED GOVERNMENT’S PLAN FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE OIL REFINERY IN BUSERUKA SUB COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The minister was on the Floor.

4.31
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Members for giving me the opportunity to present to them our responses as Government to issues that had been raised in a petition tabled by hon. Nyaks and hon. Tophace Kaahwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is hon. Nyaks? Is she a member of this House?

MR MIGEREKO: Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I have been watching TV programmes and listening to radio stations and I took note of the fact that this is the way she is normally referred to lately. 

This is as a result of the interaction with the people in Kabale, where the refinery is supposed to be constructed, in Buseruka Sub-county in Hoima District.I have a brief background to this issue. 

Following the commercial discovery of oil and gas in 2006, the Government of Uganda developed the National Oil and Gas Policy, which is a guiding document for the oil and gas sector in the country. Objective No. 4 of the policy provides for valuable utilisation of the country's oil and gas resources through building a refinery in our country. 

Government undertook a feasibility study for the development of an oil refinery. This study assessed the crude production potential, size and configuration of the refinery, location, financing options, social and environmental assessments, amongst others. The study assessed six locations and recommended Kabale Parish in Buseruka Sub-county, Hoima District, as the most suitable location for the refinery because of its centrality and proximity to the oil fields and relatively low laying terrain. In addition, the 29 square kilometre area required by government for this project is sparsely populated, with a population of roughly 7,118 people. Furthermore, we needed to bring this infrastructure to the region where the oil resources are found, to benefit the residents of the AlbertineGrabben, in particular the Hoima area.

Government has been carrying out consultations and the details of these consultations are given on pages 4 and 5 of this report. I am sure Members can take off time to study the report, which I have circulated.  

A resettlement action plan was undertaken between May and September 2012 following a number of sensitisation meetings for the project affected persons. The acquisition and compensation for the refinery land is not a compulsory acquisition as had been asserted at some stage.It is being undertaken in accordance with section 73 of the Land Act, Cap.227, and section 19 of the Land Acquisition Act, Cap. 229 The details of the relevant legal provisions are provided hereunder.

The process of land acquisition, which we are following, is in compliance with national legislation and international standards like the International Finance Corporation guidelines. The process is benchmarked on international standards and in some aspects goes over and beyond our national legislation. 

As I had indicated, Members can take time off and follow the submissions that I am making on pages 4, 5 and 6. However, I need to talk about the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) implementation, which was a major subject of the petition. Before the commencement of the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan, two public meetings were held on 22 June 2013 at Kyapuloni and Nyamasoga trading centres to introduce the RAP implementation consultant. These meetings were attended by district leaders, sub-county leaders and community leaders. I remember some of them were also addressed by honourable Members of Parliament who are here.

The RAP implementation started with the disclosure of the compensation packages. People were first sensitised in every village on the disclosure exercise so that they understand what to do at the different disclosure desks. During the disclosure, a complaints desk was put in place for people with complaints to register them. 

Some of the interventions needed to address the grievances had been planned to take place after the disclosure exercise. However, even with the grievances handling mechanism that had been put in place and the sensitisation that had been done, some of the project affected persons chose to shun the activity. They never imagined that it was real.Mr Speaker, there have been complaints raised by the affected persons and these have also been addressed, as I have said as hereunder.

Following a petition that was tabled in Parliament as I have stated, the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development held a meeting with the movers of the motion, the two eminent ladies. The meeting was meant to provide a clear understanding of the issues raised in the petition and also to discuss and agree on the steps to be taken to ensure that those issues are addressed. 

Some of these complaints were addressed by resurveying of land and re-evaluation of property.It had been stated that in some cases the actual size of the land had been understated and the values had also been understated. After getting this petition, we had to go back on the ground and the exercise had to be done again. Disputes were also resolved by mediation between parties. 

Specific attention has, therefore, been drawn to the following:There was the issue of spousal consent. Government and the consultant have revalidated spousal consent. There were reports presented to the House that the men were ignoring their partners and were doing things without their knowledge and therefore, the partners were not providing consent. This validation exercise made it mandatory for people to come with their spouses and indeed, it has helped us. We discovered that some people had left their spouses behind and they did not know much about what Government was doing in the area in addressing issues of compensation and resettlement. 

During this exercise, women were urged to come with their husbands and those who met difficulty approached our officials on the ground and were helped. Therefore, spousal consent has been sought and secured from all spouses of the affected persons in this area. 

People signing documents without payment: this was a topical issue when we had the debate here last time. This aspect was properly explained to the affected persons during the disclosure exercise that commenced in June 2013. The reason the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) signed on the agreement is because the payment is by electronic transfer to the accounts. It is not practical, therefore, to look for the project affected persons to sign for the money after payment has been effected because they will have dispersed to other locations and tracing some of them to acknowledge receipt of monies they have received may not turn out to be possible. This would, therefore, cause serious accountability problems. 

Sensitisation on this issue has continued and people’s fears have been allayed when full payment has been made to those who have so far been paid. Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the media has widely reported the start of the exercise of compensation.

Resettlement versus cash compensation: The option to be relocated or compensated was at the discretion of the property owners, after explaining to them the advantages and disadvantages of each of the options during the RAP study.Only 27 households opted for relocation. 

However, some affected persons in the area that we are talking about raised concerns that they wanted to change their preference from cash compensation to relocation. Those who expressed their desire to change from cash compensation to relocation have been allowed.To-date, the number of households preferring to be relocated has risen from 27 to 70. There have also been a few who have changed from relocation to compensation.

A request for expression of interest to sell land to Government was also publicised and people with land in Buseruka responded to this request. Site inspection will soon be conducted and Government will buy land for those individuals who have opted for relocation. 

A multi-institutional team comprising of stakeholders from government ministries – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Health - has been put in place. This team will work with the consultant to ensure that good resettlement houses comprising of adequate facilities are constructed. 

Mr Speaker, the two eminent ladies with whom we have been meeting have proposed that families be availed houses of three bedrooms, a sitting room, a kitchen, a store and a bathroom plus solar water heating, solar lighting and tap water in the houses, so that the fundamental change that we have always talked about under the NRM Government can be fully realised and appreciated on the ground.Affected persons will also be involved in the resettlement process from the point of site inspection to physical relocation. 

There has been an issue of preparing communities for the transition process. Mr Speaker, affected persons have been sensitised and told that upon payment of compensation monies, those who opted for cash will be given a vacation notice and ample time to prepare to vacate the land while those who opted for relocation will only move after resettlement houses have been constructed and are ready for occupation. The vacation notice will be three months from the date of payment.

At the moment, the PAPs have been encouraged to continue with their normal activities. Some honourable Members of Parliament from the area have attended some of the sensitisation meetings where they have also advised the affected persons to continue with their normal activities until that time when they have to vacate their land. This would require the people to plant crops that mature within a period of maybe three to six months.

There has been an issue of equipping the affected persons with financial management skills.Here, we have been able to benefit from our experience when we were dealing with the communities around Bujagali area; when they received the money,they decided to spend it instantly on acquiring other homes and what goes with those other homes. Government is aware that people may not have the capacity to utilise the money they are going to get and as a result, affected persons have now been trained in financial management, enterprise selection and improved agriculture, among other things, to equip them with the necessary skills to enable them prudently utilise the compensation money. 

The training materials used were translated into three major languages spoken in the area, that is, Kiswahili, Alur and Runyoro-Kitara. However, there is still need for continuous sensitisation of the communities in addition to the training that has been undertaken.We are taking this particular activity forward so that we do not run into problems after our people have received money, spent it instantly and turn out to be destitute in their own area.

Mr Speaker, there has been a problem or an issue that was raised in regard to engagement of disgruntled affected persons. It is important to note that there are some affected persons who had been misled into shunning the whole RAP exercise. Some of these people did not even turn up for the disclosure and therefore, did not know what their compensation packages were. We have engaged these people in meetings and left the disclosure open for them. After the engagement, these people have come and seen their compensation packages. Some of them have signed while others have registered complaints. We have verified their complaints and they are being addressed as I speak. The process of dialogue and sensitisation will continue until the land acquisition activity is fully concluded.

The civil society has been very active in this area. We have engaged civil society organisations and other stakeholders that have sought clarification on a number of issues relating to this resettlement action plan.We shall continue to do so in order to make them understand the whole process such that when they decide to engage these communities, they do so from a well-informed point of view other than debating from a point of ignorance. 

There have been questions regarding what level we are at in regard to the implementation of the RAP. Early this week, a feedback meeting was held by Government to assess how the technical team has addressed the concerns that had been raised in the petition. I do believe that Members of Parliament from Bunyoro and the movers of the motion who were present will agree with me that judging from the presentations made and reactions of the communities, it was fairly clear that a lot has been achieved. 

The table below summarises the status of the implementation of the resettlement action plan, highlighting activities that have been undertaken so far. I do not know whether I need to read whatever is contained in the table but the critical thing is that payment of compensation entitlement has started and is progressing well. If there are any hitches, I would like to request honourable members to feel free to interact with us in Government so that this exercise can move as smoothly as we would desire. 

On-going Activities and Forward Plans
Besides what has been so far done, as outlined in this report, Government is moving forward with the following activities:

1. 	Grievance management for those who previously shunned the exercise. These people participated in the exercise late and some of them have complaints. Their complaints have been registered and they are being attended to.

2. 	Processing payment for other batches submitted by the consultants.

3. 	Issuing of vacation notices to those already paid.

4. 	Acquiring land for resettlement. 

5. 	Constituting a resettlement committee for those who are to be resettled.

6. 	Sensitisation of host communities.

7. 	Construction of resettlement houses and the attendant social infrastructure services. These communities are going to be resettled in areas where they will need schools, health centres, water, electricity and other such things, which Government has always been working on. 

8. Consultation with stakeholders over relocation of existing schools, water sources and public infrastructure. 

9. 	Relocation of affected persons.

10. 	Commencement of livelihood restoration programmes.

11. 	Physical planning of the townships in Buseruka Sub-country. 

Conclusion

Government has ensured that the whole process is in tandem with our laws and international best practices. The planned livelihood restoration programme for affected persons is an indication that we are moving beyond compliance to best practices. 

As already pointed out, the participation of spouses in the exercise cannot be over stated. Government is committed to ensuring that this exercise does not become a reason for family breakdown among the affected persons. We shall continue with the sensitisation efforts to prepare the affected persons especially now in transition. 

The last time we were here, we were told that this exercise was going to be a major cause of domestic problems and family breakup. We have gone an extra mile to engage probation officers and sociologists to deal with this problem because in NRM, we believe in the unity of the family. 

The RAP implementation process is still on-going and we have started paying people their compensation dues. We are now going to acquire land on which to resettle others.Therefore,we are set to deal with any issues that are brought to our attention. Every effort has been made to ensure fairness and transparency and that the rights of affected persons, including women, are respected. The planned livelihood restoration programmes have special provision for women and other vulnerable groups to ensure quicker restoration of their livelihood. 

Last but not least, Government has shortlisted lead-investor operator firms for the refinery development with the aim of selecting one, which will be bringing not only expertise but multi-billion dollars to this strategic investment. Government is committed to continue dialogue with all stakeholders to ensure that there are minimal risks in the project and that the project benefits reach all the intended beneficiaries and all of us in the country. 

I thank you for giving us this opportunity to respond to issues that had raised concern on the ground and had to be brought here by our two honourable colleagues. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think there was also a statement from the Minister of Energy – was that handled already?

MR MIGEREKO: It was a joint statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the compensation and the settlement of the women affected by the Government proposed construction of an oil refinery in Buseruka County, Hoima District. I propose the question for your debate. Can we have short contributions.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, there was a highly protracted debated here on the Floor and the Speaker, after listening to the issues raised, decided that she should give Government time to make sure that we harmonise whatever was taking place on the ground with the movers of the motion and we came with this report. The movers of this motion have also been privy to this report before I tabled it here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.Let me hear from the mover. 

4.57
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the minister has said, hon. Kaahwa and I were tasked by the Speaker and House to work with the Minister of Energy and the Minister for Lands to verify the issues that were raised during the debate. 

The Ministry of Energy was given a lot of time to go on the ground and verify all those issues that it has reported. To our satisfaction, as the movers of the motion, we have seen tremendous improvement since that time. (Applause)I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, that we were there with the members of Bunyoro Caucus and they all agreed that Ministry of Energy and Government have actually taken a step to address most of the issues. 

On this note, I thank Government for having a listening ear. When we brought this motion, most of the people who did not understand thought that we were fighting Government; we were not fighting Government. We were simply presenting the problems of the people, which we brought here. Now Government has listened and has acted. So, we thank Government for that spirit and ask them to continue helping those people.

Of course, there are various issues that keep coming up.This is change and change comes with different things. However, the ministry has proposed that it will continue engaging with the people in the community so that they can be resettled very well and enjoy the resource that has come to Uganda. 

I also propose that we amend the prayers in the motion so that we can come to a conclusion of the debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have reviewed the original prayer, which was presented to the House, which now needs to be improved; is that what you are suggesting?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, Mr Speaker.

4.59
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA(NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank honourable members. I also want to thank Government for coming up with a positive report and above all, for responding to the issue we raised, the issue of the project affected people of Kabale. 

The issues were addressed to our satisfaction, as my colleague has said. We interacted with the affected people and we came out with positive responses. We are so grateful that our Government has a listening ear. However, there are other emerging issues as the project progresses. I believe the Government is in position to handle those issues as the project progresses and will continue to monitor those issues that come up. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.00
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter, which I want to raise, comes from the minister’s statement and it concerns houses which are supposed to be built for those who opt for relocation. 

Though the numbers are small, I would like clarification from the honourable minister if at this stage, majority of the households opt for relocation.He said it is a house with threebedrooms, sitting room, kitchen, running water and solar water heater, and he termed it as part of the fundamental change, which the NRM Government is bringing to the people of Uganda.

The reason I am raising this is because in many cases, our teachers and medical staff live in terrible conditions. Even the key movers of the fundamental change, many of them still live in what is called “Mama ingiya pole”. Are we promising more than we can handle or this is the policy, which the Speaker was talking about? I would definitely welcome a three-bedroomed house and all the facilities you are talking about for the citizens of Uganda, but are you not promising more than you can handle?Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Minister for the response because unlike what some of his colleagues do, he has managed to say something.

I would like to start with the issue of relocation. I thought relocation would depend on the size of the land one had and the developments thereon. However, the statement seems to imply that even if one had a room, they would still get a three-bedroomed house, which I also think may not be realistic. I do not know whether this was stated for political purposes because you had to respond, but I think you need to give it deeper thought.

Two, when it comes to the issue of resurveying, of course, if this has to be done, one would think the Ministry of Lands would do it and thereafter, we get a report for purposes of our record. I think it would have been better if you laid a copy of the re-survey report to confirm that the issues that have been raised are covered by that report.

On the consent of the spouse, the minister seems to imply that it has been addressed. The petition was dealing with the situation as at that time, so we do not know yet what you did then. If you are saying that as of now, for whoever comes there is requirement for the consent of the spouse, what about the issues that came up before? I am saying this because in view of the Land Act, I think section 39, which requires the consent of the spouse, if you paid but did not get consent of the spouse, that would be a legal effect on the payment.

Finally, whereas people had signed in anticipation of money being transferred by EFT, what they had in mind was that immediately after signing, they would receive the money. Now, the situation is that after signing, there was a lapse in time. So, I would wish that you address the issues as they were then. We have heard about the NRM business after the issue had been raised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The other issue the Members have raised is that they have now received an update so they need to amend their prayer so that the resolutions to be passed can take recognition of the changes that have taken place. I think that came from the mover of the Motion.

5.04
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Lands for his response. I also would like to thank the Minister of Energy.It has not been easy to get to this point that we are at now. However, I thank them because there were quite many issues on the ground, which are being addressed. 

When we went there, we acknowledged that things were improving. However, that is in as far as compensation is concerned. Otherwise, in the entire oil and gas sector, there are still other issues. So, I would like to encourage Government to always listen to the people of Bunyoro and other areas where oil is being explored. 

I would like to also say that I have been appointed by the MPs of Bunyoro to be their lead person in this exercise. I promise and I intend to lead them very well to ensure that the people of Bunyoro do not get a raw deal in the oil and gas venture.I have already established contacts with the Acholi Parliamentary Group and we intend to draw a MoU with them so that we can move together. This is because we do not want to have a raw deal in this oil sector. 

I would therefore like to request Government to always listen to us whenever we present issues. This is important because we are the ones who have been elected to represent the people in those areas and we must bring out their issues very well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Minister for reacting to issues that were raised, as I also thank our colleagues who presented the petition.

The committee would like to inform the House that some of these issues had actually been brought to us and as we discussed the petition, we interfaced with most of our colleagues. I thank Government for having taken action on most of the issues raised. I urge Government to continue addressing some of these issues because many issues will continue to emerge as we go along. So, the spirit and commitment needed to workon them is very important and I hope Government will do that.

As Parliament, and especially the Committee on Natural Resources, we will keep monitoring because these issues affect Members of Parliament. On behalf of the House, we hope that what we have stated here are issues that are going to be addressed by Government. Once more, I would like to thank Government for having responded to these issues. Thank you.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. These activities have really been protracted. We started on them slowly but well-focused in saying that we must achieve the best conclusion on them. That is why we have been receiving reports and correcting whatever would find on the ground.I would like to thank the honourable members who have been moving with us to see and verify the complaints on the ground. I think we got to move in the right direction.

However, some Members are saying that now that compensation and relocation are becoming very attractive, what if people change and now demand for more than what is being offered – that they preferto be relocated and not compensated even after receiving the money?I would like to say that we have negotiated with these people for a long time. For those who resolved that they wanted to go, we gave them the money. Even those who opted to come after to be relocated have been accepted and we have moved on. This was not done under any force; it was done through negotiations.

Spousal consentwas a very serious matter. After we had been told they were complaining, before we paid we rectified this. The spouses came together and if that had been an anomaly, it was rectified and they have now signed.

Mr Speaker, Members are asking, how about that time - supposing inflation has taken place? Our report is recent. We have just come from the field with the honourable members and the there is no lapse of time.

I do not want to say much. I just want to say that because of co-operation and understanding, we have reached this far and all of us are now very happy. It is a win-win situation. Thank you very much.

5.11
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An honourable Member raised issues regarding the three-bedroomed house, which sounded very unusual and out of the ordinary. The fact of the matter is that there were serious discussions on this matter. First of all, when you have a project of this nature and you are talking about transformation of communities, what do you do? When you give them money, they get it and disappear. 

What we are trying to emphasise as Government is that whenever we have a project of this nature, we need to pursue relocation and resettlement of people in new areas, which have been wellconstructed. This is what happens in all these countries that have made money out of resources such as oil – construct houses for them, build roads for them and provide all these amenities so that they can be able to appreciate the change that is taking place. However, we also must provide them with a source of livelihood. 

Originally, the plan was for two-bedroomed houses – that is what had been negotiated. However, we said that when you are a family, you have a man and a woman staying in one bedroom and then you have got boys and girls, some of who are now teenagers or adults. The girls may feel shy sleeping in the same room with the boys. Equally, the boys will feel shy staying in the same bedroom with the girls. So, we agreed that the best way to handle this situation is to come up with a three-bedroomed house so as to address these sensitive issues and the families will feel happy.

Regarding the possibility of people jumping away from receiving cash to getting relocated, I think they need to see the houses on the ground first because the construction has not taken place yet. However, there is also one other aspect we need to appreciate - many of the families that are staying in these areas could have come from Nebbi or the war-affected areas. Now, on receiving cash, they are rediscovering their old families and they may want to go back to the areas where they were born. So, the possibility of some saying, “Donot give us cash because we want to re-settle” is likely to be very remote.

Regarding the issue raised by hon. Kasirivu, yes, compensation is moving very well and I am delighted that hon. Kasirivu can testify to that, given the fact that he is the coordinator of the Bunyoro Parliamentary Group.

Concerning other developments that may come up along the way, we are dealing with a dynamic situation and these new developments are expected. What we would like to see happen is that any new development, which merits attention, is immediately brought to Government’s attention so that we sit down together as leaders – Members of Parliament and district leaders –and we check the proposed solutions and ensure that they deal with the situation.

I have answered hon. Akena’s question.It is true teachers, soldiers and health workers need houses. This is just the beginning; I am sure if we stay here slightly longer, all of them will get houses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for those responses. Now we need to start processing the motion. I will read the original text so that I can hear the amendments that are being proposed by the motion movers:

“NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament urges:
(a) The Government of Uganda to halt and urgently review the on-going compensation and resettlement of the people to be affected by the proposed construction of the oil refinery in Buseruka Sub-county, Hoima District.”

That was the first prayer of this motion.Is there any amendment from the mover now?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes. I would like it to state thus: “The Government of Uganda expedites the compensation and resettlement process and continues to engage with the community members to appreciate the project.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members? I put the question to that amendment from the mover of the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next one in the original text is: “(b) The Government of Uganda to review the existing legal framework governing compulsory land acquisition with a view to adequately protect the rights of the citizens from unscrupulous projects and potential abuse of the right to property.” Is there any amendment to this one?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: It should stop at “the rights of the citizens”. The other part should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying that, “…from unscrupulous projects and potential abuse of the right to property” should be deleted? Okay, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the mover of the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last one is: “(c) The Government of Uganda to report to Parliament on the action taken to implement the resolution of Parliament on this matter within 30 days.”

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, Government has reported with regard to that motion at that time.However, we would like to amend that statement to read, “Government should continuously inform Parliament about the developments in the project.”

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we replace the word “Government” with “the Executive” because Parliament is part of Government.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Why then don’t we be specific and identify the specific ministry, which is directly in charge of the project? We can say, “The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development…”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want us to say, “The ministries responsible for this project.” So, the amendment would read: “(c) The ministries responsible for this project should periodically report to Parliament on the action taken and the process of implementation.” Is that accurate? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put a question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question for the adoption of the whole motion for a resolution of Parliament on the compensation and resettlement of the women affected by Government’s proposed construction of the oil refinery in Buseruka Sub-county in Hoima District -(Mr Mukitale rose_) - If it is for record purposes, let me first put my question. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, this petition comes on the background of – We can call it crisis management. If everything had been done correctly, we wouldnot be proceeding this way. 

As you are aware, Mr Speaker and colleagues, the oil and gas developments are not going to be only on the refinery land.You can see the situational management of the refinery alone, but there are other more complicated problems in the upstream where the oil is going to come from before it reaches the refinery. Buliisa and Nwoya are good examples, particularly Buliisa where oil is on community land. There is no plan in place yet, eight years after the company started, not even to protect the community land and revoke those illegal land titles. 

I would be happy if at this point in time this petition was an eye-opener to Government to put in place a serious corrective measure. If this is not done, we shall get much more complicated problems and we do not want to come back here with another petition calling for a stop on oil developments until you do what you were previously supposed to do. 

I thought I should be on record that things are not okay down there. My peasants are being evicted from what is theirs legitimately because some people are moving with some papers manufactured yesterday. We need this addressed so that we move systematically. We are not responsible for the competing forces. We are for the development but Government has not put in place a multipurpose integrated, inter-ministerial development plan for us to co-exist. That was required yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, by saying “down there”, are you referring to the communities affected? (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the Rift Valley Albertine community - those who live on community land.	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of the Hansard, we need to be clear about what we are saying. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to assure hon. Mukitale that there are plans for addressing issues down there– in the - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the affected community.

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, in the AlbertineGrabben, Buliisa inclusive. We have a Cabinet committee and a technical committee to deal with the issues of our petroleum resource. We have been sitting under the chair of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and we have been trying to deal with all these issues that must be attended to in a very comprehensive way, in order to ensure the smooth development of the industry. 

We had a problem of funding, - budgetary constraints- but I am glad to report, Mr Speaker, that in the budget we passed here yesterday, part of the funds that are provided will be going out to address physical planning issues in the AlbertineGrabben.We shall also ensure that land rights of individuals and communities in this area are addressed. As I have indicated, we shall continue providing periodic reports in regard to the progress that we are making. I thank you.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, the minister has said that there is a Cabinet sub-committee and we look at competence because we are dealing with technical issues. During the CHOGM time, there was a Cabinet sub-committee which messed up procurement; why can’t we establish a technicalcommittee instead of a Cabinet committee?

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, my brother, Kwizera, I am sure has been interrupted by hon. Mukitale. He should have been able to take note of the fact that I made reference to a Cabinet sub-committee, which is in charge of policy, and a technical committee which is in charge of technical matters. We work together because what we handle is normally generated by the technical committee. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We have concluded this matter. Can we go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE PETITION OF THE EAST COAST FEVER BY LIVESTOCK FARMERS IN KIRUHURA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those petitions that was presented some time back but we are happy that it has come here. The issues will always remain current. Do we have a report on this, chairperson? Do I give you 10 minutes to present?

5.25
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petition on East Coast fever was presented to this House by the honourable Col Mwesigye, MP for Nyabushozi. He presented complaints from the people of his constituency.The complaints were: theyhave been persistently hit by East Coast fever in that area; there is an outbreak of cattle diseases; a problem of acaricides and drugs which didnot seem to be effective in treating disease; and also a problem of diseases which they suspected to be spreading from the wild animals from Lake Mburo National Park. 

They prayed that the ministry carries out vaccination for East Coast fever; that there should be an investigation into these acaricides and drugs which were on the market, which seemed to be adulterated; that there should be a sensitisation programme about the diseases of cattle; that there should be recruitment of veterinary staff in that district, but also in other districts; and then government should make sure that the Lake Mburo problem of wild animals is also dealt with especially by fencing.

Mr Speaker, the committee met many stakeholders and also went to the field and made findings. They observed that: 
    • There were dwindling incomes as a result of the loss of cattle; 
    • The situation was being compounded by some farmers who had secured loans from microfinance institutions and other institutions like banks. The loans were weighing heavily on them;
    • There was an effect on people’s health.They had been used to taking milk and the animals that were dying were largely dairy cattle; 
    • The acaricides were not effective against ticks and other pests and vectors; 
    • Animals from Lake Mburo were freely mingling with the cattle on the farms.You could see the zebras, impalas and so forth grazing alongside cattle.As a result, people’s lives were also at risk. 
    • The committee also found out that some of the farmers were wrongly mixing the acaricides and that is largely the reason why the acaricides were not effective. 
    • There were no veterinary staff to help sensitise the farmers and educate them on how to carry out some of the animal husbandry activities. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that:
1. 	There is urgent need for Government to look for vaccines to vaccinate animals. The Government should, if possible, vaccinate against East Coast fever. 

2. 	Government should identify genuine sources of acaricides and drugs so that farmers can be helped to procure them from genuine sources. Now there are many sources which we cannot be sure of. 

3. 	Farmers should organise themselves to see how they can get better bargains and secure some of the drugs and acaricides from good sources.  

4. 	Government must put in place a policy to make sure that good drugs and acaricides are imported into the country and are in the right hands.

5. 	Government should also ensure that farmers are given help by veterinary staff, who seem to have given up and have withdrawn.Therefore, Government must come in very handy to make sure that veterinary staff are employed and placed where farmers can access them. That means, Mr Speaker, that Government must lift the ban on recruitment of staff so that the relevant cadre of staff are available for the farmers. 

6. 	Government should make sure that Lake Mburo National Park is fenced off so that we avoid livestock and wild animals mixing freely. The issue of the East Coast fever has come out pronounced but there are other diseases which could also spring up because of this interface between those animals.

7. 	The operations of Nshara and Ruhengyere Government ranches should also be streamlined because these ranches, which belong to Government, also neighbour Lake Mburo National Park and therefore, we should have money to have them also well fenced and other infrastructure put in place. 

8. There are other diseases like lumpy skin disease, which is spreading and seriously affecting livestock. 

9. 	Laboratories for diagnosis have broken down and they need to be reactivated so that the drugs and the acaricides can also be evaluated for efficacy. The National Drug Authority can intensify supervision but also, the National Drug Authority should have qualified veterinary staff on their team. As of now, the National Drug Authority inspects human drugs more than livestock drugs.There should be inspection plants for these drugs meant for animals, to make sure that the quality of the drugs is maintained. 

Mr Speaker, those are the recommendations.In conclusion, we recommend that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries takes up these recommendations seriously and we would require them to report to this Parliament to see how we can monitor the implementation of the recommendations. I beg to report. I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Let the records capture the full text of the report and the minutes of the committee meetings. 

Thank you very much, honourable members. At least this is an improvement. This petition was presented way back on 7th September of last year and it has taken quite a while, but the issues are current. It was very serious at that time but the issues never go away. So, it is as current as it was then.Issues of drugs, how you handle the farmers and how they relate, staffing and how you regulate the connection between the ranches and the conservation areas and how we should structure them– those are the areas around which the debate was on. So, can we debate this issue and take a decision on the recommendations. Can we agree on a timeframe? Two minutes each.

5.35
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and his committee for this report.I also thank you for bringing forward this item on the agenda so that we discuss it. 

I would like the House to look at recommendations 1, 2,4,5,6,7,8,11,13,14 and 16 and lay emphasis there.We pray that Government takes serious note and tries to implement these recommendations, especially on fencing Lake Mburo National Park. It is a big concern.Those people next to the park cannot grow food, they cannot rear cows; so, they seriously need attention.We have had a series of meetings with Government, but we appeal that Government together with the ministry concerned should take serious note of this.

Another request for the farmers, Mr Speaker, is that there should be regular vaccination against these diseases like East Coast fever, CBPP just like other countries do. Why can’t the Government of Uganda budget for regular vaccination against these diseases that are actually impoverishing these cattle keepers in the whole country? This is a source of their livelihood, food and fees. If the government can handle these two major recommendations, the farmers would be grateful to this Parliament and the Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.37
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year for Christmas, I was in Lake Mburo National Park.The issue of the national park is two-way. Apart from the animals coming out onto people’s farms, there were a lot of people grazing their cattle in the park. There were literally thousands of cattle, which we found in the national park, when I took my children last year for Christmas. So, the recommendation can work but it is a two-way matter. 

The issue of those who take their animals to graze in the park is a matter that has affected other parts of the country. We do have people in Uganda who continuously move with their livestock from area to area, from place to place, and that often creates difficulty in disease control.This is something, which we may need to address more holistically. 

A lot of the farms and ranches in many parts of Ankole are fenced but there is still a group of nomads with animals who keep on moving from place to place.We have also had issues even in Apac and in Teso of people grazing their animals.This is something that Government needs to take seriously. 

Mr Speaker, I worked with the vet industry for some time and I think that in Uganda, we are really living on a time bomb. In most countries, there is strict control on the use of acaricides because as ticks develop resistance, you have to go to a higher grade acaricide, which becomes more expensive.In Uganda, there is lack of control; anybody can use any chemical without using the right mixture, which will develop resistance. In a short while, we have to go for these very expensive acaricides which our local animals will not get any benefits out of. The very expensive chemicals are for those high quality diary animals and the like, but the majority of our animals will not be able to maintain.

When I worked in the programme in Kenya, the country was zoned.If an acaricide is being used, normally it takes seven years for the resistance to develop. Kenya had a system of rotating after five years. So, different acaricides were used in different regions and there was strict compliance with the government dipping programme. The hand spray is not as effective as a dip tank, and it was really up to the veterinary officers to ensure compliance. This protected the larger livestock industry and helped the country’s exports. 

Unless we address this issue, in years to come, - not long from now if resistance is already developing - we can lose our herds and we are not going to be able to reap the benefits. So, I really urge Government to look seriously into this matter and to come up with policies designed to protect our cattle, and policies which will be designed such that we can live beyond this crisis and deal with the matter holistically. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.41
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which has been well presented. 

East Coast fever is common everywhere now. Some years back, we used not to have cases in the high altitude areas but we now have it there as well. Recently, I visited Kenya and I discovered that their animals are also suffering from East Coast fever and yet some few years ago, it was not the case because they used to spray against ticks. Now the ticks have become resistant. 

There is also a view that the drugs being used might be fake. This calls for more studies to be carried out by our researchers so that we can determine whether the drugs being used are fake or whether the ticks are now resistant. If the ticks are becoming resistant, then we need to find a solution for that and this can only be done by our scientists. Thank you.

5.42
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the quality of drugs in our communities. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards has taken interest in monitoring the drug shops which sale drugs for human beings, to establish whether they are safe for people. 

Recently, anthrax attacked Sheema and people were selling fake drugs until we complained and Ministry of Agriculture got interested. The real drugs had to come from the Ministry of Agriculture in Entebbe. I wonder if that kind of arrangement can be sustained or our animals will continue to die. In the event that we do not have genuine drugs and no one is monitoring the sale of those drugs, raring animals will become a big challenge. 

We have been encouraging people to at least own a cow at home to increase the nutritional status of their children’s food, but people now find it very difficult to maintain a cow because of the much money they invest in looking after those cows. They would rather do away with cows rather than investing heavily in them. I believe it is because of the fake drugs, which people keep buying and at the end of the day, the animals are not cured. So the Ministry of Agriculture needs to get interested in that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.44
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The petition raises many issues, including the fencing of the game park. I read in the newspapers recently that it is individuals who own land in Lake Mburo National Park. What are we going to do with such people? They are living within the park. I have also seen cows grazing in Kaiso Tonya with wild animals. I wondered whether it was a park or a private farm. So, we need to clearly demarcate the boundaries for wild game and domestic animals, otherwise we are wasting our resources. 

On veterinary services, we have a challenge; for example, we get services for artificial insemination from Kitale in Kenya now, which is very expensive. It costs Shs 100,000 or more, which is expensive. So we want Government to invest in that. Honourable minister, do you have facilities for artificial insemination? Where is the centre for the eastern region? 

On the quality of drugs, in the container village they give options when you are buying drugs; they tell you, “this one is good, but this one is better”. If we do not regulate such people, we are going to continue losing money due to such adulterated drugs. The ministry should come up with a policy to regulate those who deal in veterinary services. I thank you.

5.46
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Observation No. 7 is about fencing of the national parks; this not only applies to Kiruhura but also to Rubirizi, which borders the national park. In most cases, the animals come and mix with our local animals and diseases are spread. The hippos sometimes have anthrax, that killer disease, and because the park is not fenced, they come out and the locals kill and eat them and they also die of that disease. So, Government should take the initiative to fence the national park. I thank His Excellency because he said they are going to fence off some kilometres of Queen Elizabeth National Park. I think this should also extend to other areas where park animals affect the people. 

Let me also say something about the veterinary officers at the districts. Many times these people tend to be arrogant and corrupt. They may find out that an animal has died of a particular disease or it is infected by, but because they are given some money, they ignore that issue and people eat that animal and they in turn get infected. 

We urge the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to sensitise these people so that the locals in the country are saved. Many times when a veterinary officer is corrupt, even when we declare quarantines, animals are still ferried out under his or her influence. So, if you do not take up that concern about the veterinary officers at the districts, we shall lose it all. I thank you.

5.48
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee. When you read this report, it is indicative that the committee went on the ground and did thorough work. I want to thank them for that. I also want to thank the honourable Col Mwesigye for performing his representation role. 

I agree with all the contents of this report and therefore, I support the motion. In addition, some of us who are neighbours to Kiruhura District share this disease in a way, because we do not have watertight borders that would prevent the spread of the disease. My constituency neighbours Kazo and Buremba and we are also cattle keepers. So, I ask that when Government is implementing these recommendations, they put us also in consideration. 

By the time the petition was submitted, this had taken two years and that means it is now three years. So, these people have suffered enough and since this is their source of income, it is such a big problem to them. Actually, they lose income in two major ways; first, they lose their animals and two, they have to buy drugs over and over. Also, once animals have been attacked by East Coast fever, people are not willing to buy them because they fear them. So, these people have suffered a lot. 

I want to ask the ministry what happened. Some time back, we used to have communal vaccination of animals sponsored by Government and it used to help a lot. The committee has also indicated that the spread of the disease is worsened by the absence of veterinary officers. But even where there is one that you can call, you must pay them if they are to come and attend to your animals.  So, I ask the ministry: do you really provide facilitation for such personnel or is it the individual farmer to meet such expenses? 

We are suffering a lot, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for this. I also thank Col Mwesigye for the petition. I thank you. 

5.51
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for having come up with this in-depth and well-articulated report. 

When I looked at most of the recommendations in this report, I imagined they would apply to all areas where cattle-keeping is done. The issue of East Coast fever, for example, does not only apply to the areas mentioned. I have seen it in most cattle-keeping areas, especially in Karamoja where many animals have died of this disease.

Mr Speaker, why doesn’t Government try to increase on the recruitment of veterinary doctors? In many cases, we have only tried to advocate for issues of medical doctors and teachers; there has been no time that we have talked about the recruitment of veterinary doctors. Why doesn’t Government come up with a policy to ensure veterinary doctors are trained?

Now that Government is promoting NAADS, in some communities, people are advocating for new technologies. They need cows and goats but if Government does not raise enough funds to give the communities such technologies, then their future will be dark. I feel this is a big problem. Since the minister is here, I urge him to take into consideration that issue if they are to look after this sector seriously. It is one of the sectors that can promote our economy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.53
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for presenting a very good report. I also would like to emphasise the fact that this report should be an eye opener to Government and particularly, to the ministry. This is because the issues that have been raised are very pertinent. Government should look at them seriously and also address them.

On the recommendations, I see that the committee is raising an issue of drugs being counterfeited. This is a very serious matter. It is a matter to do with streamlining the procurement process for drugs. Everybody, whether they are educated or not, brings in these drugs, markets them or gives them to the cattle keepers, who actually do not know how to use them, at any price. Of course, the cattle-keepers opt for the cheaper ones because that is what they can afford, not knowing the repercussions. So, I would like to urge the ministry to seriously look at streamlining the procurement and sale of these drugs.

Secondly, let me talk about the issue of veterinary staff. The situation is terrible at the grassroots. Most of the veterinary officers after qualifying look for greener pastures, where the pay is high. So, as we look at the modalities of maintaining or training more of these doctors, Government should find a way of revising their salaries to enable us train and retain them in Uganda.

The committee also talked about the issue of a Government facility where the cows are not sprayed. This also comes to the issue of funding. We have all along been lamenting that Government is not paying attention to funding in the agricultural sector – (Member timed out.)

5.56
MR SAMUEL SEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank Col Mwesigye for tabling the petition. 

The East Coast fever reported about is not alone. There are different types of ticks, which cause different types of diseases like black quarter and heartwater. These diseases affect cattle throughout Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the first recommendation is very crucial, that Government should commit itself to having massive vaccination at subsidised costs. Yes, we can pay for it. I am a farmer and I know it but currently, if an individual is to procure vaccines, it is really very expensive. That is why Government should subsidise and also ensure there is massive vaccination against tick-borne diseases.

Secondly, the fifth recommendation about sensitising farmers on the use of acaricides is also very important. This is because our farmers usually mix these acaricides wrongly, which at the end of the day makes them ineffective. They mix about three before adding renegade also, thinking that they are so wise and they will kill ticks. Unfortunately, they make them very resistant; they become hardened and they eventually do not die. That is why we need a deliberate programme to sensitise these farmers on how to use these acaricides. Government should also be serious on who is supplying these drugs and acaricides. 

I thank the Members and I support all the recommendations. Let Government endeavour to implement them. We shall support them when they come to us during appropriation because – (Member timed out.)

5.58
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues in thanking the committee for producing a thorough report. Indeed, it has given facts about what you found on the ground.All the recommendations are very important and if they are carefully followed, we will get a lasting solution to the East Coast fever and other diseases that attack our animals. 

I would like to point out a few issues. On the spread of disease, just as the committee noted in Lake Mburo National Park, you find very many farmers, each of them with their own livestock suffering from different diseases, and as the animals meet, they infect each other.Therefore, the lasting solution to this would be fencing off as has been recommended.If the park is completely fenced off, nobody will get access to it. This will help in minimising the spread of such diseases.

Mr Speaker, I also noted that people buy drugs from anywhere and from different drug shops, many of which are not licensed by Government. People start drugshops and can make any labels of any acaricides and make people think they are the right drugs and yet they may not be. So, we have a problem in that line. Unless Government comes up with a policy to clear this, so that we can tell which drugshop is accredited or authorised, we will continue to have these problems.Even with crops, there are similar problems; people sell adulterated acaricides – (Member timed out.) 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I would like to just make a small comment, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you have accessed the microphone before I allowed you. Okay, only one minute.

6.00
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker for being patient with me. I would like to make an observation. While Ugandans boast of employment being 80 percent based in agriculture, we are the country that least talks about agriculture; we rarely hear people talk about real agriculture – commercial farming.People just rely on simple farming using hoes -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are discussing livestock here.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes, I am going to comment on the report. Poor people cannot do proper husbandry. This is one of the few countries that never subsidises animal husbandry. Farmers need to be subsidised.Hon. Kasirivu may be able to manage his kraal but his neighbour may not. So the ticks keep moving from the poor man’s farm to the rich man’s farm. The ticks then eventually become resistant to medication because the vectors keep roaming around. 

I, therefore, think we should walk the talk. Let the government plan and subsidise farmers. That is the way to go –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am now moving to the ministers. Honourable ministers, please address this issue, not to Nyabushozi where the mater came from because the matter now concerns the whole country. So the recommendations you are going to come up with should cover the whole situation regarding animal diseases but not only East Coast fever. Please, try to sum them up in your responses to these issues before we start processing the resolution. I will start with the minister responsible for the environment.

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms FlaviaNabugere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this elaborate report. The issue of East Coast fever is a very serious one and it is a threat not only to the animal population, farmer’s income, nutrition but also health. The petitioners have their suspicions as to what would be causing the problem and the committee also made their assessment as to what they felt was the cause.

I would like to consider issues of climate change and to what extent it leads to resistance in the use of drugs for spraying. Also, as we set down the recommendations, we should also think about investigating the extent or the impact of climate change on the spread of this disease, so that we can have a holistic picture. Thank you.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee members for their wonderful report. Therecommendations they have given are exhaustive and they address the issue.

In response to this public outcry, His Excellency the President directed the Ministry of Agriculture to come up with a comprehensive solution to ticks and tick-borne diseases. I wish to inform the House that action has been taken and a very comprehensive project proposal has been prepared. It covers a number of issues of socio-economic importance. It not only covers policies and legislation that influence the control of ticks and tick-borne diseases but also many other aspects, which have been raised here, like the interventions that require the human resource capacity of this country and also the sensitisation of the farmers. So, theproposal, which also includes advocacy, has been prepared and we are now looking for funding, and it has also been pushed to the presidency.

There are very many issues that have been raised and it would require a lot of time for one to be able to address them. On these issues –(Interruption)

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I rise on a point of clarification. Yes, we appreciate that the proposal is being written, but one of the challenges is that we have the National Drug Authority and when you look at the instruments which establish this authority, it is supposed to handle both human and veterinary drugs and also other related material. However, from the way NDA works, it concentrates on human medicine - it employs pharmacists and human medicine-related experts - but it hardly deals with veterinary issues. 

So even before you write proposals, are you trying to look at how you can streamline the functioning of the NDA so that the drugs for veterinary services can be checked by this agency?It is concentrating on human drugs. This may not even require money but just ensuring that NDA plays its role as prescribed by law.

PROF. NYIIRA: Well, this is true. By having a comprehensive and lasting solution, it includes all those elements of being able to review the structures that handle ticks and tick-borne diseases. Even that has been taken into consideration.

I was actually going to handle that particular aspect of NDA.One of these recommendations by the committee, which are comprehensive, touches on the issue of the quality of the acaricides. We have been able to get NDA to start looking at the quality of the chemicals that come into the country. We are also working with them to ensure that we track some of these companies that bring fake chemicals.

I also want to mention that the issue again goes back to the question of liberalisation of the economy and the decentralisation of our structures. First of all, the liberalisation of the economy, the freedom of any company or institution to bring in any of the chemicals, gives a ticket for any of these drugs to be brought in here and –(Interruption)

MR JAMES AKENA: Honourable minister, I am not opposed to liberalisation but there is need for some regulation. You cannot have anybody bringing up anything at any time and to any place. The government cannot abdicate its role of regulation, and it is important in this particular area because where we are going, it is going to be impossible to manage. 

I mentioned this before. It is like having the first-line drug for tick control,but we have moved ahead; we are already on the second while some people are on the third. By the time you reach to the fourth, it will not be affordable.

If you say that because of liberalisation, you let any company bring in any product - It is up to the government to put the conditions. It is the same thing that we have in in health, where you have a first-line drug for a particular disease; it does not mean that anybody can bring in any drug.Otherwise, we are going to destroy the future of this country in the name of liberalisation. Liberalisation does not mean there is no regulation. Thank you. (Applause)

PROF. NYIIRA: Thank you for that information. It is true; in fact, I was going to talk about the issue of regulation because regulatory aspects come under the Ministry of Agriculture.We are strengthening this aspect by recruiting more staff and improving on the existing facilities which we have in the ministry, including the improvement of human resource capacity for regulation.

There was also the issue of farmer education. This is very important. In carrying out surveillance, we found out that some of the farmers use the same drug in the dips for a long time without realising that in fact, over a period of time the drugs they put in these dips become diluted and in the long run they will not be effective. So, that requires only farmer education.

There is also the issue of resistance, which the honourable colleague brought out. When you use a drug over a period of time, naturally resistance develops and that means you have got to change. However, the fact that different farmers go and get drugs of different types from shops wherever they find them and they use them differently means that eventually, they develop resistance to different chemicals at different rates. So, the issue of enforcement becomes very important.We must make sure that there is zonation so that certain drugs are recommended for particular zones, they are used and the regulatory mechanism makes sure that in fact this is followed to the letter. So, again, our ministry has taken responsibility for that. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, there are many issues that I cannot really go through. I only want to confirm that the Ministry of Agriculture has taken up most of these recommendations that have been put here – actually, from the time of the first outcry - and we are moving on to ensure that they are implemented.I will give examples. We have implemented the issue of organising the farmers to be able to come together and treat their animals in time. Also, because there is movement of these animals from different places, sometimes even from outside the country, we make sure that in fact there are massvaccinations carried out by Government. Although sometimes we are constrained by the procurement procedures and we cannot get the drugs on time, realising that it is an important element –(Interruption)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Honourable minister, I just seekclarification and I hope this would not be out of the ordinary. Since we do not have time, can you respond to these recommendations in writing so that we use that response to guide our farmers? Please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are going to pass the recommendations first then they will seek for their implementation. 

PROF. NYIIRA: Mr Speaker, I do not think I have to go into much detail on most of these elements because we accept the recommendations; I think they are definitely important and I think they should be adopted and implemented. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the issues are clear. The only rider we are putting is that it is now not only Kiruhura District and it is not only about East Coast fever; it is about various aspects in the national context. These people of Kiruhura were only able to bring these issues on the Floor of Parliament to enable us deal with them.

Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on a petition on East Coast Fever by livestock farmers in Kiruhura District. There are recommendations that are part of the report. I now put the question for the adoption of the whole report and the recommendations of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It has been a long day and we are beginning to draw to the end. I think for now we can stop here. We have been able to handle the matters that were urgent. I thank you, Mr Chairman, for the effort, and thank you, honourable minister, for supporting and confirming these recommendations so that there are no issues of conflict in this matter. We are all agreed, so these matters can be properly implemented now. Government Chief Whip, did you want to say something?

6.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for sitting for these many hours. Thank you so much for serving the country. I also want to thank you so much, honourable members, for your participation and the time and resources you have put in during the whole of this year to serve this country. 

I want to take this opportunity, on behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus and on behalf of the Executive, to wish you a merry Christmas and a happy new year, 2014, the year of our Lord. God bless you. Be careful because we still have issues of terrorism. We all have to inform our constituents to take extra care during this festive season. Thank you. (Mr Paul Mwiru rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that from the Leader of the Opposition?

6.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Yes, Mr Speaker. As the acting Leader of the Opposition, I would like to associate myself with the submission of the Government Chief Whip. In the same vein,I wish you a merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We are preparing to say goodbye to the year 2013. The year has been difficult. A year lived is a year of experience. A year already lived is a year that should give us the guidance on how we deal with the next year that is coming. As we shut the doors to 2013, we should use the experiences we have had this year, the lessons we have learnt from some of the difficulties we have faced, to give us the courage and the wisdom to deal with the issues that will come in 2014 in a better way. By 2014, we are beginning to start our second year of the next jubilee of this country, so we should be better focussed. 

Also, honourable members, the clock ticks quickly when it comes to 2014; the next years roll very quickly. So it is also the time that we should begin refocusing on how we relate. That is why this period- this festive season and the one month of the adjournment of Parliament - should be used so that in the next elections, we have bigger percentage retention than in the previous years.

I wish you, on behalf of the Speaker, the Parliamentary Commission and the management of this Parliament and the people who sent us here, who now I am summing up on behalf of, a very merry Christmas. Have a good time with your people and with your families.Please, remember to pray; wherever you worship, we know we all worship one God. Please, just do that and see how to begin the New Year fresh with new ideas, new commitment to the development of this country and more focus on the economy rather than on the politics. 

I said earlier that we should devote more time to discuss the economic issues of this country because politics does not put food on anybody’s table - not mine at least; I do not know about yours. I am sure that the rest of the people in this country, in the villages, cannot eat the politics we fight over here but they can benefit from the economic policies that we make, that are progressive and that take cognisance of their concerns and their way of life. 

The policy of the Government, the focus of the Government is on increasing household income. How do we do that? There is no political shade about that. Increasing household income is for every family in Uganda and this House is best placed to pass policies, laws and budgets that support that focus. God bless you all. This House is adjourned to 4th February.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 February 2014.) 
