Thursday, 11 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, death has occurred to the husband of our former colleague, Dorothy Hyuha. I am not very aware of the processes that are going on. I will ask hon. Dombo, if he has some information, to brief the House about the arrangements for his burial.

2.10
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like you have informed the House, we were informed the other day that our senior colleague, hon. Dorothy Hyuha, had lost her husband, Mr Dan Haumba Hyuha, and this morning we received the funeral programme.

First and foremost, Mr Dan Hyuha has been a senior educationist in this country. He went to various schools despite his modest background as a peasant. He grew up to go to the highest university in this land, Makerere University, where he graduated as a teacher. During his life time, not only did he serve as a teacher but also as a tutor in primary teachers’ colleges, as a head teacher and just recently, until the time of his death, as chairman of the University Council of Busitema University College.

Mr Speaker, we shall definitely miss him in Uganda because he was still energetic and he had varied experience from which the young people and we who are aspiring to grow into leadership would definitely learn from. We pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace. Our condolences go to the family, especially to his wife, hon. Dorothy Hyuha, to the children, the people of Butaleja and all the people of Uganda and people of goodwill.

Burial will take place tomorrow, Friday 12th December, at midday at his family home in Butaleja District at Kachonga. It will commence with a funeral service, which will be conducted at Bukedi College Kachonga, at the compound of a school where he was once a deputy headmaster and where he nurtured me as a head boy then.

I am glad to inform Members that the Speaker has used her prerogative and magnanimity to provide transport for Members and staff who may wish to travel to Butaleja to go and attend the funeral. There will be a bus leaving tomorrow for Butaleja at 8.00 a.m. and it will come back in the evening. In order to enable Members of Parliament and staff who may wish to travel to do so conveniently without hustle, we recommend that those who wish to travel together with the group transport should be here by 8.00 a.m. We shall leave at exactly 8.00a.m. so that we are able to return on time. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for her magnanimity and thank you for the opportunity offered to facilitate and enable Members to go and pay their last respects to the husband of our senior colleague. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we rise and observe a moment of silence for his passing.

(Members rose observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.15
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise here to raise a matter of national importance about a school in Mwenge North constituency of Kyenjojo called Bufunjo Seed Secondary School.

Bufunjo Seed Secondary School was a community school from 2001 and around 2012, the Government took it over as a government-aided secondary school. In the same year, 2012, Government contracted one company called Lamba, and we understand that Lamba belongs to Mr Christopher Obey, to construct a seed school at Shs 3.6 billion. After six months, the contract was terminated because Lamba was found to be involved in so many activities which were not good for the Government, especially the embezzlement of funds in the Ministry of Public Service. 

Lamba was taken to court and eventually when they were allowed to resume the contract, the African Development Bank, which was the main funder of the project worth Shs 3.6 billion, was winding up its activities in Uganda. We eventually lost the money but the Government of Uganda promised that they would consider this issue and allocate funds in this financial year. The money that was allocated in this financial year’s budget was Shs 600 million but from 2012 up to now, there is no construction going on.

The existing structures, which we had then, were all demolished by Lamba contractors to pave way for construction. So, after the contract was terminated and money worth Shs 3.6 billion lost, there were no classroom blocks or toilets left to be used by the students. Bufunjo Seed Secondary School has a total enrolment of about 500 students, both female and male. As we speak, they are studying under trees and also using some rented structures, which are not enough. This issue has become political and the people of Bufunjo Secondary School feel neglected and think that the Government no longer thinks about them or cares for them.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Education had promised that by September or December of this financial year, there would be some construction going on but as we talk, money has not been released. Secondly, no contract has been signed between Government and any contractor. We only hear rumours that the Shs 600 million, which was allocated this financial year, is being diverted somewhere else.

I stand here to ask the Minister of Education to urgently handle this issue and allocate funds so that Bufunjo Secondary School is constructed urgently. Our students are really suffering and they have nowhere to go. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a response from the Government on this issue of the school? 

2.18
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Mr Speaker, from what I heard, the honourable member has a write-up. I think it would be very good for that write-up to be availed to the minister for a thorough follow-up. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you follow this up with the ministers so they can act on this, and let the Speaker know what progress has been made.

MR MUHUMUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have the write-up and I can avail it to the minister. Maybe I can also lay it on the Table, if necessary. 

We have been following this up with the ministry. I even took the deputy commissioner there and the ministers are aware of this. However, it is as if they are just moving too slowly and yet it is an urgent matter because the students are suffering as they have no classrooms or toilets. I can avail a copy of the complaint formally to the ministers, although I am aware that they have been following this up and they have been promising that they are doing something but they are very slow. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the matter is already before the House. You have raised it again and the Leader of Government Business has now taken note. Please, brief the Speaker on the progress of this matter.

2.20
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise on an issue of national importance because I am under pressure from my constituents to raise this matter. 

Under good governance, we must have three arms of Government, fully functional. However, under Article 130 of the Constitution, we have not had a substantive Chief Justice for a long time and this has denied a number of constitutional matters at the Supreme Court level from being attended to. Our concern is to find out who has failed in his or her duty because the whole chain involves Parliament, the Judicial Service Commission and the Executive. As a country, we want to know who has not done their work. 

If there are three arms of Government, we must see them functioning. A number of judges at the Supreme Court cannot act substantively as Chief Justice, so we would want Government to come out and say who has failed in their work or who has not done their work. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Kwizera. This matter has been raised before and Government said work is going on. The finalisation of this will be made public.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a Member of Parliament, when I make a substantive inquiry I expect a substantive response. What the minister from the Prime Minister’s Office is saying was said over one and a half years ago; so, who has failed? This being public information does not address the cries of the people who have cases at the Supreme Court. Thank you.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Mr Speaker, it would appear that it is business as usual when serious matters are raised. Is it procedurally right for people from the other side to turn this House into a moot climate, like the ones we used to organise for secondary schools? Somebody stands up and offers an answer, which is very incomprehensive. 

Really, these are very serious matters. We are talking about a whole arm of Government without which the country cannot function well and somebody casually stands up, and I am sure he is not ready to answer this, and gives a casual answer and expects the country to appreciate it. Mr Speaker, I want it to be made clear as to whether it is procedurally right to turn this House into a moot House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House could never be turned into a moot House and no member should even be caught thinking that it can be turned into a moot House. But please, deal with the issue properly and then we move forward.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The constitutional provisions are very clear on who has the mandate to appoint the Chief Justice. I do not think the honourable member wants me to stand up here and say I have appointed one. I can only say that the process is going on and when it is final, the results will be known –(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that this House cannot be turned into anything else other than what its responsibilities state. However, I am perturbed because the issue that hon. Kwizera raised is an issue of national importance and interest. 

Indeed, this issue has been on the Floor of this House for quite a long time. Is it in order for the honourable minister or Leader of Government Business to stand and insinuate that members of this august House do not know the appointing authority? Does the minister wish to insinuate that the matter the member is raising is not of national importance?
 
Mr Speaker, the order I am raising is that we have been requesting that Government comes here and gives us a comprehensive statement on the status. Is it in order for the minister to continue saying that the appointing authority will come, at his own time and wish, to update this august House on the issue of appointing a Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what else the minister could have said because it is the prerogative of the appointing authority, and that is exactly what he has stated. I do not know what else he could have stated as a minister. 

Can we ask that this matter be clarified to the House on Thursday next week? Leader of Government Business, please brief the House on Thursday next week about the progress of the appointment of the Chief Justice. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Maybe to help the minister, all of us Members of Parliament are above average and we know what the Constitution clearly stipulates. This is because the provisions are clear that the Judicial Service Commission shall nominate individuals, send the names to the President, the President appoints and sends the name to Parliament for vetting and approval. 

So, we want to know, has the Judicial Service Commission submitted names to the President? Is it the service commission that is failing to start the process? Is it the President receiving names and not acting or has the President sent names to the Speaker and the Speaker is not acting? 

Tell us where the problem is exactly because that is the route that is prescribed by the Constitution. When he brings us an answer, he should tell us which arm or section has failed to do its part as per the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, let us handle this matter on Thursday next week.

2.29
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the issue of the escalating number of people around the country, including in Kiboga District, who are being bitten by rabid dogs. 

People are dying slowly without help due to lack of the required anti-rabies drugs and other drugs in the government referral hospitals. In the last few weeks in Kiboga District, more than 30 people - mainly children because these dogs mainly attack children - have been bitten by dogs. They have been maimed and they are being watched by their parents as they slowly die. The parents are helpless. 

If you watched Bukedde TV yesterday, one of the chairmen in Sembabule District was reporting the same problem. About 15 people in his area, again mainly children and some of them were shown on the screen, have been bitten. If you saw the picture, one of the children had wounds on his body and they were beginning to rot. 

Mr Speaker, this problem was previously raised in the year 2011 by hon. Ntabazi. Since then, I do not think it has really been addressed. As of now, when people are bitten by these rabid dogs they are forced to go to Entebbe hospital. It seems this is the only place that offers treatment for people who have been bitten by rabid dogs. Many people in the rural areas cannot afford to go on a weekly basis and pay Shs 120,000 because even that service in Entebbe hospital is not free; one has to pay Shs 120,000 every week for about a month and a half in order to have their children treated. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is directed to the local governments. One of their duties is to kill these loitering dogs. I do not know whether killing is the correct technical word but you understand what I mean. They must destroy these rabid dogs, which are loitering around so that they do not bite people.

My second prayer is to the Ministry of Agriculture to provide vaccines so that dogs are vaccinated. My third prayer is to the Ministry of Health and other responsible bodies to ensure that the necessary anti-rabies vaccines and other drugs necessary to treat people are available not just in Entebbe hospital but also Mulago National Referral Hospital and other regional referral hospitals. 

Mr Speaker, those are my submissions on this issue, which has been hanging around since 2011 and I do not see any progress. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health is not represented in this House but the matter, as raised, will be brought to the attention of the minister for his action. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a coincidence today that hon. Kabwegyere is the Leader of Government Business. The power that delegated him is actually the Minister of Health who is also the Prime Minister of this country. Is it procedurally right for hon. Kabwegyere to run away from the role that has been delegated to him today? This is because he is standing in as Minister of Health and also Leader of Government Business. Is he procedurally right to run away from his responsibility as actually delegated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister holding the position of the Leader of Government Business has communicated that this matter will be addressed to the Minister of Health and the Minister of Health should be directed to make a statement on this. The only communication from the Speaker is that that statement should be made on Tuesday afternoon next week.

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to come back on the Floor but the Leader of Government Business has only addressed the issue, which falls under the Ministry of Health, but there was also another issue raised -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for me to guide on how we are going to proceed with the rest? There is the outstanding issue of vaccination of these dogs, which the minister responsible for agriculture should be able to address us on.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Zerubbabel Nyiira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of vaccination of dogs for rabies is a health issue; it does not fall under the Ministry of Agriculture.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we have one government or we have 23 or 70 governments. 

The Prime Minister says the Minister of Health is not represented here, the Minister of Agriculture says it is not his business; whose business is it? People are dying. He has said dogs are biting people and they are dying because there is no medicine. It is an emergency. Will people have to wait up to Tuesday to get a statement? They will have died. We should be getting word from Government that they are going to handle this as an emergency. 

We are definitely very worried that we do not have cohesion in the Government. We do not have one government and meanwhile the situation is getting worse in the country. Mr Speaker, please, let us appeal to our colleagues to be in charge of the Government. If you are tired, get out and we shall come in. Thank you. 

MR NYIIRA: Mr Speaker, I have heard one of the honourable members saying that all animals are supposed to be under animal industry; this is not true. In fact, the animal industry deals with livestock. Thank you.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt honourable Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, some of the issues raised are urgent. Certainly, some urgent measures have got to be taken to deal with the situation while we wait for this statement from the Minister of Health that comes on Tuesday afternoon.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that rabies is dangerous, but the district leadership is also there. Let us not rule out the responsibility of those who identify rabid dogs for killing. There is no doubt that the law is very clear on who can undertake action against rabid dogs. I will follow up this matter immediately I leave this Chamber, which should not be long after my appearance later on. We will follow it up and the relevant personnel in the districts are called upon to take the necessary action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER
	QUESTION 31/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is not here.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW ID 55,460,000 (US$ 83,750,000) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 132 KV MIRAMA-KABALE ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE AND DISTRIBUTION PROJECT

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker, the item that I was briefed on is not here. I beg that we defer that item.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can the records show that the Order Paper indicated that there was a request for borrowing money  and that the minister has now requested that it should be deferred. It is accordingly deferred on your request, honourable minister. Later on, we do not want letters written that Parliament delays processing of these matters. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.41
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the parliamentary delegation to the 69th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, USA from 13th  September to 3rd October. It is dated 10 October 2014. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you are aware, you will have the opportunity to be discuss this report because some of the recommendations that they make from what they have seen would be of benefit to the whole House. We will find time for this matter to be debated. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
THE PRESIDENT’S DIRECTIVES ON THE BENET PEOPLE

2.42
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER  (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I promised that today I would give a statement on the resettlemment of the Benet in Kapchorwa subregion and I am now ready. 

Yesterday, Cabinet looked at the matter and guided me in the presentation of this statement. I therefore request you to give me the time to speak. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, the problem of landless - (Interruption)

MR SABILA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I know the issue that is being discussed is very important and it pertains to the lives of people but I am wondering why I cannot access it on my iPad. I expected to have the report so that we follow very well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you access the minister’s statement on your iPads? It has not been uploaded. Clerk-at-Table, can you advise me on this. Can we have this statement uploaded before it is presented? The Clerk is directed to do that.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POWER OUTAGES IN GULU TOWN

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINIERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I was asked to respond to the question of power outages in Gulu. 

First, I would like to state the causes of those outages. Gulu gets its power from Lira. In the past weeks, the outage of power in Gulu has been attributed to a number of reasons explained below: 

The main reason is the failure of rural electrification lines belonging to Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited whose protection was faulty. 

Therefore, the main causes of the failure in November were as follows:

    • Failure of the lines connected to Gulu, as the line had many T-offs or conenctions which go to Adjumani, Otwal, Oyam and Kamdini. These contributed to 52 per cent of the failure. 
    • Failure of transformers, 12 per cent. 
    • Failure of transmission lines, 14 per cent. 
    • Planned maintenance not done properly, 7 per cent. 
    • Broken jumper, 7 per cent. 
    • Damaged insulators, 3 per cent; and others.

As of this week, the situation has greatly improved. In the last seven days, the outage has been for 40 minutes due to faults and five hours when they were working on the switch gear.

Steps Taken

Short-Term Steps 

    • The switch gear in Gulu that was burnt in October 2014 was replaced on 5 December 2014.
    • UMEME and UEDCL are having regular meetings and taking specific actions to rectify the situation as a result of the outage, which has reduced significantly.
    • So far, 13 circuit breakers/fuses are being maintained and the balance of four circuit breakers will be maintained as well. Many had faulty batteries, which are being replaced.
    • Line clearance has been done to reduce chances of trees falling on the wires and bushes overlapping.
    • Rural Electrification Agency is to transfer the Adjumani line as a solution so that it gets power directly from the substation in Gulu and it becomes a feeder.

Medium-Term Steps

    • Installation of additional transformer capacity at Gulu.
    • Standardising auto reclosers of different lines to improve reliability.
    • Agreeing on standards on T-offs, which are added to the network; for example, Adjumani is a T-off of 230km. Such long lines should not be T-offs, that is, those which branch from the main line, but feeders getting power from a sub-station. 
    • Creating a supply ring from Kitgum to Gulu so that there is an alternative power supply from Kitgum. This will be done in 2015. 
    • We also intend to connect Adjumani to a 132KV transmission network. This will be done in early 2016. 

We hope this will improve power reliability to Gulu. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any matter from the member for Gulu?

2.49
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask a supplementary question about what the manager of UMEME in Gulu tells us, and it is not in line with what the minister reported. 

Do you coordinate your activities with those managers you put in place? Do you know that we also have business people in Gulu who rely on this power for their businesses? Do you know that you are really destroying the business people who rely on power in Gulu, Mr Minister?

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for the question, honourable member. First of all, there is a purpose for taking power there. It is because we want people to rely on power to develop. 

You also asked whether we are coordinated. Yes, we are coordinated. All these things I have said were as a result of a meeting we were attending since morning, verifying everything with them. So, we are really coordinated. I do not know what they tell you, which they do not tell us. We also have technical staff who go to verify and that is why we found out what contributed to those power outages. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did the technical people tell you that that line goes to Kamdini?

MR LOKERIS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We know that that line does not go to Kamdini; so, is that really from the technical people?

MR LOKERIS: Yes, Mr Speaker. That is what they told me when I was with them in a meeting. I will go and verify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That line goes from Aboke, Iceme, Bobi and Gulu. It does not go to Kamdini.

MR LOKERIS: Okay, I will go and verify.

2.52
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much. I really do not know whether we will trust the information the minister has given us here. This is because from the onset of that statement, you can see that the minister just sat in his office and wrote a statement for the purpose of giving an answer to this question. Honourable minister, before you bring a statement, please make sure those technical people first sieve it. 

We have a lot of problems. This power shutdown in Gulu extends up to Agago District and the problem in Agago is even worse. Sometimes we have power blackouts for over six months and this is very dangerous. I do not know whether these challenges are also in other parts of the country or whether it is intentional that Gulu and the greater Gulu is made to suffer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It looks like Agago members have some issues.

2.53
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much. I was listening quietly and very attentively to what the minister was explaining as to why power is not very regular in Gulu. You are saying the line that comes to Gulu passes via Lira. We understand and know that the same line goes to Kitgum and Agago, just like my colleague has said. Why is it that when power is out in Gulu, you find power out in Kitgum but in Lira town there is power? Does it mean that these problems normally occur after Lira? Thank you.

MR LOKERIS: Mr Speaker and colleagues, Lira has a sub-station, which distributes power to different parts. However, because of the reasons I have mentioned, it also affects those other places. There are the faulty batteries, which are being replaced now. We have become very serious with these operators because the country is again going back due to some kind of negligence. All these will be attended to as we attend to the problems in Gulu. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has requested that he handles both the floods in Moyo and also the conflict between the people of Moyo and the Kukus of South Sudan in one statement and then we can have a debate on both.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, this is a statement to this august House on the actions undertaken by Government as a consequence of the clashes between the Kuku people of South Sudan and our people and the floods that bedevilled Moyo.

Mr Speaker, on 4 September 2014, the Moyo District chairman and his entourage were arrested by South Sudanese authorities in Abaya village of Moyo District while on a national census programme. It is important to note that Abaya village is about 10km inside Uganda. The arrest of the district leaders resulted in the Moyo District Local Council resolution calling for a peaceful demonstration that took place on 15 September 2014.

Mr Speaker, in the subsequent days, a group of people from South Sudan burnt 457 houses – that is what we have now verified – in the villages of Abaya and Wano of Moyo District. The attackers also killed nine people – that is what we have verified now – and looted 350 livestock. It is important to note that there were no cases of abduction. All the people who had hidden in the bushes have returned and are now accounted for. 

The attack caused fear and displacement in the following villages: Eria, Cefo, Minze, Afoji, Fodia, Adugula and Itia in Moyo Sub-county. The villages of Mace, Maringu East, Ajude, Diri, Egule, Gwere and Kibira in Lefori Sub-county were also affected. The villages of Goopi East and Padiga North in Metu Sub-county were also affected. In total, 612 households were displaced, affecting a total population of about 19,111 people.

On receiving this information, I personally led an assessment team from the Office of the Prime Minister, Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Management, to the affected communities. The following interventions were carried out:

I chaired an extraordinary security meeting that was attended by all security agencies in the district and the district leadership. At the meeting, it was agreed to provide the necessary security to facilitate the return of the people home.

As of now, all the displaced communities have returned home and have been supplied with the following food and non-food items:

    • 3,000 pieces of iron sheets have been given out.
    • 350 bags of maize flour have been given out.
    • 115 bags of beans have been given to our people.
    • 1,240 pieces of tarpaulin were given for shelter.
    • 1,740 pieces of saucepans were also given to the mothers.
    • 3,525 plastic water cups were given.
    • 3,555 plastic plates. 
    • 1,540 bars of soap. 
    • 1,749 pieces of blankets. 
    • 1,540 jerry cans. 

The Office of the Prime Minister also gave Shs 8,700,220 to the office of the CAO to facilitate the distribution of these items to the villages. Mr Speaker, I commissioned the distribution of the relief commodities as stated above.

Around the same time, floods hit Obongi County in Moyo District. They caused damage to gardens and food crops in a number of villages along the banks of the river. An assessment was conducted by my technical team and it came up with the following findings:

1. The floods caused damage but fortunately did not wipe out everything from the gardens. The affected communities were not, fortunately, reduced to a desperate situation.

2. Families have some food in their stores and what remained in the gardens can take them up to mid-February of 2015.

Mr Speaker, we have decided to contact the Ministry of Works who have a plan to take technical teams to the site to look at the rivers that have persistently broken banks, with a view to finding a permanent solution. It should also be noted that following related hailstorm destructions in a number of districts in the northern, central, western and eastern parts of the country, OPM assessment teams were sent out. Out of the 20 districts so far covered, the food situation fortunately is not so deplorable. All the communities assessed, from our reading, have the capacity to meet their daily food needs up to mid-February next year.

Another food situation assessment will be conducted in mid-January 2015 across the country. I want to commit the ministry; after that, a report will be presented to this honourable House for the members to note and to also monitor what interventions we are going to take. 

However, my office together with the Ministry of Agriculture, are planning to provide some of the affected communities with agricultural implements, that is, hoes and quick maturing planting materials to enable them take advantage of the next planting season. I am happy to report that mobilisation for this item is already in high gear.

Colleagues, I believe that with the interventions stated above, the communities affected by the border clashes and the floods in Obongi will soon be in position to overcome the effects of these unfortunate emergencies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement has covered two items - floods in Moyo District and also the conflict between the people of Moyo and the Kukus from South Sudan. We can debate it now. Can we have interventions lasting no more than three minutes?

3.03
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank the minister for the statement he has brought. However, if you have been on the ground, the statement of the minister is totally different from the reality on the ground. 

Minister, heads of cattle were swept away by the floods. If it is true that your team went on the ground and undertook assessments, this has not been reflected in your statement. Nearly all the goats in the parish were washed away. It was not just in one village but other villages of Kochi Central, Kochi Boma, Borokonyo and Waka Central were also affected badly. So, the level of damage was not well reflected here. 

Cassava might not have been swept away but it is rotting in the gardens. This means the food reserves of the people, which you estimated to last up to February, will not. You can see the cassava plants standing but down there, there is nothing. So, your assessment is inadequate.

The biggest problem is in the recurrence of the same issue. This is not the first time the Office of the Prime Minister has given some food relief as a result of floods in the same area. We suggest that we build dykes and we want to make a contribution. As a Member of Parliament, I have taken the responsibility to mobilise my people to participate voluntarily in doing the work. We only need some few things such as technical guidance, machinery and some empty sacks, which will be filled with sand. We shall do it ourselves. Give us these things, including trucks for transporting the sand to the site. 

There is need to build a bridge on River Kochi. They attempted to build this bridge at one time and that is where the problem actually started. A company called Ambitious Construction Company damaged the banks of the river and when there is flooding, this problem recurs. We need to build that bridge. Give us some heavy duty culverts and we shall build the bridge ourselves. We know you are not able to do that. Just give us the materials and we shall do the work.

On the issue of the South Sudan-Uganda border dispute in Moyo, I thank you for going down there. When you came I was there with you. However, Mr Speaker, people who were displaced still lack shelter. The iron sheets provided cannot hang on the roof like that. You need to support the people with construction materials and you need an active office from the Office of the Prime Minister down there to supervise the implementation of your wishes; otherwise, people will continue suffering and when it starts raining, the same problem will disturb them.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this problem should be removed from the root. The demarcation of the border is over and above the responsibility of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness as represented by my brother, hon. Musa Ecweru. We have not seen what was promised by the two heads of state, H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, and H.E. the President of the Republic of South Sudan, Gen. Salva Kiir Mayardit. When we invited them, I wrote the letter -	(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: The two of them promised that they would engage the Border Demarcation Commission with support from the African Union. A meeting was organised by the Governor of Central Equatorial State and attended by the foreign affairs ministry from here but these things have never been implemented. Our question is: why take very quick action on the issue of the Uganda border problem with Tanzania and Rwanda and you leave this one where people have died pending? In the south, people have not died. Where are your priorities? 

This is where we have questions about the priorities of Government. Government just wants to see people in the North and their brothers from South Sudan killing each other. You do not want to take real action to solve the border problem. What kind of malice is this? Thank you.

3.07
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Whenever the issue of borders comes up, I get disturbed because we who are neighbouring the Sudanese have problems. My question to Government is: when will they demarcate the border? Are our people going to keep conflicting all the time and killing each other? Do you want what has been happening in West Nile to also spread to my district, Lamwo? So, when will Government come out and demarcate the borders?

My people have been abducted and our animals have been stolen and taken to Sudan. Even our people have been chased away from their sim sim gardens because they say that is Sudan. My humble plea to government is: when will you demarcate the border so that the people of Lamwo and West Nile can have peace? Thank you.

3.09
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his report. 

It is true that after the conflict with South Sudan, Government came on the ground to try and help especially with relief, which was really inadequate. What the people want right now is a long-term permanent measure - demarcation of the border. The people are being kept in the dark. We were told that in two weeks’ time the border demarcation process would start. Up to now, we have not got feedback and we are under pressure as the MPs from that area.

On the issue of the floods in Itula Sub-county, Obongi, we are very disappointed. Normally, when floods happen, Government comes with emergency relief. However, from around the 18th of October up to today, the people who have been affected have not received anything from Government. So what shall we say to Government? Where is its seriousness? 

For those who lost their dear ones, we know that human beings cannot be compensated but the families really expect something and nothing is being talked of. The arrangement, as they always say, is underway but when is it coming? We need a bit of seriousness in handling the issues of conflicts. 

As Parliament, I think we should be concerned; if possible, we should even form a cross-border parliamentary committee. This is because we have issues not only on the border with South Sudan but also with Congo and other states. We should do this so that we are kept abreast of what is happening and we are able to decide and talk to our people about natural cross-border issues. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.11
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague, the minister, for presenting this statement. However, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. 

There is something that confuses me about what is happening in Moyo. Is there something that the Executive is keeping away from us? It beats common sense; the UPDF are keeping peace in South Sudan. We deployed and this Parliament was told that because they were not able to defend themselves, we had to go and help them. How then do they come to Uganda to beat up our people, kill them and destroy their crops? Mr Speaker, it beats my understanding. There is something more to this than meets the eye and the statement made. I will take the information –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I was part of a team led by the Opposition Chief Whip and we visited this region and toured the borders separating us from South Sudan and from Congo.

One of the discoveries we made was that while the UPDF was virtually disarming even those that had their arrows and bows - Ugandans were being disarmed and told not to engage and basically to leave their fields - our counterparts across where arming their own people. We had an example where we went to their border post, which they think is actually in South Sudan but the information we were receiving was that it is actually in Uganda. Our security had to plead first with the people of South Sudan for us to be able to make our way into what we consider our territory. 

The last bit of information I want to give to my colleague is that the human rights issues which arose have not been addressed. There are people who were beaten by our own security, particularly the Police. We went there and the civilians were very happy with the UPDF but very angry with the Police. 

These are concerns we brought to the attention of the minister when we came back. I remember myself and the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi were talking about compensating these people who were tear-gassed from their houses. Some lady, a former Mayor of Moyo Town Council, who could not sustain the conditions inside her shop upon being tear-gassed, negotiated with the Police to allow her move out and sit on the veranda. Another bunch of policemen instead came and beat her up. 

MR TANNA: I thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to beg that if it is a territorial matter, then like the way the Migingo Islands issue was sorted out with this modern technology of GPRS, we have the coordinates, why can’t that issue be resolved -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR TANNA: Secondly, there is the issue of good working relations. We are helping these brothers and sisters of ours, why would they do such a thing? Why can’t they bring it on the table? That means the working relationship and communication between the two must be improved. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

3.16
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. We have de-escalated the situation. We want to work together with colleagues so that together we intensify the de-escalation. We have been in Moyo a number of times and for a number of reasons. We have engaged with the local leaders and national leaders on how to go about these matters. 

On Saturday, Mr Speaker, I was in Juba over this matter. The government is engaged. We are aware of what we need to do and we are going to do it. It has three levels. Level number one is a question of security. Whether there is a dispute about a piece of land or not, both parties are required to maintain peace. There has to be peaceful co-existence so that both governments are engaged in demarcation of the border. 

I met my counterpart, the IGP, and the Director-General of Immigration and Security and we agreed that at all times, peace and security must be maintained at our borders. I met the honourable Members of Parliament from Kajo-Keji and they are good friends of Uganda. One lady graduated from Makerere and Nabbingo, another is a professor who is a graduate from Makerere; I met them and we agreed to allow that community to live together peacefully until both governments re-mark the border.

However, there is true impatience because of the pace at which things are moving. We understand that South Sudan is in a conflict and they are trying to do their level best. We had set up a technical team to undertake the re-demarcation of the land but they were delayed. However, as soon as I finished, they put together a team and invited hon. Asuman Kiyingi, who had been sent as a special envoy, and they have since concluded a MoU that is going to pave way for the re-demarcation of the land. I therefore want to confirm to the Members that we will maintain security; both countries have agreed to that. The mechanism for re-marking the border has also begun. 

I also appeal to all the leaders to ensure that we foster cross-border positive relationships. It would benefit no one if it was going to be tit for tat, that you take my eye and I take yours. We would live in a world that is irate and it would be very difficult. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are engaged and these borders – (Interjections) – Well, Congo is another story to tell but we are also engaged with DRC so that these borders are marked. We will maintain security until all these borders are marked. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I would like to first of all thank my colleague, Gen. Aronda, for clarifying on some of the issues that are not directly under my mandate. So, let me restrict myself to just answering one or two things that have to do with relief and disaster management.

It is true that whenever a disaster befalls a place, an assessment is done. I would like emphasise that in the reports, we look at the capacity of the community. If we find that they are devastated to a level that they cannot get to their feet on their own, that is when we move in very fast and assist them to get back to their feet so that they can start living a normal life again. 

I have reported to this august House that our reading of the situation of our people in Moyo is such that the little food available to them is going to take them up to about February. We are going to conduct another assessment countrywide, particularly in Moyo and the other districts that have suffered the kind of devastation that Moyo witnessed, and we will come back to this House and indicate the challenges that are confronting us. We will also give the road map of how we intend to respond to these challenges. 

I want to promise this House that we will look after our people. (Interruption)

MR OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you, minister, for the response that you are giving to the whole House and the country at large, that you are going to take more aggressive measures to find out more so that after February, you help especially the areas that have been affected by the heavy rains due to climate change and the floods. Remember, I have been to your office and have been also submitting reports regarding the floods in Agago. 

I am trying to remind and inform you to also include some areas I have mentioned. I believe that the people of Agago after February are also going to have big problems because of the hunger caused by the floods. The affected sub-counties are Omot, Lira-Palwo, Lamiyo, Patongo, Lapono and those areas that I have mentioned. Thank you.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, 20 districts have already been assessed besides Moyo. Our understanding is that these districts certainly lost what we sometimes call food that takes them through the lean time. We will certainly respond as and when we get the reading that they are now desperate and therefore need our support. We have indicated here that our ministry is working with the Ministry of Agriculture – (Interruption) 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the honourable minster. You have not been around for quite some time but I want to confirm that you sent a team to Agago District to make an assessment. However, I was wondering if you got an accurate report of that assessment which was carried out. This is because according to the response you are giving from the assessment that was made – of course I am sure Agago District was included - the results that were given to you seem not to be accurate. 

You are indicating that the communities that were assessed are able to meet their food needs up to next year in January. The sub-counties which my honourable colleague has mentioned - quite a number of sub-counties, actually - in Agago District like Omot, Lira-Palwo, Patongo, Parabongo are in dire need. Actually, people were so happy when they saw the team from the Prime Minister’s office; they thought that they would get some relief. Up to date, this part of the country called Agago District, especially those five sub-counties, are in dire need. 

I would like to request the honourable Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness - You have always responded positively to our pleas, especially last year when I requested for relief and you sent some food relief. I request that you re-consider this part of the country this time round before February. I thank you.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I take note of what my sister has said. There are times she communicates to me directly; I do not know why she has not done that. However, I am happy to inform this House that we are going to do the needful. We will revisit that report and see if Agago is in such a desperate state, then we will not wait up to January.

I again want to say that for most of the communities that we have talked to their desire is to be helped with capacity to produce food come the next rainy season. Our commitment is to find planting materials and implements for them and that is already in high gear. We will inform the country which districts are going to benefit from this intervention. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to the next item. The KCCA law enforcement officers; Leader of Government Business, is there a response? We expected this statement yesterday but the Minster was not there. We pushed it to today, we therefore expect a statement. 


THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GORVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, first of all I must apologise because the frontbench has had quite significant absentees and yet they are on the Order Paper. This situation is going to be corrected. 

On item No. 5 - recruitment, management and supervision of KCCA law enforcement officers - we will ask the minster responsible, the Minister for the Presidency, to come and make the statement next week. I would also propose that the earliest day possible would be Tuesday. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, this issue of KCCA and the people here is about life and death. We have been promised a response time and again by the Minister and the ministers of state. Now, the boss of all the ministers, the Prime Minster, has come to shift goal posts to Tuesday. 

Is it in order for people in pain to be kept wondering, even by the Prime Minster himself? Is the Prime Minster in order not to take responsibility on the issue of his ministers failing to answer? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the item on which the statement is required is on the recruitment, management and supervision of Kampala Capital City Authority law enforcement officers. That is the statement we were waiting for. We were not waiting for the statement about life and death which you are referring to. (Laughter) This is the statement we were waiting for. I do not know how it becomes a matter of life and death. The commitment from the Prime Minister is that this statement will be made on Tuesday. Honourable members, we do not have the statement now, let us not waste time on this.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SALE OF EXISTING IVORY STOCKS AND 
THE PROGRESS OF INVESTIGATIONS ON THE LOSS OF IVORY

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, this confirms the very point I had made earlier and the necessary corrective measures we will be taking with your permission. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We expect that statement also to come on Tuesday so that we finish with this business.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MOBUKU YOUTH INSTITUTE
3.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, there is a man-hunt being carried out. I am sure the honourable minister, who may be in the lobby, may appear any time. If it is okay with you, we could be dealing with the statement by hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere on the resettlement of the Benet while the Minister of Tourism is preparing to come. I wait for your guidance, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a report that we had started listening to but it was not yet uploaded on the iPads. Can we deal with that in the meantime.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION 
OF THE PRESIDENT’S DIRECTIVES ON THE BENET PEOPLE

3.31
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem of landless communities in Sebei sub-region stems from the gazettement of the Elgon forest park in 1972 and the subsequent enforcement of the order to leave the forest reserves. This led to the displacement of the Benet group of the Sabiny people who lived in the forest and survived on gathering wild food and hunting.

In 1983, the Government of the day got concerned about the changing lifestyle of the Benet community and their impact on the forest ecosystem, including the desire to provide them with social services. They decided to allocate 6,000 hectares of land from the national park for permanent settlement of that group of people. 

Note, however, that in allocating the land to the resettlers in 1983, some of the targeted beneficiaries were left out due to irregularities by the land allocation committee that time. All Benet-Ndorobo people were supposed to be accommodated on the 6,000 hectares of the land between rivers Kere in the east and Kaptokwoi to the west in Kapchorwa. Those in charge of allocation of land in 1983 took advantage of the process to allocate to themselves, relatives and friends large chunks of the land that would otherwise have been for the targeted people.

In October 1993, Government declared Mt. Elgon Forest Reserve a national park and officially resurveyed the 6,000 hectares. The survey discovered that the actual quantity of land allocated in 1983 was 7,500 hectares instead of 6,000 that was earmarked for the resettlement. This was a result of the rudimentary methods and tools used by the land committee to allocate land. Primarily, they used natural features like cliffs, streams, valleys and rivers as boundaries and made eye judgement to make estimation of acreage of land. The Government thus declared settlers on the extra 1,500 hectares of park land as encroachers and their stay there was now illegal since it was inside the park. 

More land was availed but the problem was not solved; in fact, it was made worse because we now had illegal settlers. More of the park land was encroached on beyond the 1,500 hectares to the current 2196.899 hectares between the red and white lines. Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) has since been grappling with the problem of controlling activities of those on the 2,196 hectares as illegal settlers. 

In March 2002, the Parliament of Uganda approved the park boundary and de-gazetted only 6,000 hectares leaving the problem unsolved because now there was more land encroached upon than the 6,000 hectares. Encroachers simply formalised the ownership. 

It is against this background, Mr Speaker, that the President in his letter, reference number PO/03 dated 5 February 2011 to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, directed the Office of the Prime Minister to cause all concerned stakeholders to take the following actions, which among others include:

    1) De-gazette the London portion of the national park so that displaced families from amongst the Benet community are resettled permanently.

    2) Provide building materials such as cement, iron sheets and bricks to enable the displaced households construct permanent homes as compensation for the prolonged suffering. 
 
    3) NAADS to avail the resettlers with planting materials and improved livestock for sustainable livelihood and economic emancipation from subsistence farming.

The Magnitude of the Problem

In line with the directive of His Excellency the President on the need to de-gazette the London portion of the national park for permanent resettlement of the Benet-Ndorobo community, a multi-sectoral technical team was constituted in May 2011 to carry out a technical feasibility assessment of the resettlement. The report from the team however, revealed that the London portion was not suitable for resettlement due to its fragile ecosystem, which would put the population at risk of natural disasters as well as undermine the conservation and environmental protection objectives. Resettlement in this part of the park would greatly affect the ecosystem in the near future and some of the effects would include drying up of rivers, landslides in case of heavy rains, etcetera.

Several consultative meetings were held and it was eventually agreed that the land between the white and red lines, this is the 2196.899 hectares, be considered as a fair alternative. The white and red lines, for your information, are demarcations that were provided in 1993 to show the land between the actual Mount Elgon National Park, according to the 1983 de-gazettement of 6,000 hectares, and the encroached portion of 2,500 hectares of the national park within which no human activities are allowed.

In late 2013, Mr Speaker, the President directed me to ensure the resettlement of the Benet. Since then, I have held a series of meetings with Members of Parliament, LCV chairpersons and RDCs from the region, among others. These meetings have been taking place both in Kampala and within Sebei sub region and a number of decisions have been made at each of these meetings. 

A multi-sectoral team was set up comprising of technical officers from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Wildlife Authority, President’s office, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Local Government and Office of the Prime Minister. It was constituted to undertake a number of actions in order to facilitate the planned resettlement of the Ndorobo-Benet community. The team was guided in this undertaking by the following objectives:

i) To re-verify and survey the 2,196.899 hectares of land that lies between the white and red line. 

ii) To establish the current occupants/users of this acreage.

iii) To establish the acreage of land held by each household and services available on the said land. 

iv) To re-verify the landless persons in order to establish the exact number of the landless to be resettled from the temporary sites. This is because there were cases where people were temporarily settled but it has now taken about ten years. 

v) To re-verify the Teriet landless claimants camped at Kopkworos in Bukwo District. 

The multi-sectoral team’s findings revealed the following: 

    • Total acreage of land re-verified and surveyed between the red line and white line is 2,198.899 hectares. 
    • Total number of current land users is 483 households between the white and red lines.
    •  Total land recoverable within the six zones is 502.8409 hectares. 
    • Another 316 hectares has been recovered from Amanang that was been used as temporary settlement. This makes a total of 818.8409 hectares available for resettlement.
    •  The number of the landless verified currently stands at about 926 households. 
    • The lists of the landless have been displayed in the three districts, affected sub counties and in camps for further verification by the leadership and community. This number is likely to drop because facts about those who wanted to double-deal have started coming out. The number of the landless is thus estimated to be between 500 and 900 households. 

A resettlement committee was finally set up. This time, the resettlement committee was made up of all the LCVs, and I want to underline that, all the RDCs and the Regional Police Commander. We had been meeting together, agreeing or disagreeing, verifying and re-verifying; now, they have become part of the resettlement committee so that they oversee the resettlement. The police commander of the region came in because of the security dimension. This committee, which is chaired by the Commissioner Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, is serviced by all the relevant technical persons from the relevant MDAs to ensure there is no loophole in the exercise unlike in the past. All of us involved are accountable. 

All land allocatees will have their photos taken and be given land tittles. Their names will appear on the land allocation map, leaving absolutely no doubt on who has been resettled. Mr Speaker, there were cases where people were given land and they sold it and then they became landless. Now, we want you to have the land allocated to you, a picture taken and even the name of where you are settled on the map. As we deliberate in this House now, work is going on to complete this exercise which is aimed at ending by end of January 2015. 

Let me now concentrate on the proposed course of action which was shared with Cabinet and approved. There is need to de-gazette 2198.899 hectares of land that lies within the white and red lines and 316 hectares in Amanang, totalling 2,512.899 hectares to be de-gazetted. Given the gravity of the issue at hand, I promised that a resolution for the de-gazettement of this acreage will be tabled soon for Parliament’s action. Actually, the resolution was being worked on, only that it needed the honourable minister who is out of the country; otherwise, I had wanted to table it also today.

All Benet-Ndorobo households/persons who will eventually be resettled will not be allowed to sell the land allocated to them for a period of not less than 30 years. The land will be vested in the Uganda Land Commission, which will then issue leases to the affected persons with terms restricting any dealings in the land until the expiry of at least 30 years. This is intended to safeguard against the reoccurrence of the landlessness problem among the previously resettled persons. 

In light of government’s obligation to protect and conserve the national parks, it is prudent that after the de-gazettement of the 2,512.899 hectares, the national park boundaries be permanently fixed and no adjustments be allowed save for justified technical reasons. This will reduce on the undue pressure from the people around the national parks, who continuously keep demanding for the park land. This may well apply to all protected conservation areas. 

The Implementation Strategy

Mr Speaker, the implementation of the proposed course of action will continue to employ a multi-sectoral approach involving the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Wildlife Authority, the President’s Office, internal affairs, Ministry of Local Government, the area local authorities and Office of the Prime Minister taking the lead.

Awareness meetings will be conducted to sensitise the current land users that are likely to be affected by the partial recovery from their land and the intended beneficiaries for mutual co-existence. I appeal to all Ugandans in the Sebei sub region and all of us to cooperate in this exercise, which we have tried to make as technically neutral as possible. Land matters must be handled with patience under godly guidance -(Laughter)

The Office of the Prime Minister is leading the actual recovery of land, demarcation of plots and resettlement of the landless Benet-Ndorobo people within the projected timeframe of December 2014 to end of January 2015. 

Action Required by this Parliament 

    • Note the magnitude of the Benet-Ndorobo landless issue that has remained unresolved for nearly 30 years. 
    • Approve the de-gazettement of 2,512.899 hectares of land for permanent resettlement of these people. 
    • Approve the recovery of 502 hectares of land  that had been irregularly possessed by individuals in the Benet area. 
    • Approve the demarcation and monumentation of the verified national park boundaries that will put an end to encroachment and make them a permanent feature. 

Mr Speaker, I so present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. In paragraph 18 you made reference to “with patience and under godly guidance”. Godly guidance with a small g is a human standard not God’s standard. If you really wanted it to be God’s standard, it would have been a capital g, “God’s guidance”, which would have been okay.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I so amend.

3.49	
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hail from the region which the professor has just talked about. Greetings from Bukwo; I have just come from Bukwo now. You saw me panicking here; I was running to listen to the report of Prof. Kabwegyere. 

The report has been read and it is true we have had several meetings to that effect, but I want to get clarification, maybe from the Prime Minister, on how government works. Does government contradict itself? Does it mean when you are still a minister and you do your work, when you are out of service and another minister comes in your work is rubbished? 

The issue of Kapsekek camp in Amanang was handled properly. Verification was done, a team was set up, people have been resettled and a map was even drawn. I have everything; I have all the evidence here. People were verified and I have the names and their pictures here. People have been resettled and as we talk, they have their land and they have constructed; there is a primary school, a secondary school, a police post, a health unit. So, I wonder how another team is being instituted to go and disorganise the already settled community. 

These people already have land and they are settled. However, as we talk, there is a team that has heavily deployed in Kapsekek, trying to disorganise the people. They are demarcating the land afresh and they want to give them one acre. Initially, it was 12 acres for 49 families; each family was given 12 acres. I told members the other time that in Sebei, because of the warmth of the environment, people produce so fast. You find about 30 men of your age in one family. So, there are 12 acres for a family of about 30 people and those are the acres that are going to be redistributed; they are subdividing them. I understand the people on the ground now want to give each family two and half acres or one acre. As I talk now, there is a team down there. So, I do not know how we can be helped. 

We worked with hon. Serapio Rukundo and hon. Mukwaya and we a directive was given by the President to allocate these people land and they are settled now. Hon. Rukundo and hon. Mukwaya – unlike Prof. Kabwegyere who has never been there - came to Bukwo themselves to work! I have communication from hon. Rukundo about the implementation after we had finished the exercise. It took us three months to conclude that work – to verify the people, look for the land and to do the whole exercise. 

I have the pictures of the people here. These are the pictures of the people who are occupying the land now. They are properly settled on Kapsekek land. We are only waiting for Parliament to de-gazette these 318 acres. The Prime Minister is saying that we are going to recover 318 acres; the 318 acres is not there because people are already there. If I am lying, hon. Prime Minister, send a team today to go and verify it - (Interjections) - I will need a copy of that - (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member wanted to lay it on the Table from all the way there. (Laughter)

MS TETE: Mr Speaker, I have a letter from the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Please, allow me to read this letter. We also have a verification report, which was for three months. I was there with my colleagues, the district leadership, the army, UWA, the police and everybody else; those are the people who came up with the report. It is referred to as hon. Toskin’s report. It is a very perfect report and people are settled. The title of the report is “Verification Report on Kapsekek Settlement in Amanang, August 2009” -(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member has a lot of information for us and she is going to give us information so that we can debate the minister’s information from an informed position. However, I think it would be procedurally right if we could give the honourable member a little bit more time so that she organises herself and presents her information in a better way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not given the member any time limitation on this matter. I have allowed the member to present her case because she comes from Bukwo.

MS TETE: Mr Speaker, there is a letter to the Resident District Commissioner from hon. Serapio Rukundo about the implementation of the Toskin’s land verification committee report in Kapsekek of December 2009. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

I have a letter written to the Second Deputy Prime Minister on 4 March 1999, when hon. Toskin was a Member of Parliament –(Interjections)- Maybe, Mr Speaker, you could allow me to organise myself better because I came panicking -(Laughter). Colleagues, the things are here. Now, let me lay on the Table the report of hon. Toskin to the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade, which is dated 4 March 1999. I beg to lay. 

I also have hon. Toskin’s report about the plight of the Kongasis, now in Bukwo District, about the Teriet Ndorobo. This is where the team from the Prime Minister went. I think hon. Moses Ali will bear me witness - How many people did you find there? (Laughter) Did you find one person?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Member for Bukwo wants to seek leave to cross-examine hon. Moses Ali. (Laughter)

MS TETE: I have the report of hon. Toskin here. The verification committee of hon. Kabwegyere said it is only one person who was verified, honestly is there justice! They say one person out of about 70 or 80 people who were evicted, and I was among those who were evicted because I was in my auntie’s home; we were about eight families! Today, they say it was one person, moreover a young man.

Another communication is by the district local government to the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry, that was hon. Janat Mukwaya, in 2008, on 17th November. It is about resettling the Teriet, Ndorobos, not one person according to the minister’s report. I think she was a minister, honestly, because she did work. We have another communication from Bukwo local government. It is a minute extract of the district council meeting held on 12th November at Bukwo town council. The report is here and it is about the same vulnerable teams.

Of course, there is also the directive from the President. I also have the communication from the then RDC of Bukwo, Mr Songhor Chepkurui, about the resettlement in Bukwo District. It is addressed to the Minister without Portfolio, Office of the President, Deputy Secretary General and dated 18 September 2009.

Another communication is by Wilson Muruli Mukasa. On the 8th, there was another communication by the chairman LCV Bukwo to Mr Albert Kurui on hosting the Teriets. There is a man who is hosting the Teriets. For those people who went to Bukwo, there is a man who has given them land, about one acre, to put up their tents. Hon. Ecweru can verify that because he was the one who gave them the tents but the man who gave the one hectare is called Albert Kurui. So, the chairman LCV of Bukwo wrote requesting him for the extension of some period in hosting the Teriets and the number of people settling on the land. My colleagues and I have been paying that man some money to allow those people settle on that land - (Interjection)- Some little money. 

I also have communication from the victims, the Teriets-Ndorobos, appealing against the reports on the Teriets- Ndorobos by Commissioner Rose Nakabugo on 3 July 2014 as to why one person was verified among the many suffering people. It is here. 

The Toskin report, which is there, has captured all the people settling on that Amanang land. There is a map and everything. I also have communication from the then Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, that is hon. Rukundo, to the RDC. I told you, honourable colleagues, that on this land there are structures, there is a police post and everything. Can we allow Ugandans to suffer? 

Yesterday, I was so disturbed that I had to communicate to the Prime Minister. Didn’t I communicate to you? (Laughter) Why deploy security for a suffering community, for people who are suffering and they just want land? The problem in Bukwo does not need a lot of technicalities and all those things; we want land. Those ones who have been resettled in Kapsekek should be allowed to settle on the 318 acres permanently. They should not be disturbed. If you disturb them, where will you take them? That is my request for Kapsekek.

For the Teriet-Ndorobos, at least it should not be one. Even according to human understanding, you cannot have one person live in the forest; with whom? We also have the Yatuis. We have a community among the people who were resettled in 1983 and we have the Yatuis who were evicted. I want to request that I bring a CD for you to watch what happened to these people. They were tortured, women were raped; it is just pathetic! I will look for that CD and bring it for you to see.

There is a group of people who were evicted after these others had been resettled. So, they remained hanging on the rocks. These are now the Yatuis – the Kisitos, Cheberens. Up to now, they are homeless. They do not even have a place to bury their dead. So, we are asking government to resettle this group of people who were left out. We also have a group of the same people in a place called Rwanda and Kisangani; those people are living on rocks. The situation is worse –(Interjection)- I am not crying. 

My humble request is that these Kapsekek people be left alone; honourable colleagues, support me on this. The pieces of land sitting on 12 acres should remain untouched. The Teriets should be at least more than one.

As I conclude, I request that Parliament de-gazettes this land immediately for the resettlement of these people. For those people who were given land in 1983, let us be human; from 1983 up to today, do you think that land still exists? The Benet people have multiplied, land has exchanged hands; Government should look for alternative land to resettle the people. We are government; we can do something other than this. The same people that we are going to disorganise are Ugandans and they are voters of NRM.

Mr Speaker, thank you so much for giving me –(Interjections)- I am going to photocopy these documents and then I will bring them. I am going to organise them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member requested the Speaker that she has travelled for 12 hours, she left at 4.00 a.m., to come and listen to Prof. Kabwegyere making the statement and in case the statement does not reflect what she has found on the ground, she would wish to speak. So, she asked to speak and that is why I have given her that opportunity. (Applause) 

Honourable members, maybe at this stage before we debate this matter, we should have the minister respond to those specific issues -

4.07
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really thank the honourable member for her contribution. First of all, it is true there have been efforts of handling this problem and she has enumerated several of them. However, they have not solved the problem. That is why the President directed that this problem be handled. That also explains why we have taken long since that directive. 

As you can see, the honourable member has been in meetings, which we have held together, not once; I can bet five times in her presence. So, what she is presenting should have changed by now, given what more work has been done, including the involvement of the local leaders as members of the resettlement committee.

The land she is talking about, where there was an allocation of 12 acres, was a temporary allocation and she knows that is true. That temporary allocation was still in the de-gazetted area. So, the settlement there was temporary. What is happening now, as she said very rightly, is that there are people living on the rock, on nothing. There are people with 12 acres who are temporarily settled. The committee is in search for land to give to the landless, those living on the rock, and among the decisions made was that some of that land that was temporarily given away, which is recommended now for de-gazetting, should be reduced to give to the landless. 

The argument, as you could hear, is that those who got 12 should still have 12. Now, the question is: where do we get the land to give the landless? This is a challenge we have discussed and shared with all the leaders and that is why ultimately, we agreed that the chairpersons of those districts, since they are the presidents of the districts and they are representing the interest of the leaders, must be members of the resettlement committee. So, the chairman of Bukwo is a member of the resettlement committee, the RDC is a member of the resettlement committee and we have also included the Chief Administrative Officer for the understanding of the local terrain. 

Mr Speaker, I therefore think the case presented by the honourable member is an illustration of how complex the issue has been. Until we scientifically and technically agree on how the land can be recovered and how the land –(Interjections)- but the technical thing is we do not have land that is “standing away”; we are recommending a de-gazettement. Any member here who says he has land available for re-allocation, we can talk about. 

However, the issue we have is that there are people in a given zone and the land is there and part of it is a game park. So, we are recommending in this presentation that some of that land is de-gazetted and then in the process, we can share that land with the landless. For some of the people who have had land, including those who got what they should not have got, we compromised and said we should get a piece from them so that it is given to these landless. At the end of the day, much as we will not have solved the problem of landlessness, at least we will have people on a piece of land where they can survive. That is as much as I can respond to the honourable member’s contribution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has come to my attention that our Committee on Government Assurances had captured the President’s directive as an assurance. They have actually visited this place and they were ready to also make a statement to the House on this, but they are not here.
 
The chairman has sent a message that they are involved in this matter, they took this as an assurance of the House and they have gone there and they would also like to make a contribution. So, can we defer any further debate on this matter. We have heard from the minister, we have heard from the member for Bukwo, we have heard a response from the minister, we could also hear from the Committee on Government Assurances and then we debate this thing in a more complete way. Would that be proper?

MS CHEMUTAI: Mr Speaker, you have heard from Bukwo but you have not heard from Kween and you have not heard from Kapchorwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, can we now deal with that at that time, all of it, because it seems there is clearly a serious issue about this matter that needs to be resolved. I am dealing with the procedure. I am proposing the way we will proceed with this matter so that we can deal with it in finality, not having half debates and we leave this matter still outstanding. 

My proposal is, let the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances also come and brief the House, open all these matters together and we debate it comprehensively and take a decision. Every issue is outstanding; there is nothing which is concluded.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I think that is good guidance. Can I also recommend that the committee also meets our technical team, and if need be, meets the resettlement committee before this House is apprised on the matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the committee has already been there; that is the brief I am getting. They would want to make a report to the House on this subject because they captured this presidential directive on which the minister is speaking as an assurance to Parliament. So, they have handled it. They would want to report also so that we have a comprehensive coverage of the subject. That could be the best way to handle this matter. 

The team on the ground is not the team from Parliament. What we are saying is that there is a committee of Parliament ready to report to the House on this matter; can we defer debate and then wait for them to speak and then we see how to move? This matter will wait for comment from the committee and then we see how to move from there. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like raise a procedural issue. We need to talk about time. What hon. Tete has said true; if you have been to Bukwo and if you have been to the rocks she has talked about in Bukwo, in Kween, when somebody dies, you need to spend Shs 200,000 to go and look for a piece of land to bury. For toilets they use buveera. The situation is really bad. That is why I want a decision on the time since we are even going for recess.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the committee chairperson will be ready on Tuesday to brief the House on this matter. So, it is before recess.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is a serious matter and we need to deal with it as quickly as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us deal with this matter on Tuesday when the chairperson of the committee is ready to brief the House on what their findings were. We shall then see how to bring in every discussion on the subject and then we see how to conclude it. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MOBUKU YOUTH INSTITUTE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not able to find the Minister for Gender. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at least I saw the minister here.

4.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought the minister was around but it is obvious she is not. She may have gone to do final preparations and may have been caught by traffic or some other issues. We are going to ask the minister responsible to be included on Tuesday’s Order Paper.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the clerk capture this particular item for Tuesday afternoon. We have item no. 5 and the minister is ready.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW ID 55,460,000 (US$ 83,750,000) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 132 KV MIRAMA-KABALE ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE AND DISTRIBUTION PROJECT

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow US$ 83,750,000 from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the construction of the 132 KV Mirama-Kabale Electricity Transmission Line and Distribution Project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee, the Committee on National Economy, to examine and come back to the House within the timeframe provided by the rules of this House. Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO 
THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR BY THE PARLIAMENTARY AD HOC COMMITTEE 
IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR 
AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I proposed the question for adoption of the report of the committee and debate had started. We are using five minutes each. Honourable member for Adjumani, you had already debated on this matter. 

4.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the members in thanking the committee based on their findings. I also thank the author of the minority report. The committee has raised a number of issues, most of which, from the beginning of this debate, we have discovered have been overtaken by events positively. 

Mr Speaker, I rise to speak about two issues. One is the issue that was in court. This Parliament needs to make a finding of facts and if necessary, an amendment to be made. Hon. Kyanjo raised this issue about when the Attorney-General conceded to most of the issues and when Parliament wanted to join, they were blocked. It was a technical constitutional matter. Probably, as we are debating, we should be able to find out how best we can harmonise this. I was in court myself as an interested Member of Parliament and seeing Parliament being locked out was very painful. I really want to thank hon. Kyanjo for bringing that up.

Secondly, there is the issue of what is coming up in this Parliament - people making statements, allegations against each other, affecting the reputation and the image of this House. Mr Speaker, I have been a chairman of an ad hoc committee. When they see you today putting on a different necktie or driving a moderate vehicle better than others, they will say you have received a bribe. This is very painful for this House. It reduces this House into a gossip chamber and a laughing stock, that anybody can say anything since we enjoy immunity. 

I rise with a very heavy heart and pain to say that we do not bother to find out in detail about allegations against each other. I was a chairman of an ad hoc committee and I am now the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. There is an inquiry on members who allegedly got bribes to defeat the ad hoc committee on energy. I excused myself because I was the same chairperson who investigated the report; I decided to stay aside and let my vice-chairperson take over, just to give confidence to the witnesses who will come. However, when I was doing this, one member from this House, hon. Christopher Acire, said, “Yes, because those who took the bribe were not named; so even you could have been the one who took the bribe.” I raised the matter with the Leader of the Opposition, but this is part of the challenges we have.

Recently, hon. Werikhe is being implicated for having been a minister. What wrong did you do by becoming a minister and now a chairperson of the ad hoc committee? I think we need to raise the bar of the debate and allegations that we make. We are Members of Parliament first of all and we owe a duty to protect the image and reputation of this House. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MR AMOS OKOT: (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, Mr chairperson, for the report that you have presented and even the minority report. 

Mr Speaker, indeed when we went through and saw the terms of reference, it was such a huge exercise and work for the committee to handle. However, to the best of my knowledge, it was supposed to come out of the allegation that bribery took place in the oil and gas sector. However, we still have to appreciate the committee for the good work that they have done.

Mr Speaker, to eliminate being suspicious of each other, maybe we need to amend our rules when the time comes, so that anybody who may have any allegations against another – If an ad hoc committee has been put in place, we have to put it in our rules that members of the ad hoc committee should not come from the very committee being investigated or should not have a background or connections to that very exercise that is being investigated. 

Uganda, among other countries in the world, is ranked high in corruption. So, somebody may suspect a member wrongfully and yet deep inside the person’s heart, he holds integrity which needs not be damaged. Yesterday, an honourable member said here that his account has been frozen simply because of wrong allegations. This is something which should not be tolerated. Although we know time will prove the history; we are living in a world where you may not be able to discover certain issues now, but time will prove them. 

Mr Speaker, I believe the committee had a very hard time in coming to a decision and forming an opinion. This is because when the chairman was presenting a report here, he talked about the different allegations that were put in place. There were allegations against hon. Kutesa’s concerning €23 million and hon. Hillary Onek’s €6 million. These are big amounts of money. A lot of money where somebody can raise the filament to say, “Why are you doing all this nonsense?” 

Indeed, the committee took a great stance to come out with the opinion because on page 26 of their report, they stated very clearly that they tried to call Ms Susan Barret of the UK but instead of getting at least a meeting or getting a one-on-one talk about the same matter, they ended up getting a family telephone talk.

The committee also stated that they tried to write to UAE but did not get a response. This is on page 27. They still had to rely on the report that was sent before when our President, having heard about that kind of allegation, took a step. At this point we have to thank him so much because at least after hearing about a matter of that kind, he took a step to find out the truth. The committee had to rely on those kinds of correspondence which, in my view, was a very hard moment for them. However, they did this so that they can form an opinion regarding the matter on table. Again somebody can be convinced that the anti-money laundering law would have put these people to question, even about the ethical behaviour alone. So, I want to appreciate the committee for that.

I asked a question yesterday outside this House; most of these correspondences are in Arabic but I went through the report and I never read any other interpretation of this Arabic -(Member timed out.)

4.30
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I have some issues for clarification. 

Failure to get information from the United Arab Emirates: Mr Speaker, the committee indicated clearly that they failed to obtain reports or information from the United Arab Emirates. I believe next time we may also need information from such an area; can we get to know exactly our relationship with them is? What is government going to do to ensure that if we want information as a country, we can easily access it because next time we may need the same and things may become so impossible?

On the issue of the time taken, which was too long, Mr Speaker, some of the challenges mentioned, in my view, were manageable. I will give an example. The committee said that there was the issue of a delay of the release of funds for their operations. I believe that is within our mandate because this exercise was so sensitive. When you take too long to accomplish a sensitive exercise, there are a lot of temptations and interruptions that will come in because we are all human beings.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think when we are setting up ad hoc committees, we should know these are special committees for special investigations so we should be able to provide the resources, which we can. Because of this, we were able to realise that many of the issues were overtaken by other events. So, what is the cost effective benefit of this report? To which extent are we benefiting from this? Having lost in terms of time, many events have taken place. So, I think we need to review that when we are setting up ad hoc committees.

There was a recommendation about amending the existing procurement laws as a means of giving way to protect and promote our local investments. Mr Speaker, this is critical. Ugandans need involvement, participation and many of them are in the business sector. If this recommendation is what they thought and are still thinking as a remedy to solve the blockages our people have been experiencing, we need to hear from government whether there is any initiative that has started to ensure that these laws are amended or not. If not the reflection here is without the amendment of the existing procurement laws, our local investors will not be protected and promoted.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, to me whistle-blowing is healthy. Though today we are seeing more of the disadvantages of the issue that came on the Floor of this Parliament but in other circumstances, we have benefited. Some people brought information here and investigations were done, especially in relation to the scandal that happened in the Office of Prime Minister. When hon. Odonga Otto came here and said that some of our money was spent on purchasing vehicles, it helped the country to know some of the truth. So, I think it is all about management and to what we can put in place to have verifications and maybe to demand for fair justification of these issues before we constitute the ad hoc committees. Otherwise, in my view it is healthy, it is dependent on management. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.35
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened yesterday and I did not contribute but today, I thank you for giving me this chance. 

Whereas this debate brought a lot of confusion, disunity and suspicion in this House, I propose that this debate be taken or given a short life simply because everybody - our senior members like Sam Kutesa, Hilary Onek and now my brother Werikhe - are also involved and every person here has got at least a friend. Mr Speaker, this has become a blame game and you will find that it only annoys some of us. We become irritated, annoyed and disappointed to find out that what we were hotly debating here was something that did not even exist. So, we find it a problem.

However, Mr Speaker, this cannot lead us to amend our laws. This is because in some cases, facts were obtained; for instance, as my sister over there commented, still we cannot say that since these members could have been using this to fight their own wars - because we shall establish that some people who want to punish their fellow members can only come here to this Parliament and enjoy this opportunity of immunity to defame others.

Mr Speaker, I propose that since this committee did its work and proved that what was being alleged was totally lies and whereas, as some members commented, some political giants could have been fighting their own wars using this House, this must be put to a halt. This must stop from today because when people want to go and argue, they should not come and cause confusion in this House. We are brothers and sisters; whether you belong to the other side and I belong to this side, we are together because all of us have red blood.

In addition, when you look at that brother of mine who is waving to me from the other side, you may find that at one time, my grandparents also waved to his grandparents. It is on this ground, therefore, that I kindly request that this debate be short-lived, so that it does not continue annoying us – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give to the honourable member and the House is that the committee sat and gave us a report. If you have read the report, under bullet 1.5 - challenges faced by the committee - it says, “The complexity of investigating alleged corruption: Bribery being such a discreet vice and further noting that one of the terms of reference of the committee was to inquire into allegations of bribery of high-ranking officials of the Government of Uganda by some oil companies; and considering that the alleged transactions are said to have occurred in multiple countries, there inevitably arose the need for sophisticated criminal investigative capabilities, which Parliament as a legislature did not possess.” 

When you go down on No.3 they say, “The committee notes that Parliament on its own could not easily and expeditiously access other countries’ institutions without going through other organs of the executive namely, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Uganda’s missions abroad and the DPP yet some of the office bearers in these institutions had been implicated in the bribery allegations. It is noteworthy that at the on-set of the allegations of the bribery in the House in October 2011, members were informed that the DPP, in liaison with the Uganda Police Force, had instituted investigations…”  

Mr Speaker, when you read further, the committee ends by saying, “As such, the committee failed to gain entry in some of the countries involved namely Malta and UAE, where the transactions were alleged to have originated. The committee therefore relied on third party information void of meeting the very institutions concerned on its own.” 

This is in the report and this is the main report. The committee members, all of them, told this House that had it not been for these problems, most probably they would be here with a different report. So my information to you is that in this report, the committee is not saying that there was nothing to find; they are only saying that they failed to find the information. I do not know why we continue to blame colleagues who raised this matter when in fact in the report, they are showing the challenges which led to the failure to implicate the said people. That is the information I want to give to you. Next time, you read the report.

MR KAMARA: I thank you, my sister. However, what I watched here was a drama and in drama, there are always -(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you, Mr Chairman, for the report that we have received. I have got three comments to make on the report that was submitted. My comments will be on the skills required, and that is employment for our children, on the local content and then the investigations of the privileges of the Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, from the report, it is clearly stated that the oil industry is not labour-intensive therefore, it employs very few people. I think we need to take this very seriously for purposes of planning for our children, who are taking on courses in the petroleum industry. Many institutions and universities have now started courses in petroleum and I think they need serious planning and guidance as to whether these courses that these children are doing are actually going to get them the jobs. They should be looking at the collateral part of the industry, where they can get jobs.

At one time, Makerere University was training students of commerce in insurance. They would graduate with quality in insurance and a time came when they found that the products were not getting jobs, and it was phased out for some time. Probably, it has been revived. I want us to look at the oil industry and see whether our children, who are really opting for this industry – because they know it is highly paying and that is the general information – will be able to get jobs here. They should be guided appropriately such that they take on the courses which will help them eventually to get the jobs.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of local content, sometime back we had a meeting with an oil company - those that were working on the oil in the Albertine Graben – and they told us how much Ugandan companies are participating in this industry as it develops. They actually told us that about 62 per cent of the activities was being done by Ugandan businessmen and companies. However, when you look at the value of what Ugandans were doing, it was less than 10 per cent. So you wonder whether our local industry is really benefitting from this. 

I think we do not have a clear policy on this. If a Ugandan company cannot supply huge machinery but there is a company outside which can, how does a Uganda element come into that? If capital is the restriction, how does our position as Ugandans make us access such businesses? I think we need to look at this and make sure that our local companies can actually benefit from the industry.

Finally, Mr Speaker, yesterday hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo made a comment and said that it seems like some action should be taken against the members who brought these documents to this Parliament. You know, every investigation starts with suspicion and I really think that if we are to do that, we shall be gagging members. I appreciate the fact that it is not really good for somebody to come up with information in bad faith and bring it to Parliament, but if somebody really brings information in good faith believing that it is true, why should we not protect such members? 

When the documents were brought here, all of us almost had a high level of probability that maybe they were true. We were convinced as a House. Even the members who are rising up against them now did not say that those documents, at face value, were actually wrong. If we have reasonable grounds to believe that something could be true and a member is actually doing it in good faith, I think we need to protect them because many of such reports have given us credible results and helped the nation.

It is not cheap to fight corruption. Actually, some efforts may not yield results when fighting corruption. Some people could even lose lives. You could even cling onto documents which are not correct. However, every effort needs to be taken to ensure that we fight corruption in this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have general comments to make. 

One, Members have called for the general respect of colleagues and this is true; we should bring issues here when we have facts. However, if we insist on this, that will mean that Members who have facts that they may not be able to verify because they do not have the mechanisms to, may feel intimidated and may not bring issues to Parliament. 

So, we need to move cautiously so that when they come to you, Mr Speaker, you have a way to handle this; otherwise, Members are going to be intimidated. In this case of the oil, for example, if we insist that Members who brought the issue did a bad thing, really, it would be unfair because to the best of their knowledge, this is what they had and they presented it to Parliament such that you can investigate and investigations have gone on.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is on stepping aside. It should be a culture, really. When you are mentioned somewhere, whether it is true or not but people insist that there is something to be investigated about you, it is better to step aside and let history exonerate you. Like in this case, I think Parliament was very fair because we had moved to censure the ministers but the Speaker advised us and said, “No, we have a committee in place, do not go that far.”So, I think we must have the culture of stepping aside when we are mentioned in cases. 

My colleague, hon. Kamara, the debate should go on. Why should you feel annoyed when this debate goes on? We want to find the truth. Up to now, the Members are not exonerated because there are issues. The committee is saying they met challenges and if I can remind you, colleague, there was a mention of a certain job that was not advertised but by some coincidence, this is an irony actually, the job was given to one of the relatives, I think a daughter, to one of the ministers mentioned. What coincidence can this be? The job is not advertised but by some funny coincidence, it goes to the daughter of a minister. So, there are issues. We must tell the public that much as the report is in place, there are issues that are still outstanding.

Mr Speaker, thank you for the time. My colleague from Bulamogi mentioned corruption; it is true that when we have corruption of this level, people will be suspicious all the time even when you are not in the wrong. People have a reason to be suspicious because it has become the order of the day. Thank you very much.

4.51
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report although it is too late and has been overtaken by events. We, the host community, are paying a very high price and we thought that since this motion was about regularising, Government even without waiting for this report - because the Executive should not wait for a Parliament select committee or ad hoc committee to do its work.

We have challenges of being evicted in the oil area, we have challenges of the Balaalo coming back to Buliisa and challenges of the general delay of the development plan. We have challenges of private security being in charge of the oil area, challenges of recoverable costs not benefiting and building capacity of institutions of Government, challenges of moving unilaterally without bringing on board the neighbours like the DRC and South Sudan, which would bring economies of scale. These are big issues which the regularisation should have handled either by this committee report or by the Executive. To date, we have not got an update on the Floor of Parliament.

Honourable colleagues, I do not belong to the two extremes - those who want to pin some ministers and those who want to exonerate them. I do not think the preoccupation of this Parliament should be either to exonerate or implicate. That is not our purpose. We cannot reduce ourselves and deteriorate to that level. We are not pleaders hired to speak for anybody. We should look for the bigger picture. 

I am disappointed because from yesterday, the debate is deteriorating to the level of speaking about implicating and not implicating. There were 10 issues in this motion and others. When I went to this committee, I never talked about implicating anybody because I am above that. I talked about the big issues of recoverable costs and local content. Why isn’t the debate bringing out that?

If the public is to judge the Ninth Parliament against what was presented here and what we are debating now, our performance is more dismal than what the Speaker in the Chair said some time back because we are disappointing citizens. We are not rising to the occasion, we are not giving hope to the people of this country and there was no thief that day. You see how hollow and empty Parliament is.

The whistle-blower’s law is our law, passed by the last Parliament and therefore, I cannot stand here and start punching holes in this very important law. Do you want impunity in this country? We are not francophone where somebody is guilty until proven innocent. In Uganda, you are innocent until proved guilty. So, why are we behaving as if we were hired to speak for somebody? We have an anti-corruption forum in this Parliament; why are we causing ourselves to have this forum if we cannot speak on this kind of occasion? 

It is true there are winners and losers in this contract and they are the ones who bring this information, but colleagues, you should be aware by now that it is not Parliament which first investigated this information. The President of this country, the fountain of honour, already involved the Police. Actually, we are doing thorough investigation. So, why should anybody be accusing those who brought the information here? If you went to State House, the President sent the same organs of Government to investigate. So, why are we deteriorating to fighting personalities?

Mr Speaker, I would expect the bigger issues. You have heard of problems in Hoima of compensation, of the refinery, lack of a resettlement plan - that is what I thought this Parliament would be debating to give hope to the host community. The delayed development plan, the affirmative action of training areas for us who come from the region and none of my people has ever gone for training from Government. We only get social corporate responsibility from the oil companies which is by their resolution and not taxpayers’ money.

Honourable colleagues, for the last three years, we have been asking for an inter-ministerial presentation in this House - what UNRA is doing, what all these ministries are doing and what NAADs is doing. We went to the committee –(Member timed out.)

4.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, as you may realise, I was the major seconder of this motion. When I look back on the 13 years I have been a member of this House, if there is any contribution I have made to this country, it is to second that motion. That sector, the way it was before that motion, was shrouded in secrecy, tainted with Bills bordering on corruption. 

When we brought that motion, it was in good faith; we appeared before the “Werikhe committee” and all the nine issues we had raised in the motion were addressed. The issue about the individuals was secondary; it was minor, but I see us running away from the real issues.

Colleagues, we are talking about an industry worth US$200 billion and we have trivialised it. Let me tell you, there is an opportunity for us to jumpstart this country so that we become a middle class country. There is an opportunity, but there is also a risk to have the oil curse because many African countries indeed have been victims of the oil curse. Why can’t we address ourselves to the main issues raised by the petitioners and indeed in the report? 

Honourable colleagues, as you may know, there is an industry I know more about, and that is the legal industry. Let me tell you, and any lawyer will tell you, if you fail to get a conviction, it does not mean that the crime was not committed. Any average lawyer will tell you that. If you fail to get a conviction, it does not mean that the crime was not committed. It could be due to bad prosecution, it could be due to witnesses turned hostile and many other reasons. 

If a president says, yes, he looks at it and he finds reason for him to investigate, why do you condemn a Member who looks at it and says that there is a reason to investigate? Why do you condemn the Member? Secondly, where does a Member of Parliament have the opportunity to have a matter investigated other than raising it here and it is pushed to the relevant committee of Parliament? How can you condemn a Member of Parliament doing his own job diligently? He says, “Look here, I have received this information, honourable Speaker, honourable members, here it is, let Parliament look at it,” and you blame him? You come saying they should be referred, prosecuted, you need to ban them; really, we are guarding Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, my view is this, countries that were deserts 30 years ago have been turned into first destinations for tourists because they utilise their oil resource prudently and correctly. Countries that are major exporters and big members of OPEC have 70 percent of their population living below the poverty line, especially on this continent. Just go and see what is going on in West Africa; just go and see what is going on in Nigeria. I was reading the Forbes Magazine of 2014, the third richest person on the continent is Isabel Dos Santos, the daughter of the President of Angola, and you know why, it is about oil and we are here playing around, protecting individuals, come on –(Member timed out.)

5.02
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think from where my honourable and senior colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu, has stopped, there was a problem and everybody still knows there is a problem of corruption in Uganda. What has still become a problem to us is how to catch those who are accused of involvement in the wrong. 

This committee, which was tasked with the responsibility of finding out, of investigating, has given its report. Let us receive the report and if we are not satisfied with the report, we can launch another investigation because according to the processes of court, there is an appeal and there is even a re-appeal after an appeal. (Laughter) If you do not have confidence in the judge who handled your case or the level at which the case was handled, you go to another level. What I do not accept is again the committee report being used to turn against the whistle blower, the courageous people who took up the initiative to tell us that there is something wrong.

Even with or without bringing that information to Parliament, Ugandans know that there is a problem here. Ugandans know that there is corruption in the oil sector, so why take this action of shutting down people from bringing information to us? Do you think tomorrow, if we turn our guns on our own colleagues and incriminate them for bringing information to us, somebody out there will stand up to say something wrong is happening here and there? Never! It will never happen. You would have cleared the way for corruption to thrive without handbrakes and by so doing, you will have put this country into serious doom.

I request you to re-examine your minds especially when it comes to the tendency to incriminate the honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament, who brought the data here and raised the issue here about this suspected case of corruption. I would like to end by saying this, my honourable colleagues, you should stand with your heads up.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How else can you stand? (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: Do not move with your heads down like you are ashamed, like you feel guilty; this is what I mean because the direction being taken now can lead to somebody feeling guilty, withdrawing and feeling sorry for the action which he or she took. This is what I mean by someone moving with his head up because you have done Uganda a noble thing. What we know is that corruption is here. We are coming; the next government will make sure that this corruption will not thrive anywhere. You cannot hide under our government. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it does seem that the contributions are exhausted. Is there a Member who would like to contribute on the subject? 

5.05
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Sir. I just wanted to add my voice –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not picked you yet; yes, I was still examining those who are standing but -(Laughter) 

MR MUHUMUZA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for bringing this report and maybe among the recommendations are the terms of reference.

I am just happy that this report has come up. We have issues even now, in the oil sector, and especially the Bunyoro area. We can see people are still grabbing land as we talk. The wanainchi are being evicted for big men here to grab land in the Bunyoro area. So, this has opened our eyes. Next time, we shall be able to bring more information here. I thank the whistle blowers and even the committee for the report. This is not the end but just the beginning for us to begin the fight. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just an observation and also to guide this House. 

My experience in this House -[HON. MEMBER: “You want to guide the House?”]– Yes. My experience in this House is that all the documents which are laid on the Table - if you look at the Hansards of 2008, when the Vice President, Rt Hon. Ssekandi, was the Speaker, he ruled and said any document laid on the Table must be authenticated and must have a source. I can see now where the problem is. Anybody can bring a document as a whistle blower but with an ulterior intention. How do we cure such a situation? I have read the report from the select committee and seen the documents handed to them and it has been proved beyond reasonable doubt that the information in those documents was not correct. 

For instance, honestly speaking, if somebody can allege - in this world of today, there is nobody who can prove with evidence that 18 million Euros can move from one account to another without being monitored in a whole country. But here is somebody who brings a document, downloaded with no source, no information, to the Floor of Parliament and we waste a lot of time debating such a fake document. What do we do? It is by common sense; honestly speaking, there is no way in the world today that one’s account can receive 18 million Euros without being detected. This is a problem. 

Mr Speaker, I want you to implore this House that for every document laid on the Table, somebody should state the source because as you know, we are in politics and people have different agenda but they should not waste the time of Parliament. Persons saying they are whistle blowers must provide the source of such documents and they must be authenticated. Otherwise, if we continue like this, I am finding it a problem, Mr Speaker. Thank you and that is my observation.

5.10
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Debating this report at this time is not wastage of time. Yes, this debate would have been debated some months ago but we are very grateful that finally, it has seen the Floor of Parliament, so that we can move.

We have a lot of hope in that sector. Whenever we move around, we have even tried to forget the other sectors to the extent that when we talk about tourism, industries and so on, what rings much in our minds is the oil sector. We all hope that much as we are what we are right now, sooner than later we may go to the Promised Land when we are set with our oil refineries. 

My concern as we debate this is that there is no smoke without fire. Definitely, if the President thought it befitting to carry out his own investigation, he must have heard something somewhere and when colleagues picked it, they must have heard some rumours or seen some smoke somewhere. Therefore, our major concern, Mr Speaker, right now should be to put mechanisms in place to ensure that our oil does not become part of the famous oil curse like the one we read about in other countries. Can we jealously guard this sector to the benefit of everybody? That is the gist of our concern. How can we? Where are the loopholes? What can be done to ensure that oil benefits each and everybody? Are we giving equal opportunities? 

Mr Speaker, there are several opportunities for scholarships to the UK and other areas, especially special universities for oil studies. Howe many Ugandans have been given that opportunity to go and study in that sector? We know that scholarships are being given, but are they given to the extent that everybody has access to them or to the extent that every region is ably represented in giving out those scholarships? Local content is also very important. How best can we ensure that our local people get this benefit? How can we ensure that we all participate in this area? 

We also need to be updated; we have heard of testing for so many years. How many barrels are we going to be testing to confirm this is okay? I am saying this because we are getting rumours that testing is still continuing and in bulk. We do not know how many barrels should be tested and where they are being tested from. This information should be given to us so that we do not take rumours that we are already exploring oil and we are already in the business. So those are the issues that we should now handle, to know that testing will take us up to this stage and so far this is how much we have tested, so that everything is in black and white. 

Finally, on the issue of whistle blowers, it should not be us, Members of Parliament, to discourage this because when you read the Whistle Blowers Act, there is no -(Member time out.)

5.16
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I have been following this debate quietly but with a lot of interest. There have been a lot of accusations and counter accusations, a lot of innuendos, defences and gossip. 

There is a lot of optimism about this oil industry in this country. That is why, of course, it has attracted a lot of emotions. We are looking at oil in this country as salvation but as I follow these discussions and debates on this Floor and outside this House, the laws that relate to the oil industry are not being adequately digested. 

There is excitement yes, and quite a lot of it is born out of ignorance and optimism. Yesterday, oil hit the lowest price in five years and is still going down. This year alone, the price of oil has collapsed by 40 percent, from US$115 to US$63.27 per barrel, and when you look at the international oil intelligence figures, you expect this figure to drop to about US$62 next year. The major producers of oil are scrambling for a diminishing demand market. I would like to think that our biggest consumers of oil in the world, the United States, today is pumping nine million barrels of oil per day and that is from 8.5 million barrels. By 2035, we expect America to be the biggest exporter of oil.We also have neighbouring countries that are generating oil. 

Mr Speaker, I think the processthat this House should start is to seek means of  getting alternative revenue sources for this country. The future of the oil industry is not as lucrative as we think. I would advocate that as we discuss this oil matter, as we look at the future of oil and how it can benefit this country, the Minister of Energy and the Committee on Natural Resources should try to do intelligence work on the future of oil and how it can uplift the standards of living in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.19 
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I sat herethis afternoon, I recalled what happened here on the day this matter was brought before this House.I remmeber on that day, Mr Speaker, I stood up several times, but I could not catch your eye. There were so many people here and you could see a Parliament that had resolved to fight corruption. 

Mr Speaker, this afternoon, I remembered my sister, the late hon.Cerinah Nebanda. As I sit here this afternoon, I ask: where are the accusers and the accused? Apart from hon. Amama Mbabazi seated behind there -although he has also changed the seat from the front to the backbench - where are the others?

Mr Speaker, by this report and the way we have conducted ourselves during this particular debate, the Ninth Parliament is being judged. It is as if we have betrayed Ugandans. Your Parliament looks so fatigued and almost collapsing yet we are just a few metres away from the finishing line.That our colleagues who stood up with papers in their hands inciting this Parliament to move are not here while this  matter, which has been on the order paper for several days, is being discussed, is also very telling. The fact that the hon. Sam Kutesa, who some people are trying to defend, and his colleagues are not here with us, shows that this Parliament is nolonger being taken seriously.

Mr Speaker, justice delayed is justice denied, goes the sayingby learned people like you. The committee was given 30 daysbut it has taken years to report. Parliament, in its wisdom, called on Members who were accused to stand aside but a one Severino Twinobusingye came up to stop that, and it does not require one to be an expert to tell in whose interestshe was working.

Mr Speaker, that the committee did not go to the United Arab Emirates and Malta, what does that say about the investigations? It shows the investigations were incomplete and when investigations are incomplete, you cannot draw final conclusions.

There are obvious things in this report that need not be defended. There is the minister’s daughter; who appointed her on merit for a job that was never advertised? How do you explain that? There is the Twinobusingye drama and the behaviour of our own Attorney-General, who chose to side with people who were accussing us instead of standing to defend Parliament. 

The report does not say that bribes were taken neither does it say that bribes were not taken. It only says that the committee failed because of the various challenges as listed.The accussed should therefore be very grateful to this Parliament that atleast it gave them a chance to be heard. Already, His Excellency the President was investigating hon. Amama Mbabazi. He had sanctioned an investigation against him, but Parliament came in and gave himthe opportunity to be heard.He should be very grateful. 

No one should be calling upon you, Mr Speaker, to apologise to anyone. Infact, those people should appraoch you in the evening and bring a cock and a bunch of bananas to your home to thank you for allowing Parliament to give them the opportunity to be heard.

Finally, I must say that one time -(Interjections)- I will not take the information, thank you. One time this Parliament sat to investigate Idi Amin on the issues of ivory. He was not convicted but so many years after, people are still referring to that report. This investigation was not done in vain. It is a document which our children will refer to.

The fact that the hon. Michael Werikhe, the chairman,is one of the people who once worked in the Ministry of Energy, is a fact and truth. I do not expect you - Maybe you did it or maybe you did not, but if it were me, I would not have been able to betray my colleagues. If it were me, I would not be willing to give information about my colleagues.

Mr Speaker, all in all, what I am saying is that we are asking -(Interruption)- I will take the information now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in that same way, we have come to the conclusion of this debate.

5.25
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Mr Speaker, it is so squeezed here -(Laughter)- a factor I am experiencing for the first time in 28 years. I better get used to this. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I do not have an intention of debating this report because it is clear. The findings we have in the report are clear and I do not think I would have much to add to it. I just want to thank the committee for a job obviously well done, the limitations and shortcomings notwithstanding. 

The information I wanted to give to my sister, hon. Betty Nambooze, is that in my case, because she was referring to me, there was no allegation against me until the day it was produced in Parliament here. So, I want to ask her to do what she had asked someone else earlier to do, to read the report more thoroughly because she will make that finding.

Secondly, I want to make a point; you know you people, you have built your reputation through hardwork. Each one of us here has a reputation. You have worked hard to be what you are. It is not fair, it is not right that someone comes out of the blue and seeks to bring you down on the basis of a falsehood when they know that it is a falsehood. In civilised societies, that behaviour is not allowed because if we allow that kind of behaviour, I do not know how we will live as civilised people. 

I recall, very vividly, the debate that day. The allegation against me was from Wiki Leaks, that I had been eyeing a bribe of US$ 200 million; eyeing a bribe! Hon. Christine Abia stood here and said that my grandchildren would be executed, punished, for the crimes I had committed – for eyeing a bribe. This is a Member of Parliament; seriously! I will have occasion to speak about this in another forum because this is a matter that I intend to take up certainly. 

The findings about me are very clear and obvious. You see, evidence or fact is not by inference; it is fact. It is there or it is not there. What was the allegation against me here? What? Those allegations which were investigated were allegations that people had received money - payments in banks – and the amounts were specified. What was the allegation against me that prompted hon. Christine Abia to threaten my grandchildren with death in this honourable House; what?

I am glad the committee’s findings are very clear that all the things that were said about me were not only false, but actually were imagined. I have no relationship, not even loose links, with any of the things that were said –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, please conclude. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, maybe I am tempted to go on and on yet maybe it is not necessary. Let me just conclude by saying that I think we need to have rules in this House. Just to repeat what hon. James Kakooza said, we had handled this kind of situation before in this Parliament. Maybe hon. Abdu Katuntu had not come here; he has been here only for 13 years, as you know. We had set standards that if documents are to be presented in this House, they must be shown to the Speaker in advance and the Speaker must be convinced that there is reasonable ground for he or she that seeks to present this document to believe that there was reason to pursue them in the House.

You cannot simply produce documents out of the blue, alleging the kind of allegations that were being made against senior citizens of this country, when they are obviously false and everybody knows they are false, they are made up! How? What kind of Parliament are you? 

Mr Speaker, I am now a member of the rules committee and I want to undertake before you, honourable colleagues, that we will discuss this matter in the rules committee with the view to amending our rules, so that we are very clear on this one. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If there is no other contribution on this matter, honourable members, don’t you think we should process the recommendations that were made?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at the report, it is really a voluminous report. It has a lot of recommendations not actually in one block, but scattered. Some of those recommendations have been overtaken by events, some by some of the laws which have already been passed. The guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is: can’t we reduce this in matrix form to show what recommendations the committee had made, what has been done and what needs to be done as the way of guiding the process?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is what I said at the beginning and I had hoped that the committee chair would help me do that. However, that has not been done. Now that I have access to all the recommendations, I want to process them one by one. If one has been overtaken by events, we say so and we move forward. If one has not been overtaken by events, we take a decision on it. 

On the specific issues of the bribery allegations, there is no recommendation that has been overtaken by events. There are only recommendations on the sector relating to procurement issues, local content and several other recommendations like those that have been overtaken by events. Most of the recommendations were already taken care of in the four Bills that were passed in this House. The first was about exploration and matters related to that activity. The second was about refining and processing. The third was about storage, transportation and things like this, which we passed. 

Some of the recommendations in this report, and as the chairman said, had recommendations presented in the course of the debate on those Bills and they were adopted by the House. So, we will be singling those out and dealing with them. There were other recommendations that related to how we handle the money that comes from the oil sector, and we have just passed the law on public finance and with the amendment of the title; you know what it is now called after it was passed. 

So, many of the recommendations relating to this sector have already been taken care of in the laws that were passed by this House. This means we will just be confirming that, that is taken care of and we move forward so that we do not leave anything to doubt that some things were skipped. 

However, what I want to say here, before we start, is that there is not a single recommendation that has been stated by the committee on the allegations of bribery. All they said was that on all those things, they did not find anything that can confirm that there was such a thing. So, there is no recommendation that we need to take decision on, on those allegations. They cleared the three citizens of this country before they moved on to deal with recommendations. I thought I should make that guidance before we begin processing the recommendations. So, can we process them?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. It is now over two years since this motion was moved with the committee being put in place. There was, at some level of the debate, a promise by the Prime Minister and Government that there were some administrative measures by Government, beyond the laws we handled, which would be undertaken to cure and regularise. Would it not be proper for Parliament not to proceed unilaterally?

When we process our own report without hearing from the Government side, it is like a lot of unrefined information, investigations without a Government position would sound a bit unilateral. I think it would be better that we process after listening from the Government side on what they have done to regularise. That will help us to proceed in a complementary manner between the Executive and Parliament, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had asked for a contribution on this subject and nobody said anything. I am not under duty to compel anybody to speak.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that it was tradition that after this has been done-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you should have risen, hon. Minister.

MR LOKERIS: Okay, much obliged. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to thank the members of both committees for the efforts they exerted to look at the gist of what was being discussed and what we asked for in the terms of reference. This really enriched our laws and maybe it was a blessing that it came at the time we were making the laws. We took a lot of what was there to make good laws. I will just mention some issues which were raised in this Parliament.

On adoption of the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative, we are trying to work this out so that we get the protocol processed for the necessary organs to adopt.

The issue of land rights and compensation was raised by hon. Mukitale. What is happening at the refinery site? We have already got the claimants and paid some because we pay in turns. We have purchased the land for those who decided to be resettled but there are a few who are disputing the amount. We are handling all those and the process is ongoing.

Mr Speaker, the institutions which were talked about are already in place. The laws stipulated the creation of the National Oil Authority and National Oil Company. The members have already been appointed by the appointing authority and they are about to start work. 

About the Production Sharing Agreement, the future model of these agreements will be brought to Parliament for our endorsement as recommended by the laws. 

For bonuses, we use signature bonuses. We used to negotiate with companies, but in future this will form part of the documents in the bidding process, so that we also look at what companies are offering in terms of signature bonuses among other due diligence processes we shall carry out during the bidding rounds. We just advertise instead of negotiating. Future licensing will be based on bidding processes and there will be bidding rounds.  

Finalisation and regularisation of the regulations on oil and gas: We are processing these and we shall bring them to Parliament when we finalise.

Recoverable costs: There has been talk about recoverable costs and we know they will be there. There is a standard way you handle the recoverable costs during exploration and evaluation. There are standard formats on the components that will be included as recoverable costs internationally - what you have to put there – and you follow these, the way the accountants do theirs using their international bodies like ACCA and so on. We also have these in the oil industry; we do not reinvent the wheel. 

What we do here is to set what will be the recoverable costs and of course the ministerial people, together with experts, discuss them and look at the costs. These costs are arrived at before a company is allowed to go and start exploration. Because the budget is known, they go and do the job but before anything else is done, this is what they will follow so that we recover those costs. We do not bring any extras or anything strenuous into the recoverable costs. So we follow international formats. Also, before you pay a company or certify that you will recover certain costs, it is audited by the Auditor-General and confirmed. So, you do not just pay on your own. 

They talked about farm-ins and farm-outs on the issue of the profit gain tax. We imposed this on the companies. Some companies have paid but even some who paid were disputing that during the time of signing the production sharing agreement, the tax element was not very prominent. So we have got the money and as you know, we passed some money to defend these cases. It costs millions of dollars now, but we shall continue to defend our position. 

The present production sharing agreements have the tax element on our profit gains. This is a situation where somebody is selling what he says are assets minus what you have agreed as the costs, which we are putting, and then you look at the bulk of the gains. These people should not walk away with all that. The people of Uganda must get part of it and our law says 30 per cent. 

On the laws of revenue which we said must be separated, a separate law for revenue is now available. On local content, we have developed a document which shows what is supposed to be local content and we itemised them so that our people can engage in this industry seriously. 

The local content also has a training element. It is not only when you are trained in petroleum that you can benefit from this industry. Even if you are a lawyer, there are cases which arise from this. These are indirect services for lawyers, insurance, banking institutions and the like. There is a lot to come. Do not think that only when you are drilling is when you can profit from this industry. The industry is diverse. So, direct and indirect benefits are all provided for here.

On the exploitation of our wells on a cooperative basis, two weeks ago, the minister from DRC was here; we discussed how we can cooperate to jointly explore the wells around the Albertine Graben and the possibility of a joint pipeline to go to the destined area of Kenya. We signed a Memorandum of Understanding, which is here. When they do the seismic studies and explorations, all the equipment will pass over our territory to go there. That is the extent of the cooperation that we have got. 

The Sudanese said they are bringing their pipe to join the one from Kenya at Lokichar and ours will also go to Lokichar. This will help us to jointly export our products through the Port of Lamu. That is the cooperation we have, and we have meetings all the time to discuss this.

There was the issue of training by Tullow. Tullow decided that we train our people in geology sciences. They said they were going to advertise and then the British Council would interview the applicants. However, the people from the oil areas said this would be a disadvantage to them. So, we did positive discrimination by not allowing them to compete with other candidates. For the government trainings, the government started with the employees who were interviewed by public service to go to these departments. For those ones, I cannot say they are from this tribe or the other but it is whoever passed and they are mixed. If you go to my department, you will find most of the people, except maybe those from my area. 

In the universities, Makerere has opened a faculty of petroleum sciences. Students apply through the usual way and they are taken without any discrimination. Other universities have also developed such faculties. The Nkumba Institute of Petroleum also advertises and students are admitted. So, we are really developing the bulk of our expertise so that in future, we can also get engineers who are experts employed by these companies and displace those who now have the knowledge that we do not have. That is what we are hoping for. However, the bulk of the jobs which are below supervision levels should be done by Ugandans.

The oil testing and appraisal: Once you have discovered oil and you want to know the extent of the reservoir, after punching a number of wells, you draw some oil from some parts and measure from the other wells to establish whether they match or they are different oil reservoirs. So, after getting this oil, we have put it in tanks and it is up to us to decide where we can keep it. Some people who are engaged in the manufacture of cement have expressed interest in buying this oil but until we fix prices for it – (Interjections)- You do not have to worry, we do not vent or flare; that is prohibited by our laws. So, anything which is there is kept and it is left intact for your decisions in the future. 

You talked about the fluctuating oil prices. Yes, we discussed that and agreed that these are really very volatile. They can go up; there can be a boom and then even a slump. That is why we say that whatever we get must go for huge infrastructure, which will be long lasting; it should not be finished by the current generation. That is also well enshrined in the laws that we previously passed. 

As far as I am concerned, I would like to thank you very much. At my age, I do not mind any discussions which come. They must come, be discussed and at the end of it, we should remain friends. For those who are mentioned, we now know that they have not done anything wrong. We must move together as people of Uganda. Quarrels and accusations are normal. Unfortunately, they hurt because they remain in the print media and other media. 

America may not soon flood the market because they are using shales to manufacture their oil, which are very difficult to crack. So for sure, they have a long way to improve their technology to abandon fossil oil. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Does the chairperson want to say something general, briefly? I will ask- if you could guide us on what we are going to do. I will also ask the minority report writer to make a comment.

5.51
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity, once again, to thank my colleagues who worked with me on this committee and for having done what we did, despite the constraints. 

I would also like to thank the honourable members of the House. You are the honourable members who gave us the go ahead. Actually, when I listened to people accuse the chair, I was not even in the House; I was out of the country when my name was mentioned but I appreciate that my name was proposed and the entire House approved the list of members who carried out this work. It is not that we allocated this responsibility to ourselves. Therefore, we thank you for having given input during this debate and for having come to this eventual conclusion. 

Indeed, Mr Speaker, this is not so much about the bribery. In fact, if I might quote from what hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Kyanjo said even in the minority report, that the moral basis of this - There was a joke when we were in Jinja when all of us were trying to look at this report and it came from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The conclusion was, the moral basis of this joke is the premise of our firm conviction that it is better to come up with recommendations that will improve the management of the oil and gas sector even if we fail to catch a single thief in this inquiry.  This is a quotation from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

Indeed, like hon. Katuntu said, as a committee we decided that we would do our work but the most important thing was how best to come up with recommendations that would shape the future of this sector for the benefit of the present and future generations. The process continues because this is not the end. This is just the beginning and indeed, here we are. 

Mr Speaker, we thank your office for having given us this responsibility. This is the report, all those constraints and some challenges that we faced notwithstanding. We have been able to at least come up with some recommendations. I would like to thank you and I would like to thank my colleagues, the two members who came up with the minority report. I know hon. Kyanjo somehow – anyway, I do not want to reveal this; we shall talk about it later. I think he was hesitant to actually sign this minority report but, somehow I think he was convinced at the last minute. 

We worked together as a team. There was no division while we worked on this report and therefore, I thank all my colleagues. Thank you very much, honourable members.

5.54
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (Jeema, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my chair who steered us through the proceedings. I want to assure this House that we were not intending to pin down any one individual. That is why both reports do not pin any individual. We only looked at the broader picture of the whole industry. Whenever I saw my chair flipping papers and saying time has overtaken some of the recommendations, I felt happier because this time was supposed to be lost but since it gained some credence, it was not lost.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the whole House for bearing with us because time it was a long time since we were told to come up with this report. We were given just 30 days but it went into years. However, Members from both sides have been patient and they have been able to debate. It is rare for this House to get into a situation where the Speaker asks, “Are there any more contributions?” and nobody stands up. Everyone had their chance and no one has complaints for now. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will not be able to process this because it is 6 O’clock now, but let me just guide the House. 

We have some matters that need to be corrected so that we can handle them properly. Item No. 7 on the Order Paper is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to ratify the Protocol for the establishment of the East African Monetary Union. Members, you will recall that this motion was moved and spoken to and we stood over the debate to today. However, we have not been able to handle it. So, we have to find time for it.

A similar motion was moved, which is now captured under item No. 9, but what is now reflected under item No. 9 is a motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ratification of the mutual defence and peace security pacts.  That would not be the proper heading of this item. It will be a motion for ratification of the mutual defence and peace security pact except that the committee will report. 

So, the heading of that item will be, “A motion for ratification…” but the Committee on Defence will be able to report on what they have been able to do. So, we are not going to debate as if it is the main thing we are dealing with. What we will be dealing with is the ratification; that is what is before the House. But since we referred it to the committee, we will be able to then allow them present, just like we do with Bills. When a Bill is brought for the first reading, it is sent to the committee and when it comes back, we do not receive a report of the committee on that particular Bill but we receive a motion for the second reading of that Bill before the report is presented by the respective committee.  

That is how we are going to handle this item when the time comes for us to deal with it. I was informed that this particular on the ratification of the mutual defence and peace security pact was not spoken to; it was just immediately referred to the committee.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Two points, Mr Speaker. First, there are two motions; there is a motion in respect of the mutual defence pact and secondly, there is a motion for the pact of peace and security. We moved the two motions separately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So then they have to be presented as separate motions and then the committee will be reporting on each one of them.

DR KIYONGA: Yes, and we did not have the opportunity to justify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then the ministers will speak just like they speak to justify a Bill on second reading. We will then open the debate and see how we can move forward. So, please, split them so that there are two motions for ratification and we will be able to process them in a more orderly manner. Those are the two items that I thought I should clarify. 

When we come back, we shall process our decision points on this. Therefore, I am directing the Clerk to Parliament to extract the recommendations from both the minority report, which we will deal with first, and the main report. Extract them so that I can quickly and easily process them. Each time a recommendation is called, the chairperson or the mover of the minority report will confirm that this particular aspect does not require a decision because we have already decided on it in the Bill. That will facilitate us to take quicker decisions.

We will have to finish all these matters in one day and that day is going to be Tuesday next week. So, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)

