Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 12 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation of bishops from the great Ankole region. Rt Rev. Sheldon Mwesigwa, Bishop of Ankole Diocese, Rt Rev. Johnson Twinomujuni, Bishop West Ankole Diocese, Rt Rev. Nathan Ahimbisibwe, Bishop of South Ankole Diocese. They have come with members of other clergy. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Secondly, honourable members, this morning, I received a delegation of a group called African Access to Information Centre. They work in the region of East Africa. They reminded me that under the Access to Information Act, the minister responsible is supposed to report to this House annually about the request made by the public for information and tell us whether he or she has granted or not granted them and give the reasons for that. Apparently, Parliament is supposed to carry out oversight role but it seems that when we made the law, we did not establish the machinery to monitor like we do with the other commissions. I hope that it can be looked at.

I would like to read out section 43 of that Act, which requires Government to give access to information. Section 43 says that each minister should submit an annual report to Parliament on request for access to information, indicating whether access was given or not and reasons of not giving. They carried out a study and it seems that not many people are aware about this Act. There is a lot of ignorance and no one is aware that they are supposed to report on the compliance of that act. 

They brought a publication and I will pass it on to the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. However, just to give a sample, majority of the requests that were made to the Government were denied. I will just read one or two areas that were reported. 

From the district local governments, majority of the requests were denied. Uganda Police Force, all requests recorded were granted. In agencies, majority of the public officers were not cooperative and in Parliament, ministers are not complying. I think we need to look at that act. I will ask the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to look at this report and give us a report so that if we have been failing in our duties, we must design avenues for fulfilling the law, which we made ourselves. As you may remember, it was the private Members’ Bill and it was passed with a lot of hustle but it was necessary under the Constitution. 

Honourable members, there were just a few areas of national concern.

2.57
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have got very sad news about Lolwe Island, which has a population of more than 30,000 people. 

There are some people in this country who are using other people to get land titles. We have discovered that in Lolwe Island, there is someone who was given a land title for the whole island under Plot 1 Block 12, Bukooli Island.

When people want to construct schools and their homes, they are told that the whole of Lolwe Island belongs to someone. 

Madam Speaker, my humble prayer is, may I through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be told this person who owns Plot 1 Block 12, Bukooli Islands? Who gave him the permission to take the whole of the island that even no Government institutions can be built on the islands? I would like to know this mafia. Wherever people go in Lolwe, they tell them that someone owns the whole of Lolwe Island. People have stayed in Lolwe Island since 1956. I want to know this person owning Block 12 under this title.

THE SPEAKER: You know the plot number and you do not know the owner?

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I do not know the owner.

THE SPEAKER: May we ask the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development to say something about this.

2.59   
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising that concern. Outrightly, I cannot tell who the titleholder is but I will get more details from the Member and then we establish through our system because we have capacity to know who the person holding that title is, when –(Interjections). We are not supposed to make phone calls in Parliament. I can call after here. When did the title get issued and under what circumstances? 
I will come back to the House on Tuesday next week and give a report.

Should we find that that title was issued irregularly, then we shall cancel it in accordance with the law. On Tuesday, we shall update this House about that title, which the honourable member has raised.

Secondly, I also wanted to assure the House on the first issue, which you communicated on access to information. You said that the access to information law was introduced in this House as a private Members’ Bill and it was taken over by Government and this Parliament processed it into law. I would like to assure the House that Government is committed to ensuring that we implement the law to its letter. We shall also look at that report and if there are any weaknesses within the departments of Government in terms of sharing information, then as the acting Leader of Government Business, I will make sure that all the ministries and departments of Government comply with that law. As Parliament, we passed it and we accepted it as Government and therefore, we must comply with the provisions of that law. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we will ensure that you get a copy of the report from the civil society. Honourable members, I had introduced the bishops but I would like to say that they are representing all the Members of Parliament from Ankole region. These are their bishops and they are here to wish us a Merry Christmas. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of youth from Rubaya. Reach Uganda Youth, Rubaya Chapter, Mbarara. They are represented by hon. Nathan Itungo and hon. Rosette Mutambi. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome.  (Applause)

3.02
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding what is happening in Nyumanzi Refugee Camp in Adjumani District. I received a message from my sister, who works there, about a young boy – a chapatti vendor at Nyumanzi Trading Centre – who was killed by a Dinka refugee. This incident has created a lot of tension between the refugees and the host community. 

Some of the partners who are working in the refugee camps have been locked up and they cannot leave that place because of the insecurity caused by this incident.

My question to the Minister of Internal Affairs is: what is being done to ensure Ugandans who are there are safe? The second concern is to the Office of the Prime Minister. We have had these tensions frequently. What is being done to ensure these conflicts reduce? 

MR DULU: Thank you. What she is addressing is from my constituency. The information I would like to give is that apart from the refugees displacing our people from two sub counties, they have also called their fellow South Sudanese soldiers. Those soldiers are now crossing on canoes to Uganda. I think that if this issue is not taken seriously, many more deaths will be seen. I felt I should give that information to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dulu, are you saying the refugees have invited their soldier relatives to come to Uganda?

MR DULU: First of all, the current refugees who are in Nyumanzi have invaded our people. As I talk, some children are nowhere to be seen. They have invited armed soldiers who are now crossing on canoes from Nimule side into Uganda.

MS LUCY AKELLO: As I conclude, the two NGOs that are locked up there are Finnish Refugees Council and the Medical Teams International. They have no access road to leave the refugee camp because the police have blocked all the roads. They are very worried. I am not just speaking because my sister is involved but because the lives of other Ugandans are involved. Thank you.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, there have generally been situations where conflicts have been frequent between the host communities and the refugee settlements, particularly along the borders. The reason is that a number of times, the host communities feel that they are not gaining from what is being done for the refugees, although they have offered hospitality in terms of land and settlement areas. The refugees on the other hand, many times, feel that it is their right – since they are under the auspices of the United Nations, they feel they should do what they want. 

The local governments in those areas, including the security forces have been doing their best to sensitise the host communities and refugees to live in harmony. This particular incident, which my sister and hon. Dulu, have raised dust. There was – for lack of a better word – a native from Adjumani, who died when he went to have a bath. The locals suspected that he was strangled by the refugees. When the body was taken to the hospital and a postmortem examination done, he was found to have died of a heart attack. Nevertheless, the locals were not satisfied –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKLLO: The reason they suspected this boy to have been killed by the refugees is because they had a heated argument. Therefore, when they found the boy dead the next morning, they definitely thought the refugees were the ones who had killed him.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we get an investigation then?

MR OBIGA: That is what I was going to say. Whatever happened is being investigated. I am just giving you the gist of the problem, in terms of how the violence came about. The locals organised themselves and attacked the refugees, who also retaliated and there was a fight. That is how the security personnel came in. 

Last night, the situation was peaceful but this morning, the host community also organised themselves. The conflict between the two groups flared up. There was a demonstration by the locals who were blocking the roads. The security forces, led by the police, had to go and open the roads and made sure people go on with normal activities.

It is true that there was a rumour – and this rumour is not being taken for granted – that some people could be mobilising themselves across the border and from other refugee camps to come and reinforce their colleagues in this refugee camp. This was a rumour but the security people have not taken it for granted. 

They have moved to secure the border to make sure no persons cross to Uganda with guns and other equipment, which can be used as weapons. There is now an inter-forces deployment to make sure the border is secured. As I talk, the security forces, led by the police, have moved into the refugee camps and communities to sensitise both sides so that they continue to live in harmony. This is the latest information that I got as I was coming to Parliament. 

The security people are doing everything to contain the situation. I am confident they will continue with the investigations. In fact, as I talk, three people have been arrested over that conflict.

Therefore, I suggest that you give us a chance to get the truth because now, it is possible that in a situation like that, we could be getting very many versions of the rumours and we would be debating rumours. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, will you be able to give us an update next week before we go for Christmas? 

MR OBIGA: Well, it depends on when we are going for Christmas. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: We shall close on the 19th.

MR OBIGA: Definitely, by next week, I shall have some update on the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.12
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the rampant crimes in Lira District. Of recent, Lira has experienced several crimes ranging from defilement, house break-ins, killing of boda boda riders and theft of their motorcycles, bag snatching and marijuana smoking and playing cards in broad day light. They claim that His Excellency has given a directive that those who are idle and disorderly should not be arrested.

Madam Speaker, business women are living in fear because by the time they are going home after work, they are not safe. Their bags are snatched and some of them are raped. Even those who arrive late in the night by bus have their property and money robbed. Therefore, it is worrying.

Madam Speaker, this rate of crime is developing and increasing almost every day. I would like to ask the minister, now that we are entering the festive season, what measures have they put in place to help my people of Lira District to curb these crimes so that people enjoy the festive season. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Shall we ask the minister to come and give us his overall plan before we break off. We would get the overall plan for the country and advice before we leave. Thank you.

3.13
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding Kabukyera Bridge in my district that has been washed away. It connects Mitooma and Kajara districts.

The matter of disasters arising out of landslides and floods has been ripe on the Floor of this Parliament. However, I would like to put this on record. Kabukyera Bridge was washed away in 2013 and we raised this matter on this Floor. We would like to thank the Government that it was worked on. It has now been washed away again. It is a very long bridge that connects these two districts over a very big river. Those who are well versed with the area know that the water flows from Orisundura and goes down. It is a big volume of water.

Madam Speaker, children cannot cross and go to school and vehicles cannot pass. It has affected the inter district trade. People normally have gardens and businesses across and these have also been affected.

My prayer is that Government should keep constant surveillance of these areas because these bridges get washed away and sometimes, people do not know. They get affected and some of them have died.

In addition, if Government keeps constant surveillance, they will be able to patch up any damage to the bridge because it begins as a small area and then expands.

In addition, if we are to construct a bridge, we should use permanent materials. If this bridge had been worked on with permanent materials when it was worked on in 2014, we would not be having this problem.

We do patch up work and waste resources, only for people to be affected. Therefore, my prayer is that this bridge is worked on urgently. I know the entire country is experiencing the same kind of problems but we request that these bridges are worked on urgently with permanent materials.

The culverts may be big enough but usually, with temporary construction, there are loopholes or weaknesses where the water takes advantage.

Let me also mention that if there was constant surveillance, the swamp that blocks the culverts would be removed and water would flow freely. However, because there is no surveillance, the culverts get blocked and the areas flood, which worsens the situation at the bridge. That is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We ask the Minister of Works and Transport to address the issue of the bridge in Mitooma and give us an update before we break for Christmas. Thank you.

Honourable members, I would like to remind you that on Tuesday, 17 December 2019 at 5.00 p.m., we shall have joint Christmas carols of both the Anglican and Catholic parliamentary chaplaincies. Please, put it in your diaries. We will try to finish early so that we can go and speak to God before we go for Christmas. 

I would also like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Kinkizi East Constituency. They work with Kataate Diamond Jubilee Hospital Project. They are led by Dr Hamlet Kabushenga, a former Member of Parliament; Dr Helga Russell, an international Surgeon from Germany; Mr Sham Imana, Project promoter from Singapore; Mr Oder Mugabe, the Deputy Mayor of Kanungu Town Council; Mr Johannes Kanyeihamba, Town Clerk, Kanungu Town Council; Mr Julius Baluku in charge, Kanungu Health Centre; Mr Martin Atukwase, the Project Secretary; Mr Alvin Muhwezi, trustee; Mr Gerald Mbabazi, trustee; Mr Moses Kukundakwe, Development Manager and Ambrose Noel, a member of the user community. You are welcome. They are represented by the Minister of State for Housing Dr Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Elizabeth Karungi. You are welcome.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ENGINEERING, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE ISIMBA PUBLIC ACCESS BRIDGE CONNECTING KAYUNGA AND KAMULI DISTRICTS

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I have come here to make a statement on the engineering, design and construction of the Isimba public access bridge connecting Kayunga and Kamuli districts.

During the Eighth Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 20 November 2019, you guided that a comprehensive statement be presented to Parliament on the Isimba Public Access Bridge.

Madam Speaker, it is on that basis that I present this statement to appraise Parliament on the matters pertaining the engineering, design and construction of the Isimba public access bridge across River Nile, connecting the districts of Kayunga and Kamuli.

Background 

Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, under a bilateral agreement with the Government of China, received financing from the Exim Bank of China to develop the 183 megawatts Isimba project power project as a national flagged project, which is aimed at increasing power generation in the country in order to support social-economic development.

The components of the project were; 183 Megawatts (MW) Hydropower Plant, 132 KV Transmission Line from Isimba to Bujagali Substation and the associated substation at Isimba and required extension at Bujagali Substation.

On 22 July 2013, Government through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD) entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with China International Water and Electric Corporation (CWE) for a completion -(Interruption)

MR KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, quoting rule 81, I am uncomfortable with the dressing code of the hon. Centenary. I would like you to guide, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not appropriately dressed, please, go and organise yourself. (Applause)

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, even hon. Dulu should go and put on in a Parliamentary way. We need to be serious on this. Members these days put on the way they want. We must be serious with Parliamentary rules. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dulu, I think you also need to go and organise yourself. Go and put on a proper dress. Honourable minister, proceed. (Laughter)

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, I was saying that a Memorandum of Understanding with China International Water and Electric Corporation for a completion Turnkey Contract for the 183 MW Isimba Hydropower plant and Associated Transmission Line on an Engineering, Procurement, Construction (EPC) plus Financing basis. 

The EPC contract to develop the project at a lump sum price of $ 567,738,990.96 was later signed on 6 September 2013.

Madam Speaker, Fichtner GmbH & Co a Germany firm undertook the feasibility study of the Isimba hydropower project and supported Government to review CWE's technical and financial implementation proposals and contract negotiations.

The Contract for Isimba hydropower project provided for the construction of a public access bridge on top of the dam as part of the hydropower plant, to connect Kayunga and Kamuli Districts as well as construction of a 3.5 km access road to the project site and a total of 1.5 km access roads within the project site.

The contractor through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development submitted designs of the Isimba public access bridge to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for approval as required by the contract.

On 8 September 2017, UNRA pronounced itself that the public access bridge design- (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to interrupt but the honourable minister is reading a very important statement. We neither have copies nor is it uploaded on then iPads and yet, we would like to be following. It is controversial and important but we do not have copies. I wonder whether we are proceeding well.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ascertain from the Clerk.

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, it was submitted to the Clerk. I do not know whether it was uploaded. 

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR LOKERIS: I was told that it was submitted yesterday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the document was received but there was a slight problem with the internet. If you do not mind, maybe he could proceed as the Clerk ensures that it is sent.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for the wise ruling, Madam Speaker. I know that we were provided with iPads.

The Contractor through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development submitted designs of the Isimba public access bridge to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for approval as was required by the contract. 

On 8 September 2017, UNRA pronounced itself that the public access bridge designs submitted by the Contractor in August 2017 were inadequate.

The public access bridge designed by the Contractor on top of the Isimba Dam was found unsuitable for public use because the contractor had provided only one lane instead of two lanes separate from the facilities used for operations and maintenance of the dam as specified in the contract.

In September 2017, Government formed a technical committee composed of representatives from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, Solicitor General and UNRA to engage the Contractor in the construction of the Isimba public access bridge as specified in the contract.

Based on the technical committee engagements, Government directed the Contractor to construct a separate public access bridge with two lanes as specified in the contract since construction of the Isimba Dam had advanced.

Madam Speaker, following the earlier concern that you raised in May 2018 to His Excellency the President about the construction of the Isimba public access bridge, communication from my ministry was made to the Office of the President and to you, apprising you of the delays in the implementation of the Isimba public access bridge. 

In our communication, we highlighted that the access bridge that had been provided by the contractor was deemed not to have met the contractual requirements and was rejected. 

We further noted that at that time, the contractor had submitted a revised technical proposal for which they were asked to undertake geological and hydrological studies to support the new location that was selected downstream of the Isimba Hydropower Plant.

The contractor is constructing the re-designed Isimba public access bridge as approved by UNRA as part of the Isimba Hydro Power Project since it was incumbent upon the Contractor to design and construct the Isimba public access bridge as specified in the contract. 

The Isimba Hydro Power plant and transmission lines were completed and commissioned on 21 March 2019 by His Excellency the President, but completion of the Isimba Public Access Bridge is scheduled for 31 December 2020. 

Progress 

To provide for the smooth construction of the redesigned Isimba Public Access Bridge and access roads, a tripartite agreement was signed between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited. Under the tripartite agreement, UNRA is responsible for supervising the construction of the Isimba Public Access Bridge to connect Kayunga and Kamuli districts. 

The contractor undertook feasibility studies for the separate Isimba Public Access Bridge located 500 metres downstream from Isimba Hydropower Dam. The feasibility studies were completed in November, after which UNRA cleared the contractor to proceed with the detailed designs. The contractor submitted the detailed designs in May 2019, which were approved by UNRA in July 2019. The construction works commenced thereafter and are progressing well.

In the approved design, the Isimba Public Access Bridge consists of two sections joined at Koova Island. The section on the left river channel is 433 metres while the section on the right river channel is 457 metres. The road section on Koova Island is 301 metres. The layout of the Isimba Public Bridge is attached under Annex I.

As at 30 November 2019, the overall progress on works was approximately 22 per cent. This includes construction of 18 piles out of a total of 78 piles; - piles are the foundation supports for the load of the bridge deck - construction of 248 metres of the steel trestle, out of the total required length of 312 metres (the steel trestle is the platform used to undertake drilling and casting of piles under water); filling of gravel on Koova Island and the access roads; 40 per cent formwork for the box girders and associated reinforcement cages; and a completed box culvert for drainage along the access road on the left bank. The remaining 78 per cent of the works is expected to be completed by 31 December 2020.

On Wednesday, 20 November 2019, there was a visit to the project site by the ministry, led by my colleague, the honourable engineer Simon D’Ujanga, Minister of State for Energy, with some Members of Parliament including hon. James Waluswaka, Member of Parliament for Bunyole West County, Butaleja District, and hon. Amos Lugoloobi, Member of Parliament for Ntenjeru North, Kayunga District. They witnessed the ongoing works under the Isimba Public Access Bridge. Photographs are attached under Annex ll.

Challenges 

Land acquisition continues to be one of the biggest challenges to infrastructure development in our country. Specifically, my ministry is faced with unprecedented claims for compensation of rock deposits within Isimba and Karuma project sites. To date, the total documented claims for compensation of rock deposits under Isimba Hydropower Project amount to over Shs 400 billion. These include:

(a) 	Claims of up to Shs 203 billion under Civil Suit No. 383 of 2018 in the High Court of Mukono, which is stated in the report, involving Disson Nsubuga, Berenado Sajjabi and a number of people.

(b) 	Claims of up to Shs 132 billion under Miscellaneous Cause No. 12 of 2018 in the High Court of Mukono involving Charles Magumba and Kazibwe Tom. 

(c) 	Claims of up to Shs 25 billion under Miscellaneous Cause No.15 of 2018 in the High Court of Mukono involving Ruth Sebadduka and others; 

(d) 	Irene Buluba of Bupiina Village in Kamuli submitted to my ministry a claim of Shs 24,408,690,648.

(e) 	Claims of up to Shs 18.3 billion under Miscellaneous Cause No. 122 of 2017 in the High Court of Mukono.

(f) 	Mutengu Keith is also claiming Shs 18,295,513,204.

(g) 	Mugabi Frank of Bupiina claims Shs 5,997,715,907. 

(h) 	Makanga Robert of Kiyunga Village in Kamuli has a claim of Shs 3,363,834,240. 

The rest are cheaper because the others are all billions. They all total to the amount I mentioned. It is really too much money and we do not know where to get it. 

Madam Speaker, there are claims for rock deposits encountered during the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) implementation where the claimants have not attached amounts to the claims. These claims are very many. I request that since I have already told you the whole figure, I only go to what I think we could do in order to solve all this. 

In all the above instances, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development liaised with the Attorney-General’s Chambers to intervene and have the contractor’s accounts released since land compensation matters are a contractual obligation of Government and not the contractor. Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for your intervention towards the release of the accounts of the contractor. 

Consultations amongst Government ministries and agencies, including Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Attorney-General’s office and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, are continuing to holistically address the above matters.

Conclusion  

(a) 	The progress made by Government in the construction of the Isimba Public Access Bridge connecting Kayunga and Kamuli districts is on-going. 

(b) 	The cost for the Isimba Public Access Bridge is an integral part of the EPC lumpsum contract price provided in the original contract signed on 6 September 2013.

(c) Temporary freezing of the contractor’s bank accounts was related to compensation claims and Government intervened to quickly release these accounts.

(d) The Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) is currently undertaking investigations on allegations of fraud, – people say there have been some kind of fishy dealings in this and all this is being investigated - bribery and embezzlement under both Isimba and Karuma hydropower projects. The office of the Auditor-General is undertaking a value for money audit for both Isimba and Karuma hydropower plants.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for your support towards the energy and mineral sectors. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, have the documents come?

3.42
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank you for having insisted. I would not like to thank myself for having raised the issue on the Floor but it is evident. 

The money in contention is not only Shs 24 billion. When the ministry told us that they were building the dam, I called the minister and said, “Madam Engineer, as a registered engineer, there are things you are supposed to do, leave alone being a minister.” She said, “There is work there.” Hon. Lugoloobi called me, as the area Member of Parliament, and I went there but the news that I found was shocking. The issue is, even for the power that the President commissioned in March, where I told you that the wind was almost taking us, the contractor has not been paid and he is still demanding US$ 35 million.
	
For the honourable minister to come and deceive the country that this bridge will be completed in 2020 – I interacted with the contractor who told me that they will not complete the bridge because they have not received payment for the dam that they constructed. It is evident, and I have his photos and telephone numbers. If this Parliament so wishes, the Speaker can institute a team to find out the truth.

We went there with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), LCV chairperson and the mayor of the town council. They said that the ministry does not involve them. The RDC said that these people had a sit-down strike for a week because they were not paid. When we asked the contractor what happened, he said, “Where do you want me to get money? All these people are here, including expatriates, and I am supposed to pay them but I have not been paid.” Madam Speaker, it is more than Shs 24 billion.

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) was brought in at the last minute when the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development realised that there was fire burning. When we found hon. Simon D’Ujanga there, the people of the generation company were not there.

I would like to say that there is a lot of graft in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Honourable minister, there is another scandal that we are bringing next week, so stand informed. We are trying to clean up our Government because some of these people – Can you imagine that the Speaker of the House is the area Member of Parliament for Kamuli, together with hon. Lugoloobi, but they were not involved as area Members! Compensation went ahead in Kayunga but on the other side of Kamuli, people complained that they had never got the money.

Madam Speaker, although the minister’s report is good, he said that it is 22 per cent complete but when we talked to the people on the site, they said it was 17 per cent. I think that the minister was hiking the price but I have a report that the contractor and UNRA brought in black and white –(Interruption)   

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. You have made serious statements here and indicated that the President commissioned a project, which was halfway done. It looks like the project will be completed in December 2020. Did you find out why they rushed the President to commission an incomplete project? This is the clarification I am seeking from you.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for taking the lead regarding this alternative road and bridge debate. You may recall when we passed the loan requests for Isimba and Karuma dams, the complaint was that when Bujagali Dam was done, there was no integrated intention to have a bridge to cross from Busoga to Buganda. Aware that we only had one bridge and we even had challenges with the bridge, we said that these dams can be used in a multi-purpose manner to include even a bridge that has a road. It could be a tourist attraction and provide water for production.

I am aware that there was a scandal in this procurement because nobody can adduce details of the due process of procurement and who was finally awarded. You will never produce that and the technical officers will disagree with you. That is why you have no technical commissions but political commissions were being done both in Karuma and Isimba until the cracks occurred. That is when you said, “Technical people come back.” The technical people were not respected by the contractors because the Government did not take the due process seriously. 

That is the reason why UNRA has come last and the Speaker has to complain why the road is not coming. If they had listened to our input as Parliament at the point of approval of that project, the road would have been in built in the project because that was our debate on the Floor. However, because the way it was awarded was contrary to the norm, you are now seeing a cost overrun and it is now being brought as if it is a design review. It should not have been a design review. It should not have required a cost overrun because in our debate here, all that was supposed to have been included.

Madam Speaker, I thought I should bring back that institutional memory.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that the minister has got the information. However, hon. Nsamba, the senior cadre of NRM, wanted clarification. (Interjection) - Yes, he is our cadre although he is trying to go astray. 

I would like to let you know that the dam was successfully completed and commissioned and it is working well. However, the bridge, which was a subcomponent and was supposed to be commissioned with the dam, has not yet been completed. I think that some mafia wanted to use this money but when some of us went there on the day of commissioning, we asked where the drawings were. We also understand some engineering. Right now, because the contractor does not have money, he has even subcontracted another contractor who is on site. This is the challenge and the country –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the Member to clarify on the commissioning. He has accepted that this was a subproject of the already commissioned project; how do you commission one and not even think of the other one at all? What was the rush about?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, as a senior cadre of NRM, there was no rush. The technical people had guided the President that the project would be completed and we needed power. As Government, we cannot just sleep. The President had to commission the project but there was an error, which the ministry should correct. 

Unless the minister comes here and gives confidence – the contractor told us that he cannot complete the project by December 2020. That is the clarification. 

In view of that, I request this House to agree that a forensic audit be carried out on the project. We cannot just end with the minister’s statement. I request this Parliament to invest some money into having international, competent and technical auditors to audit some of these projects. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just say that the dam was commissioned. I had threatened the Government more than a year earlier that I would not allow the President to commission that dam until work on our bridge had commenced. I threatened the President and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I also told the contractor that I would not allow them until work on the bridge had started. 

We want our bridge. We could ask our committee to keep monitoring the progress so that we are updated on whether it is going to be complete in 2020. I cannot now even go home because the road is broken. If the bridge was there, I would use the ferry.

3.55
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank the minister for reading what he read. However, what he read is not what we wanted. It is good the minister gave us a background. He informed us that in 2013, the business was begun; in 2017, they reached somewhere; the commissioning of Isimba Dam was done in March 2019; and they promised him that in December 2020, we shall have the bridge.

Madam Speaker, I come from Kamuli and I use that road. At times we pass by to see whether what we were promised is about to mature. I offer to go with the minister and his team in my vehicle tomorrow so that he comes back here and we see whether he will give the same story he has read in that document.

Madam Speaker, you remember that there was a time when the ferry was swept away by the floods –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to raise a point of order against my brother because I appreciate the matter that is on the Floor. However, is the honourable member in order to belittle a minister of Government by saying he will offer his own vehicle to transport the minister to go and supervise the bridge? Is this Government short of providing the minister with transport to inspect the bridge?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we are colleagues in this House; we sit together in the canteen and we play football together. What is wrong with the minister and the Member sitting in the car? (Laughter) However, let us task our committee in charge of physical infrastructure to follow up and give us an update.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude. The minister said that some of the delays have been caused by the compensation programme. With due respect, I would like the minister to come back tomorrow and show us the number of citizens they have compensated from Kamuli or those they have promised to compensate. Some of these statements are advanced to delay and create a door for some people to swindle money. 

Madam Speaker, you know the people who owned land that other side. There is no compensation that has gone on. We are here suffering and instead of the minister giving us the road so that we stop complaining, he is talking of compensation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would not be fair to say that no one on the Kamuli side has been compensated. However, there are additional categories like the people who used to engage in the economic activity of selling stones who have not been compensated. 

3.59
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, a few days ago, we had an anti-corruption walk in this country. When the minister reads this kind of report, it makes me remember the games played – I will not quote my good friend, engineer Waluswaka, who was on site. However, when I read his mood, I saw that a lot is lacking and a lot of money must have been swindled in the project.

I do not know why the Minster of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Irene Muloni, wants to soil the name of one of the senior Karimojong elders by giving him a doctored workshop document to come and read in the august House. (Laughter) I do not know why, for issues that pertain to failures, hon. Muloni always delegates fellow ministers to come and read statements. She might make me begin doubting the wise words in the Bible that the wise come from the east.

I, therefore, request that the document - I am calling it a workshop document partly because I passed on that road when one of my voters was going for an introduction and I cried before I reached the introduction ceremony. Therefore, I request the minister and my good friend, who was given a workshop document, to deny the report in front of this august House and let the senior minister, hon. Irene Muloni, come and read her report by herself, so that she carries the shame of the year since we are closing 2019. That is my submission, Madam Speaker.

4.02
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am equally going to comment on what the minister has said. 

The minister has read a document and hon. Waluswaka mentioned something, which was so irritating - that the President of the Republic of Uganda was duped into commissioning a dam when the contractor still demanded US$ 35 million. This is a lot of money. This is a project for which the Government borrowed money and we expected this money to have been released.

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is: Is she in the know of the US$ 35 million that the honourable colleague has mentioned? If so, why did she allow the President to commission the project yet she knew very well that the contractor had not been fully paid? Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Both the statement of the minister and the revelations of our colleague, hon. Waluswaka, have opened our eyes to serious deficiencies that characterise this project. There is something very serious to look at when the minister tells us that there was an original plan or design to have the public access bridge, which was later redone with the approval of UNRA. Why was that done? Was it a dark design to misappropriate some of the money? That is one of the questions for which we seriously need an answer. 

Secondly, if they say that the contractor –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Thank you for giving way. I am wondering because he talked about the bridge and the dam. The bridge is supposed to be on top because that is an integral structure. When you are approving and giving the structural drawings, the design naturally would include the structure on top because it is supported from the bottom. Therefore, I am wondering how they could have started the lower structure and it is approved without approving the bridge, which was supposed to be on top.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: The minister will clarify. Madam Speaker, it is a serious allegation to say that the EPC contractor has not been paid for work which is complete. We seriously need to look into that. If it is true, these are very serious allegations because Parliament has approved a loan for this particular project.

Madam Speaker, there is also the question of why the EPC contractor abandoned the bridge, which was an integral part of the initial contract. We need to establish all these and also if it is within the performance of this contract that a subcontractor is allowed to come in when the EPC was identified on the basis of its competence and not on the competence of the subcontractor.

4.06
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my language, we have a proverb that says that you will never regret what you have not said. What we are talking about are works, which are just here in Uganda. We can go there, get information on site, request the ministry to give us more information and we analyse it. 

It will be wrong for Parliament to just start saying things because they may make us look unknowledgeable; for example, somebody asked, “How can you partially open?” On the Northern Bypass, there is a flyover that has been opened and is being used. It is just here. We opened part of Entebbe Road when the project was not yet completed. Somebody has not been paid but the works are finished -(Interjection)– Yes, all works are finished and contractors are not fully paid because there is always retention money at least.

Therefore, I would request and appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to go to the site and to the ministry to get more information for us to analyse all these issues. Some of us are slightly knowledgeable in this, so we can come and report, instead of sitting here and making allegations against ministers, contractor and others, which may make us look bad. Therefore, I genuinely think that the line you had taken of saying that the matter goes to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is the best for us now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already made that proposal that we ask the committee to take up this statement and follow up on the contents, visit the site and come back and report to us as soon as we come back from recess.

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ALUM SANTA OGWANG ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT   DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES

4.09
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, sometime back, hon. Alum Santa Ogwang, the Woman Representative for Oyam District, raised a concern on the Floor of the House about continued incursions of elephants into communities of Oyam District neighbouring wildlife conservation areas. She informed this House that the elephants had destroyed food crops and caused injuries to communities. She requested Government to compensate the affected people and support the capacity of game rangers to appropriately handle the wildlife incursions.

Madam Speaker, you referred this concern to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for a comprehensive statement to Parliament. I beg, therefore, to give the required comprehensive statement over the matter.

THE SPEAKER: Do so in five minutes. Are five minutes sufficient?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I can summarise it, Madam Speaker. The underlying causes for human and wildlife conflict are well known and structural. You recall that at the time of Independence, Uganda’s human population was about 6.9 million. The land size remains the same but the population of humans and animals is increasing.

Following the restoration of peace and stability in the country, we embarked on a robust conservation agenda and I am very pleased that the number of animals, which had almost been decimated, is recovering. I have just returned from Kidepo - you will be amazed at how thousands of elephants and buffalos are there.

As result of the animal population being restored and human population increasing while land remains fixed, there have been increasing cases of human-wildlife conflicts and indeed, the issues raised by hon. Santa Alum Ogwang are true. Oyam and many other areas in the country have suffered some incursions of animals to their farms.

Maybe what is of interest is to emphasise what we have done to contain the situation. Madam Speaker, we are fully aware of the plight of the people affected by human-wildlife conflict and several interventions have been implemented in the country to address the problem.

More interventions are planned but more specifically to Oyam area, we have excavated a total of 38 kilometres of elephant trenches in Nwoya, Oyam and Kiryandongo. To further reinforce the elephant trenches, we are planting Mauritius thorny hedges along the trenches.

We have continued to work together with the affected frontline communities through forming volunteer wildlife scout programmes. So far, 310 wildlife scouts have been trained and equipped and they are actively participating in elephant control in frontline villages.  

A number of trained scouts in the Karuma-Kyobe sector and Murchison Falls National Park have been deployed. Currently, over 110 scouts in Oyam, 40 in Nwoya and 160 scouts in Kiryandongo have been trained. As a result, we are witnessing reduced incidences of crop raiding by elephants. If I may compare with 2016, the number was 867. This has been reduced to 650. Incidents in 2018 have also been reducing, showing that these measures are working.

Because crop raiding tends to be high during the harvesting season, we have also established what we call temporary elephant control ranger posts for quick response in such hotspots. We have established more outposts in Kamdini - [Hon. Mukitale rose]

THE SPEAKER: No, the person who is entitled to ask is hon. Alum. Please conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your very wise ruling. In swampy and rocky areas where trenches cannot be dug, we have used chain link and barbed wires, although sometimes, criminal elements vandalise these pillars and wires.

In addition, we have had beehives placed along the dug trenches to further make them effective and this has proved effective in areas around Karuma. Research has shown that bees can be effective because as they sting these animals, they retreat.

Other interventions include recruitment of 500 new rangers to enhance the capacity of the rangers for a quick response to incidences of elephant incursions. 

We have also finalised a countrywide feasibility study on human-wildlife conflict and we believe that we shall find a lasting solution to this problem. The study is expected to highlight the areas where electric fences will be installed, among other interventions.

We have done a pilot project of 10 kilometres of electric fencing around Kyambura and this has proved very effective. We are embarking on rolling out this intervention to Murchison Falls and Oyam. 

We have also embarked on the programme to address invasive species. These species are quite difficult because they destabilise the habitat of the animals as they move in protected areas. This will create more appealing habitats for wildlife so that animals are attracted to remain inside the parks.

On the issue of compensation, which was raised as well, Madam Speaker, you know only too well that the Wildlife Act, 2019 came into force on 27 September 2019, following presidential assent. The law provides compensation but also provides that there should be regulations under the new law.

Actual compensation, therefore, will only occur next financial year when the compensation scheme will have accumulated money on the account and when Uganda Wildlife Authority has raised the 2 per cent generated revenue to be put on the account.

Therefore, in effect, much as the law was passed here and it is effective, the required regulations and access guidelines have not been done and the money has not accumulated on the accounts.

In concluding this matter, I would like to confirm to Members that we are fully committed to addressing and solving the challenge of human-wildlife conflicts and we stand ready to fully resolve this problem forever. 

We are very clear on what needs to be done but sometimes, both financial and human resources limit us. Therefore, we seek and appreciate your continued support, especially when it comes to resource appropriation to be able to undertake massive scale interventions on this front. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you permit me, I can go to the second point, since they are related.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you have answered it.

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, I did not want to rise but the question that he has just answered and the subsequent one that he is about to answer, were answered by hon. Geoffrey Kiwanda.

THE SPEAKER: So, why is it on the Order Paper?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me answer this quickly. Hon. James Kaberuka, MP, Kinkizi County, raised a question on the need to compensate victims of wildlife attacks in accordance with the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019. 

Madam Speaker, this Act came into force in September. The Act, under sections 82, 83 and 84, provide for compensation of wildlife induced damage or injury for selected species of wildlife. The Compensation Act also establishes a fund and the money to be appropriated into this Fund.

Madam Speaker, the Wildlife Act came into force on 27 September 2019, following presidential assent. Consequently, to implement the compensation scheme under the law, there must be money in the fund, there must be regulations prescribing compensation values and there must be guidelines to access that money. 

Therefore, this Act and the money will be effective in 2019/2020 financial year. That is when we shall be able to come to Parliament during the budgeting of financial year 2020/2021 to seek appropriation into the fund, as per Section 83 of the Act. 

Accordingly, actual composition will commence in the next financial year when the composition scheme will have accumulated one year. The revenue and regulation would have been done and put in place so that operationalisation of the Act takes place. That is when this composition will be done and we are following it very closely to ensure that it is indeed very effective, as soon as the financial year starts. 

Once again, Madam Speaker, I thank you. Honourable members, I thank you for listening. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable Alum is not here.  Let us go to item 4 (b)

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JOHNSON MUYANJA ON THE INADEQUATE ILLUMINATION OF THE ENTEBBE EXPRESSWAY AT NIGHT THAT HAS LED TO INSECURITY ON THAT ROAD

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement presented in response to the concern raised at the Third Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 5 November 2019 by hon. Johnson Muyanja, Member of Parliament for Mukono North, regarding the inadequate illumination of Entebbe –(Interruption)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: It has often come here but Johnson Muyanja does not represent Mukono Constituency North. I represent Mukono South Constituency. This is not the first time it has come here; they always say I represent Mukono North. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please check your records to make sure that hon. Muyanja is properly reflected in the constituency he represents, which is Mukono South. If there is a mistake in the records, please correct it. Please proceed. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement presented in response to the concern raised at the third sitting of the second meeting of the fourth session of the Tenth Parliament held on Tuesday, 5 November 2019 by hon. Johnson Muyanja, Member of Parliament for Mukono South regarding the inadequate illumination of Entebbe Express Highway during the night that has led to insecurity on that road. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), has developed an operation and maintenance strategy for the Kampala – Entebbe Express Highway. 

One of the key activities in the strategy is to procure a private company to undertake the operation and maintenance of the Kampala – Entebbe Express Highway. The target is to complete procurement of the operator to commence full operation under the management contract for the period of five years. 

The operator will be responsible for the following activities: 

    1. Management of toll plazas;
    2. Toll plaza traffic management; 
    3. Toll collection and system management; 
    4. Toll plaza financial management; 
    5. Road operations; 
    6. Route patrol; 
    7. Overload control; 
    8. Incident management; 
    9. General Tin and ad-hoc inspections; and 
    10. Installation of street lights. 

Once the procurement of the operator is complete, the operator will provide lighting for the entire Entebbe Express Highway.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muyanja, do you have a supplementary question? 

MR MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the short report from his technical team. 

Madam Speaker, before I came here, I was very sure that the contract of Entebbe Express Highway included designs and street lights. However, when I now hear that they are going to award a contract to a new contractor, that means the minister needs to investigate more.

For example, you have been talking about Isimba and Karuma Bridge. There is a problem when it comes to our contractors. The contractor of the Entebbe Express Highway was aware and even the design included lighting. 

However, to now say that they are going to award another contract means that the minister needs to investigate more and look into the contract because the documents are available. If he cannot access a copy, I can access it on his behalf because I have all the documents and the evidence on that, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, was the lighting included in the contract? If it was not, why was it not? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, at this moment, I cannot tell this august House whether lighting of the Express Highway was part of the contract or not. Since the honourable colleague has put it, I need to get back and examine the contract and find out that particular aspect. However, as of now, that is the status. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the honourable member can supply the information because it means that whoever was negotiating our contract must have really cheated us if a vital part – the road is to be used day and night. Please, get the information and give it to the minister. 

4.27
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, now that you have requested the minister to check whether the lighting has been included, can the minister also include the many urban growth centres coming up, where this Express Highway is going to pass? This is in order to include cab ways and lighting for those new emerging trading centres that are coming up because – 

THE SPEAKER: Are they part of the Entebbe Express Highway? 

MR BABA: No, they have not done them but now that we are going to do the Jinja Express Highway, all these things should be looked into so that they are all done at once. Lighting new trading centres, cab ways and pedestrian lee ways, all the pavers made and the drainage covered so that people are not hurt as they move at night. 

We were touring the oil roads in Western Uganda and this has been done on some of the roads of the new trading centres and they look great. However, in others, the drainage is left open and people are falling inside there. There is also no lighting. I think we should do things properly at ago. This should be part of the design. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we are talking about different contracts and roads. I do not know whether the minister will be in position to answer for all the roads and all the contracts. I do not know whether the Committee on National Economy can give us an update. What were the things they passed? This is because we have been talking about the designs of the roads and what should be included. 

Hon. Baba, could you give us particular roads? In that way, we can ask our committee to find out if they passed them and then we can take on the Government on it. Give us the particular roads that you are interested in. Thank you.  

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. AMOS MANDERA ON THE FLOODED SEASONAL RIVERS THAT CUT OFF THE LYANTONDE-LUMBUGU ROAD AND THE DEMOBILISATION OF ROAD EQUIPMENT BY THE UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY

4.29 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement in response to a matter raised by hon. Amos Mandera, Member of Parliament for Buyamba County, concerning the flooded seasonal rivers that cut off the Lyantonde – Lumbugu Road and the demobilisation of road equipment by the Uganda National Roads Authority. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the road is currently in a poor condition due to the heavy rains. When the seasonal streams burst their banks and the rains continued, as they still are, it posed a danger to the equipment to try to intervene at the peak of the floods. 

The intervention would cause further loss in terms of machine breakdown yet no substantial works would be achieved. The UNRA team was, therefore, put on standby to monitor the flood levels and will carry out rectification once the floods recede. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Amos Mandera? He is not here. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS TO AN ISSUE RAISED BY HON. JOHN BAPTIST LOKII ON MEDIA REPORTS THAT GIRLS FROM KARAMOJA SUB REGION WERE BEING TRAFFICKED TO JOIN THE AL-SHABAAB IN SOMALIA

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, this was a matter related to the trafficking of girls from Karamoja, allegedly by the Al-Shabaab, as reported in the press. Our team is still investigating the matter because we need to get information from Interpol. Sorry, it will take a little while before we make the statement here because we want to make a comprehensive statement on the matter. I beg that I make it next week, if we have time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will present on 19 December 2019. I think the other ministers are not here. Let us go to item No. 5.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, my procedural matter is in regard to rule 221 of our Rules of Procedure on Contempt of Parliament. On the matter of when the lakes will be opened to fishermen, I brought this matter to this august House over a month ago. People are waiting yet the ministers supposed to respond are conspicuously absent.

When ministers fail to respond to issues raised in this august House, it impedes the work of Parliament. One of the cardinal roles that I have in this august House is to represent the interests of my people. When I bring such concerns, it means the people are waiting and they want to hear the response from Government. 

However, for over a month, the ministers are absent. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not here to respond. Madam Speaker, don’t you think we would proceed well to give a deadline to the minister, failure of which, this august House would probably find him guilty of Contempt of Parliament? Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is quite annoying because the members of Parliament are here to present issues in their constituencies. When they bring them here, it is because the people down there need answers. We keep talking about this matter but if by next week the ministers are not here to answer, we are going to take other steps including informing the Head of the Executive that there are people who are not performing their work. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EFFECTIVELY IMPLEMENT ADOPTION OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY IN THE EDUCATION SYSTEM

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala is not here.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ARISING OUT OF THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF OVER 300 FAMILIES IN KYABISAGAZI VILLAGE, KIGOROBYA SUB COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand this report was presented but before the debate would commence, some Members raised issues about the sector ministers who were not there. Clerk to Parliament, I do not know whether those ministers are here today. They are still not here. Who are they? Clerk, can you give me the portfolios? I know that the Prime Minister has gone to Bundibugyo; he wrote to me saying that he was going to check on our brothers and sisters there. I do not know who is the most senior? 

Hon. Werikhe, I want you to ensure that the Attorney-General, hon. Kiiza and the minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees are here on Tuesday. This is an outstanding issue and there is a crisis in that part of the country. Please, ensure that they are here on Tuesday. 

No, hon. Kania Obiga respects this House. Despite all his difficult work, he is here almost every day. I think that we should commend hon. Obiga and hon. Werikhe. He is generally here and we need to commend him. (Laughter) 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, the Government is still undertaking consultations with the stakeholders. As a result, we pray that you give Government some time and we come back after concluding the consultations. I beg to request.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this Parliament had carried out wide consultations. We were given a chance to go back and consult further. I do recall that the Office of the Leader of the Opposition went to several places to consult with sugar millers, big and small. 

What is happening now means that whatever is contained in the President’s letter objecting to the assent of the Bill no longer holds. It has been overtaken by events. The whole idea was for us to zone the areas so that we do not experience any shortage of sugar supply to the mills whether big or small. However, right now, the sugar farmers are even struggling to export their sugar to Kenya and they are finding it difficult. 

What is the justification, which was an issue of contention? Where is the justification now? What we need is to know the economic factors that determine demand and supply. When there is drought, the farmers have short supply of sugarcanes and the sugar manufacturers need the supply. As a result, you find that because of the shortage, the farmers would want to sell their sugarcane to whoever is giving them a better price. This has been misunderstood.

Madam Speaker, is it really justifiable, that as Parliament, which is very well informed, we shall be expecting new information from this Cabinet consultation, which is apparently still going on endlessly, yet the President has already spoken on the issue?

I am seeking guidance on that issue. As far as I am concerned, I would like to suggest that we send the Bill back to the President to assent to it because there is no other new element that is going to emerge. There is nothing that Ugandans do not know. There is nothing that is secret to you that the sugar farmers who are our voters are stuck with sugar in their houses and cannot export anywhere. They are experiencing a very serious economic situation because the market is over flooded with sugar.

Madam Speaker, I seek your procedural guidance on the way forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether members of the Government actually understand what is going on with the sugarcane farmers. At the moment, if you are to get a permit, you must first pay a debt – you know those millers lend chemicals and seeds to farmers. If you want a permit to sell, you must pay somebody’s debt. This is blackmail and that is what is going on now. If you have no money to pay somebody’s debt you will have no permit to sell.

4.41
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the minister presented the Sugar Bill in Parliament and it was referred to the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The committee carried out extensive consultations with all the stakeholders and presented the report to Parliament. Parliament debated the report and passed the Bill, with amendments. The Bill was forwarded to the President as required by our laws. The President returned the Bill, citing certain provisions that he said should be debated by Parliament. 

Therefore, the work is within the premise of Parliament. We have the Bill with us. The President made his opinion clear. It is within the purview of Parliament to process this Bill. We either take it, as it is, back to the President or we agree with the stand of the President. Parliament is now being delayed by ministers, who actually attended the meetings with the committees and even carried out consultations with stakeholders before the Bill was presented to Parliament.

I wonder why at this time the minister is playing this hide and seek game. This is sugar politics, Madam Speaker. I am one of the victims of this sugar politics. These people are highly placed and they are using their money to bribe whoever is on their way. That is why this Bill cannot see its way out. 

Madam Speaker, if you read the President’s letter clearly, his stand was clear that he was not happy with certain companies. Actually, in that letter, he even accused certain companies of money laundering – and doing things outside the business they were meant to do. This means whatever the minister is telling us is not from him. The minister has not got guidance from the President. Therefore, the minister cannot even talk now; his hands are tied because he has not got clear directions from the President –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to my brother, hon. Okot-Ogong. I am a minister under the President of the Republic of Uganda and he is the one who returned the Bill to the House. We have been in touch and it is under his guidance that we are undertaking the consultations because he had concerns, which were clearly communicated to the House. 

Therefore, is my brother in order to say that I am just saying my own things and I am not even in touch with the President?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are part of the Cabinet and so, you are in touch with the President.

Honourable members, that notwithstanding, I think the matter will be back on the Order Paper next week. Finish your consultations with the President; we must finish that Bill before we go for Christmas.

Honourable members, for Item No. 8, the minister in charge of science and technology was supposed to come back for us to proceed but he is not here. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is not here for Item No. 9. Is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives ready for Item No. 10?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, this is now in the hands of the committee. Otherwise, I am here and ready.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the committee in charge of trade and industry? He is not there. For Item No.11, there is no committee chairperson. For Item No. 12, there is no committee chairperson. For Item No. 13, there is no committee chairperson. For Item No. 14, there is no committee chairperson. For Item No. 15, the minister is not present.

Therefore, let us go to Item No. 16, which is adjournment.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I did not get the opportunity to discuss the matter with you but I appeal to you to allow me raise it because it is a very important matter that affects one of us from my constituency. You could allow me to raise it since the Minster of Internal Affairs is also here.

THE SPEAKER: Eh. You have been here the all afternoon and you could have sent me a note. That is smuggling.
	
However, there is a football match at Lugogo. Let us go and support our team. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)

