Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 19 December 2019

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. There are a few matters to communicate. I heard from the media that the President has reshuffled the Cabinet and appointed some new ministers. 

Unfortunately, as of today, I have not received any communication. Of course, we are expected to vet them if they have been appointed but I have not received any communication. Therefore, I am just alerting the Appointments Committee that in case the letter comes during the recess, I will invite you to come back to perform that duty. But as of now, I do not have any official information.

Honourable members, yesterday, there were just three matters that had not been concluded. Can I invite hon. Watuwa? She had something to raise.

11.07
MS GRACE NAMAKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. In Bukwambeyi Bupoto Sub-county Namisindwa, boulders have come down and are behind a primary school. The next rain will push them to Bukwambeyi Primary School and will definitely come down to Sahana trading center.

The boulders have also blocked roads to Namisindwa District Headquarters. You cannot access the district headquarters from Manafwa. You have to go through the longer route of Manafwa, through Tororo closer to Kenya then you come back to Namisindwa District Headquarters. The bridges on Kufu and Sahana have been washed away.

My prayers are: the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should urgently come to our rescue and break up the boulders to save the primary school and the people around there. Also, the Uganda National Roads Authority should repair the bridges.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, Mt Elgon seems to be prone to disasters all the time. My prayer is that Government should intervene and come up with a legislation to create a Mt Elgon Authority - to borrow from the Tennessee Valley Authority - so that we can attend to the very important problems of the Mt Elgon area, develop tourism and other issues, so that the people of Mt Elgon can move and be able to do better things than dying.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the ministry does not wait for us to die like in Bududa before they come to our rescue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I think I understood the issue about the need to address the closure of the roads but I did not understand the issue of the Mt Elgon Authority. I do not even know whether it is really a matter of national importance. The one of the boulders yes, but this one of establishing an authority, you will have to bring a motion. Where is the Minister for Disaster and the Minister for Works and Transport? 

11.09
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, in addition to what the Member has just told the House, there is a crack in Namisindwa, which has formed right from Kenya, Namisindwa, Bududa, Budadiri up to Sebei. This crack is vibrating. When people try to hear what is going on down, they say that the ghosts are talking –(Laughter)

The crack is becoming bigger. We suspect that there is some poisonous gas which is coming from the ground. We are losing about 20 people in a day, which is extraordinary. I do not know whether people are dying like that in other districts like in Namisindwa. We have a burden of our voters calling us to buy coffins and organising funerals for the dead.

I pray that the concerned ministry goes and checks whether there is some poisonous gas coming from this crack. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, on that second one, it is similar to what hon. Muhumuza raised here. He came and said there were cracks developing in some subcounties in Bundibugyo and last week, I think you saw want happened. The ground opened and three villages were destroyed - I think the gods were talking.

It is a serious issue. I think the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was required to go there and check what was happening in Bundibugyo; now it is happening the other side of the rift valley.

11.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have sent people there but we have not received a report. As soon as we get it, we will let you know.

THE SPEAKER: But you need to address the issue now in Namisindwa- you are waiting for Bundibugyo but there is a new issue in Namisindwa.

MR D’UJANGA: Yes, we just got this. We will get more details from the honorable colleague so that we can take that one also on board.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. The Minister of Works and Transport is required to assist and create access to the district headquarters. That is an issue of democracy. The voters cannot reach the seat of their democracy; it is a problem. The minister of works should handle that as quickly as possible.

11.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues of national importance. The first is the bridge between Kaliro and Pallisa. Two days ago, that bridge called Saka Bridge was blown completely and we find difficulty in crossing. 

When we contacted the Ministry of Works and Transport, they said the Ministry of Finance has not released the money despite them asking for an emergency fund of Shs40 billion at the end of October. To date, the money has not been released. We are only being told that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has only released Shs5 billion to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. However, the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is highly affected, is not being helped.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, people are in dire need of support in that area. We need urgent attention to address that issue of Saka Bridge.

Secondly, is the issue regarding the public concern in the way one of our own - the Minister for Security, Gen. Tumwine - conducted himself and the way he mistreated another General - Gen. Angina on 13 December 2019.

Madam Speaker, what is even disheartening is the tone and the language that the minister used while calling and ordering his colleague, whom he should have just summoned and said, what you are doing, if it is true, is wrong. But to tell him, “Do not bring this type of behaviour to our army…” does it mean Gen. Angina does not belong to the UPDF or are there two armies in this country?

Madam Speaker, we have had misbehaviour by some Generals but they have been mishandled. We had the issue of Kasirye Gwanga and Kyaligonza; it was very humiliating and embarrassing for a General to treat a fellow General like that. 

I think the Commander-in-Chief should take action on this minister because this is not our first time that we are witnessing this behaviour. For example, in the Seventh Parliament, he wanted to box the Deputy Speaker, hon. Oulanyah. There was also the issue of hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the way he referred to you, Madam Speaker. 

I think his conduct in this House is a matter of national concern that needs to be addressed because today, it is those people but you never know who is next. Probably Gen. Pecos Kuteesa or somebody else will be the next victim, given the minister’s conduct. 

Therefore, the Commander-in-Chief should take action on the conduct of Gen. Tumwine. If it is the issue of land grabbing, I think we have cases and allegations on him –(Interruption) 

MAJ. GEN. KUTEESA: Madam Speaker, I am forced to speak for the first time to address what I was addressed to do. I am holding the military doctrine. Every institution has its mandate and the way it does its work. When civilians start telling soldiers how they should run, I think they are overstepping their mandate. 

The point of order is, what concern does hon. Okupa have regarding the conduct of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF)? What is his order? What is his mandate? I would like an explanation, please. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I think the conduct of any Government official is of concern to the country. Therefore, it is not a no-go area. The people of Uganda are entitled to comment on what they have seen that is not pleasing to them. Please complete. There is no point of order there.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, for your wise ruling and I would like to tell the General that tomorrow, if you are attacked, I will still comment. As a representative of this country, any person –(Interruption) 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are aware that the UPDF is an army instilled with discipline and there should be discipline at all times.

I watched what happened; Gen. Angina almost wet his pants. He was shivering. I almost cried when I saw what was happening because it was too much. He was harassed and he shivered. It was very painful to watch and very unfortunate. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague, hon. Okupa, for giving way. When we were growing up, we were taught that the army is supposed to be very disciplined and decent and they have a way of resolving their internal conflicts. 

However, it really beats my understanding when I see a General being demeaned by his superior before a civilian. That sends a very bad message to the people out there. This is really not an issue of Gen. Angina as such but an issue of professionalism of the army and the country in terms of the UPDF. 

Whereas Gen. Tumwine is a Minister for Security, I think he also needs to respect his own people. The information I would like to give is, it would be wrong for this House to just watch an issue that happened between these two serving officers without taking action or making a comment. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, what are your prayers? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, my prayers are that: 

    1. The appointing authority takes action.
    2. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should make a statement to this House on whether or not that is the conduct of the UPDF. If it is the conduct of the UPDF then they should tell us, like Gen. Pecos said. 

However, I know that is not the conduct of the UPDF but that of undisciplined soldiers.

Madam Speaker, we have heard so many –(Interruption) 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A soldier beat civilians at 3.00 a.m. We are the same ones complaining about soldiers beating fishermen and grabbing land. When their superiors try to mention it to them, we want the matter to be resolved in the “bedroom” under the “bed” when it should be resolved publically. They should be told off publically.

Is it in order for us to start protecting the land grabbers; those who beat civilians? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is grabbing land. Let us hear from the UPDF representative. 

11.22
COL. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the submission of hon. Elijah Okupa, I do not condone that verbal exchange that happened because it is unfortunate. 

However, it was not correct for the soldiers - the honourable said, “Does it mean that some people own the forces and the others do not?” What was not proper and what the General condemned was deployment of soldiers at 3 o’clock in the night in a land wrangle moreover. It is not the work of the UPDF to be deployed at 3 o’clock in the night. They were deployed by a General on a private property because of land wrangles. We have a procedure of how these issues are handled. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot take a position on this issue because I do not think we have enough facts from either side. Let us go to the next item. 

11.23
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of serious concern in relation to Lt Mutatina – we are again back to the soldiers – and John K. Behimbiza, a staff Sergeant who went to Kisanga Market yesterday at the peak of our discussion regarding UPDF soldiers harassing fish vendors. 

This time, they did not go to the lake but went and harassed the wife to Ambassador James Mbahimba in a market. He stripped her naked yesterday. She had gone to buy fish in the market. The lady pleaded with him and told him that she was actually a customer and not the owner of the fish but he did not listen. 

There was another incident in Kizungu Market where the same staff sergeant went and confiscated people’s fish on the stalls, including mukene which he called ‘immature fish’. The vendors called me. They had surrounded him and he had cocked his gun. If I had spent another five minutes without reaching the scene, lives would have been lost. It was not until I negotiated with the vendors and we created a safe passage for him that he left. 

The issue of the UPDF harassing people on the lakes and in the markets is a very serious matter. 

For now, my prayer is that since the cause of their deployment was to stabilise the fish stocks in the lakes and that has been achieved, they should be taken away. Their activities should be suspended until the mode of operation is streamlined and the rules of engagement are clear, if Government deems it necessary to send them back to the field. That is my prayer. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall address that after the minister has made a statement under item No.3 (1). 

11.26
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues: One was for yesterday and the other is for today. We are coming to the end of the year and usually our people expect a Christmas gift. 

The issue I am talking about is the police SACCO where the people in uniform have been saving their money. Now it is almost Christmas and the money is not there. 

I am told by one of the heads of the Police SACCO that the books of accounts disappeared. I wonder how police is supposed to keep people and their property, when they cannot keep their own books of accounts. It is pathetic. The wives of police officers are disturbed. There is no money for Christmas. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs, are you aware of the failure of the SACCO to –? 

11.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I am aware of the issue of the police SACCO, called the Exodus SACCO. We had a meeting on Tuesday with the police authority about that matter. 

The IGP informed us that last week but one, all the representatives of the SACCO had their AGM in which they elected a new management committee as per the Cooperatives Societies Act. These were people who came from all over the country. They have formed a new committee and within that committee they formed another sub-committee to investigate management issues in the SACCO. 

It is true there were management issues which persisted in the SACCO. It is this investigative team set up by the new management committee – which was freely and democratically elected under the direction of the IGP – that will come out with a report and guide on the next course of action. 

Since this matter is being investigated, there is no shortcut now in the remaining two or three days to Christmas, which can handle the matter. 

It is true; the members of the SACCO will not be able to get the funds. It is absolutely important that this investigation is completed in order to streamline the management of the SACCO. (Members rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is under investigation, I do not know what you want the minister to do. 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to give clarification. The SACCO they are talking about is called the Exodus and it belongs to the police. 

The Exodus SACCO decided to divert money to do other businesses. They appeared before the committee and it is not about the management; it is about diversion of money that was used to do other construction activities not as per what is prescribed to be done in the SACCO.  

What the minister is saying is not true. Bringing new management will not solve the problem. The issue is diversion of money that the police have invested to do other activities. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs has delayed to take action. During the budget policy statement discussions, I happened to attend the internal and defence affairs committee meeting and this matter was brought up. This was about four months ago. 

I also attended the Public Accounts Committee; this matter has been brought up by the Auditor-General who said that it was wrong for the Exodus to divert the money for construction. 

What we needed was the Ministry of Internal Affairs to put the money back and then the police should be able to access their money from the SACCO. What the minister should be telling us now is when his ministry is putting the money back in the SACCO in order for the policemen and women to get their money for Christmas. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the Government illegally took money from savers? (Interjections) 

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, it is a pity that even police officers who saved their money are not allowed to withdraw it when they go there. When you meet them, they ask to be assisted. It seems like it is a SACCO of theft. Can they tell us the truth? 

THE SPEAKER: That is what I have asked the minister to clarify; whether it is true that the Uganda Government illegally took money from a SACCO of savers and used it for Government work. 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, that is not true. That is a rumour –(Interjections)– I would be grateful to receive the documentation, which backs up that allegation. In the absence of that, it is a rumour – (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, this is a House of record. During the budget process, we discussed that matter in this House and it was the submission of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we should allocate money to the police to repay the money that they had used from the SACCO; we did that. 

The argument was that we should appropriate money directly to the SACCO but it was rejected because the SACCO did not have a vote account. Therefore, we paid that money to the police. What the minister should explain now is where they have kept that money.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the man who keeps the money.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, it is important that the House allows me to explain this matter. I said that the SACCO, for all intent and purposes, is registered under the Cooperative Societies Act. When the committees in charge of defence and budget requested that issues of management be addressed and the funds refunded, it is the SACCO members who must move that motion. That is why the IGP ordered for a meeting of the Exodus SACCO to take place. It is also the reason the new management committee was formed. 

Additionally, it is the reason an investigative team has been put up by the new management so that all these management issues, which have been raised, are dealt with by the cooperatives and not by Parliament. What you can only ask is for Parliament to receive the report of that committee.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister in charge of microfinance and cooperatives.

11.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Madam Speaker, the SACCOs constitute a very big portion of the microfinance industry. I will not tolerate any individual whose aim is to swindle savers’ money. (Applause) SACCOs are supposed to be managed by the shareholders. The Exodus SACCO is member-owned. The IGP cannot dictate how it should be run.

I suggest that the Registrar of Companies audits the Exodus SACCO with immediate effect. This business of the IGP conducting investigations will not help. It is the Registrar of Companies who should go and carry out an audit. Once that is done, we shall be able to identify who did what and even if – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the information coming from the House is that the Auditor-General reported on this matter and that arising from that loss, this House was asked to appropriate money to police to refund the SACCO’s money. Therefore, where is that money?

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, it was good for Parliament to do so but we want to know, from the minister, where they put the money. (Laughter) Otherwise, the act of Parliament appropriating money to refund the SACCO’s money encourages further indiscipline. Why did Government pick money from the SACCO without following the normal procedures? We must not encourage indiscipline. SACCOs are managed by members, not via dictatorship by superiors. 

We have the Uganda Parliamentary SACCO but the Speaker does not dictate how it should be run. It is good that Parliament appropriated the money but those who misappropriated the SACCO’s money must be brought to book. Where did the money go? It is now discouraging members from saving and portraying a bad image yet we are encouraging many people to form SACCOs. If a police SACCO has been mismanaged, it is gives a bad image to this country.

11.40
THE MINISTER FOR STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Madam Speaker, whatever is being raised has some grain of truth. I request the House to give me the opportunity to explain because I have followed this issue since it started.

First of all, the IGP wrote to the Registrar of Cooperatives inquiring about a need to have the SACCO audited. We invited the purported members of the board to the ministry – (Interjection) - I am using the word “purported” because their term of office had expired. We called them and required that an audit should take place. 

We had wanted to involve the students of Kigumba to put together the records because the Exodus SACCO had no single record. Somehow, the students could not do the work. The Registrar of Companies appointed an audit team and the team proceeded to audit the Exodus SACCO. 

For a number of years, likely from 2013 to 2017, there are no financial records for the Exodus SACCO. In the absence of the records, the board members in the recent meetings of the SACCO, which I attended, found a report by the board members requesting that, that period where books of accounts are missing should be excluded from their file accounts. 

Madam Speaker, I advised the board that they had no authority to write off books of accounts until the members of the SACCO, in an annual general meeting, resolved so otherwise. After the resolution, we agreed and their records show that it is true the Exodus Sacco ventured into business of supply of food stuff to the police in order to get some more money.

Madam Speaker, they were complaining that they had not been paid. Therefore, in the absence of the records and because the police had not paid them for the supply of food stuffs, the SACCO cannot break even. In fact, their loan portfolio was only Shs 20 billion. However, when you look at all police officers contributions, you find money is missing.

Madam Speaker, they had an election; they elected new office bearers and we instructed that an investigation be carried out. That is the status quo as of now.

MR OKUPA: Can I give information to the honourable minister? You have put it right but that is why Parliament appropriated money to the police in order to pay Exodus. This is why we are asking where that money is. Otherwise, the money was given.

MR GUME: It is indeed true, the Exodus SACCO demands money from the Uganda Police for the services done. That is the situation.

THE SPEAKER: I have been told that this House appropriated money to the police to pay the debt. That is what we want to know: what happened to the money we appropriated?

MR GUME: Madam Speaker, if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says they paid the Exodus SACCO money, we have a responsibility to follow the payment given by the finance ministry to police. I think that money has not been transmitted to the SACCO. That is the situation on the ground.

11.46
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): It is clear a supplementary request was put before  this House and we appropriated it under the Police Vote for transmission to the SACCO [HON. MEMBERS: “How much?”] I do not remember the figure but the appropriation was done.

I remember hon. Nandala-Mafabi tried to challenge it but an explanation was given to justify the payment. Otherwise, the SACCO did not have a vote under Government and so, the money had to go to police so that the police could pay the SACCO.

Madam Speaker, I have heard the minister talk about investigation but I would like to request the minister to clarify and tell us whether they are serious. If you institute an investigation, where there is a fraud, what have you done to the perpetrators of the fraud? They are in office and they have not been interdicted. 

The Inspector General of Police (IGP) who is meddling in this matter should have been interdicted already. You cannot have the IGP who is part of this fraud in office yet you are claiming they are being investigated. What are you investigating? All those people should have been interdicted first before you carry out an investigation. That is the procedure that should be done. 

11.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Cooperatives for the explanation given. That is actually the correct position.

Madam Speaker, there are two issues: The first is the issue of the management related to Exodus and their going to business. That matter is for Exodus as a SACCO. 

The second issue is the money, which was appropriated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to police for purposes of paying the supplies that included the suppliers from the SACCO.

This second element is not an issue, which was raised here for me to answer. What was raised to me was the status of the SACCO and that is what I answered. I said the new management of SACCO is in place. They have, in their own wisdom, put an investigative team with full cooperation of the controller of cooperatives and SACCOs.

Having said that, I need answers from the police, regarding the appropriation of the money to them for the payment of the suppliers including the SACCO. Madam Speaker, I do not have these answers now. I need to get those answers. Given time, I will get that answer and submit it.

Secondly, when the SACCO, which is under an institution called Exodus, is ready, we shall table it here and Members will debate it the way it comes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when we resume, we want an answer to where the money we appropriated go.  

MR OBIGA: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not going to conclude this matter because there is a lot. Let us wait for the minister to come with the answer and then we can raise other issues  

11.50
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development convinced the House and so, the Committee on Budget that I sit on appropriated money to give to police to pay the debt. They said the police had a debt for food to pay.  We actually did not know it was a police SACCO.

Madam Speaker, in the event that the police SACCO has lost its record for the last five years, how much money is that? For how long is Parliament going to pay debts of people who have mismanaged their assets?

Madam Speaker, we do not know whether or not all the money of the five years was used to buy food. These are some of the issues that we need to ascertain. I, therefore, feel that if the minister is coming to report, he should bring a report of the five years. How can an institution operate for five years without records? Who was supervising that institution?

Madam Speaker, we need that information. Thank you.

11.52
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the ministers for their submissions.

The information I would like to give is that the policemen are public servants and so, if they have a SACCO, their money is deducted under a particular code. Therefore, if they do not have the records, I think they are records with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Otherwise, these people are civil servants and so, their money is always deducted and forwarded to the SACCO. For that matter, I think we have alternative sources, if we are to audit them and get the money.

Secondly, every year, there is an annual delegates’ conference. I, therefore, expect that these members of the SACCO should have asked for permission to use the people’s money but not to sit as an executive and begin transacting their own business. I think something must be done and they should be brought to book. Thank you.

11.53
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this matter is very important. We have been informed by the ministers here that there are no records of accounts.

THE SPEAKER: What did you say? 

MR OKOT-OGONG: We have been informed by all these ministers that there are no records of accounts of the Police Exodus SACCO. 

I am proposing to this Parliament that the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (Cooperatives), using his powers, because SACCOs are under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (Cooperatives), suspends deductions from all police officers, for the time being and with immediate effect, until the management has been sorted out. 

THE SPEAKER: Can Parliament do that? Can we interfere in the internal affairs of a SACCO? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, under the Cooperative Societies Act, the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has powers to manage and supervise all SACCOs in the country. With that power, he can suspend deductions from members of the SACCO.

MR PATRICK NGOBI: Honourable colleagues, it is not the minister who has powers but the Registrar of Cooperatives. The Registrar of Cooperatives has used part of his powers, like I explained, to have the SACCO audited. The auditors spent three months with the police and got the records. 

In the general meeting, the Board reported that even before they took over office, the records could not be traced by the previous regime. That is why I tend to borrow the Member’s advice that since payments to the SACCO are deducted from the payroll of the police persons, I should request the Registrar of Cooperatives to ensure that these deductions are computed at the source. 

The other scenario is, if we receive the income side, how shall we handle the expenditure side? We forget that these cooperatives are private entities owned by the members. They resolved, in their meeting, that an investigation be done. Therefore, we should follow suit. 

They did not write off the books even when the other Board had suggested that the books be written off. We said, “You have no right to write off the books until the members resolve as such.” As a result, the investigations shall go on.

11.57
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, from what I can see, the centre no longer holds. I would like to inform the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that I have a SACCO. Every year, to renew the licence, there must be an AGM. The Registrar of Cooperatives requires that you submit audited books of accounts to show how you have been proceeding. However, from how you are proceeding, it looks as if you are not in charge. 

What hon. Kasolo is saying is correct. There is no way that the Board can decide to invest members’ money without their involvement in an AGM. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are taking a lot of time on this issue. What concerns us is appropriation under Vote 144 in the Financial Year 2019/2020. It says, “Vote 144 – Uganda Police: Payment of Shs 5 billion to cater for Domestic Arrears under the Police SACCO”. This is our concern. Where is the Shs 5 billion? Those are the answers we want from you. The internal management of the SACCO cannot be done from this House. Thank you.

11.58
MR PAUL MUSOKE (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda has 131 districts and out of those districts, only 11 have gazetted dumping sites. Of the 11 dumping sites, seven are pilot projects funded by the World Bank.

As I speak, Kampala Capital City Authority is illegally dumping waste and exposing it to the community. People are scavenging these dumping sites to pick plastic bottles, which they recycle to pack juice in local areas like the ghettos.

When you look at the dumping sites –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR PAUL MUSOKE: I am still trying to build my point. If NEMA was given priority to offer that service in the 131 districts, we would have over 310 dumping sites in the country, which would fetch Shs 2 billion of revenue under NEMA.

Apparently, NEMA is frustrated. I would like to pray to the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Local Government to emphasise this. As I speak, the President has approved 20 industries in my locality. In addition to the existing ones, I have 71 industries. Out of those industries, I would be fetching Shs 2.2 billion annually as an increase on the revenue of my local authority.

Madam Speaker, we are paying heavily to dump waste in those pilot projects and paying heavily in return to pick the finished products. Those pilot projects are in Masaka, Mbalala and Jinja. They make manure and charcoal –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers, honourable member? 

MR PAUL MUSOKE: My humble prayer is, the Ministry of Local Government, the Prime Minister and all other line ministries should emphasise the gazetting of dumping sites in the country. Otherwise, we are killing our environment and industries. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think you should have brought a motion so that we debate it and make resolutions? Right now, there is no decision.

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Madam Speaker, the policies are in place. I am raising a matter of national importance -

THE SPEAKER: I am saying, can you bring a motion so that we debate it in a focused manner? 

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

STATEMENT BY MINISTERS ON THE MISCONDUCT BY UGANDA PEOPLES DEFENCE FORCES (UPDF) AMONG FISHING COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Before we go there, there is a small request from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

12.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Three weeks ago, this House gave the Committee on Physical Infrastructure 20 extra days to finalise the consideration of the Traffic and Road Safety Bill.

Whereas the deadline is today, 19 December 2019, the committee has been unable to complete the task because for the last two weeks, we have not had a permanent clerk to the committee. 

The clerk to the committee is away on sick leave and the few we have had have been up and down. In light of that, Madam Speaker, the committee requests for two more weeks to begin counting, after the recess.

THE SPEAKER: You report as soon as we return; report in the week when we return. Do you need two weeks?

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, the committee has not heard positions on five clauses and the fact that we are going away on a long recess; we are not very sure whether we shall have quorum in the first week of return. So, maybe we can get it in the second week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, report in the second week after our return.

MR KAFEERO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MISCONDUCT BY UGANDA PEOPLES DEFENCE FORCES (UPDF) AMONG FISHING COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTRY

12.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Col Okello Engola): Madam Speaker, in the course of debate in this august House on Wednesday l8 December 2019, Parliament asked the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to make a statement on allegations of misconduct by the Fisheries Protection –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, Parliament requested the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come and clarify on all these piled up questions concerning the military across the country. This country is aware that recently, we have been facing prequalification of who is an authentic member of the UPDF and who is not.

So, can this minister prequalify himself? Is he qualified to be called UPDF and therefore, can speak as the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs or he is the kind of person who may be coming to – (Laughter) – Can the minister first prequalify himself? Doesn’t he fall in the category of Lt Gen. Charles Angina, whose case we are handling right now?

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister, before he makes a statement, to prequalify himself. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether I have understood what the honourable member is saying.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the minister has been cleared by the appointing authority that he is an authentic member of the UPDF. Secondly, for being a minister, we have cleared him as Parliament but has he been delegated by the appointing authority for him to stand here and speak on behalf or in defence of UPDF?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are serious issues. It is this House that said the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should come and explain. Take the Floor.

COL ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I think I am now qualified to answer. Thank you for your ruling.

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that there have been several other allegations before of torture and illegal detention by the UPDF Fisheries Protection Unit, as was mentioned yesterday. However, we have been taking investigations into this matter all along. In some of the matters, some of the allegations made, investigated case by case, we have made responses to this august House in the past.

At this juncture, I notify the august House that we are working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come out with a modality of ending the UPDF operations in the lakes and then the lakes will get open very soon.

Madam Speaker, the matter which was raised in Parliament yesterday, 18 December 2019, is of serious concern not only to the area members of Parliament but also to us as Government and the people of this country. 

Information available to us on this matter indicates that a 16-year old young girl called Ekite Naome and a daughter to Mr Calvin Ogwang reported a case of rape by a person who was dressed in a T-shirt and military uniform with a gun. 

The young girl claimed that a soldier came to their home and found her mopping. He requested her to escort and show him a path leading to some village but along the way, he forcefully had sex with her. This girl was then taken to Amolatar Health Centre III for medical examination. The doctor’s preliminary medical report indicated that there was penetration. 

An identification parade was immediately conducted at the UPDF detachment in the presence of the Resident District Commissioner of Amolatar, District Police Commander, District Internal Security Officer, LCI Chairperson and the family members; where the girl identified one soldier called Private Elidard Atuhaire as the prime suspect. 

Madam Speaker, this soldier was immediately arrested by the UPDF Commander at the Detach and handed over to the police. He is currently detained at Amolatar Central Police Station, as further investigations are being conducted. 

It should, however, be noted that as Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the UPDF, we do not condone, at all, acts of indiscipline. Let me repeat this; we do not condone any act of indiscipline in the UPDF. Therefore, during the cause of conducting further investigations; if found to be true that this UPDF soldier indeed raped this girl, then he will face the court, in accordance with the law of the country. 

In that regard, therefore, I wish to inform this august House that the Police are currently handling the matter, while we are also chasing up any other atrocities which are made in any other sector of the lakes in Uganda. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.13
Mr Anthony okello (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, allow me thank the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs for acknowledging the seriousness of the rape case. 

However, allow me to also correct the record that the girl was taken to Amolatar Health Centre IV and examined by a qualified doctor but not the one at the health centre III.

And, without sounding contradictory to my brother, the honourable Minister for Defence and Veterans Affairs, allow me state the following with authority that:

The culprit is RA235208 Pte Atuhire Madurai. When this culprit was identified at the parade, the soldiers refused to hand him over to police. He was put in an army vehicle and escorted by six soldiers together with the RDC, DISO and District CID officer, among others, to the scene of crime.
 
Ekit Naome, the female juvenile, took the team to a garden of pigeon peas where she was raped in Acanokun Village.

On return to police, still the army refused to hand over Atuhire to the police. In fact, they cocked the guns and almost exchanged with the police to the point of grabbing the original medical form. It was only by luck that the form was photocopied; it is the photocopy that remained. The team decided to drive away. Right now, the culprit is not – I repeat - the culprit is not in police custody.

This is pure lying and by doing so, we are condoning rape. The issue at hand is a capital offence. I am not sure whether the law in this country is applied selectively to the extent that there is a group that belongs to criminality while other people should abide by the law. 

We see the army almost behaving like they are enemies of the police. We are doing this to the detriment of our people. We need to condemn this action in the strongest terms possible.

I am ashamed by the statement of the minister that he can have the audacity to lie to this august House - (Interjections) – the operations of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces on the lake ended long time ago. I informed this House that to date, the team has got no work on the ground apart from engaging in criminality.

There are many women in Amolatar that have been raped but for fear, they choose to keep quiet. There are many people that have been tortured but because no action can be taken, they do not report.

In Amolatar District, we are like children without a father. We are in a complete state of quagmire – (Member timed out.)

The speaker: Please conclude.

Mr Anthony Okello: As I conclude, now the girl cannot live comfortably in the community. However, I would like to thank her for standing firm for her rights because there are many people who do not come out to fight such atrocities that they might have faced; she has been traumatised. 

I would be glad if the officials of Government here were parents like me. We needed to give psychosocial support and counselling and find a way of settling this young girl. That will encourage victims of defilement and rape to come up.

Madam Speaker, my confidence has run low in as far as the officials representing Government are concerned. My heart bleeds. I can even cry here – (Interjections) – may be they have never seen a big person cry but I can. 

This higgly piggly and the lullabies should stop. I beg to submit. 

The speaker: Honourable minister, can you confirm that the man is under arrest? Where? What is the file number? 

COL okello engola: Madam Speaker, I can confirm to you that that culprit is under arrest – (Interjections) – I agree with you that the culprit was taken by the soldiers because they also wanted a statement from him. However, I instructed the commander of marines to send back that soldier to police because it is a police case. The commander must have taken him –(Interruption)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is becoming a culture for the people we entrust with authority to come and give us statements that do not reflect what we expect out of them.

Madam Speaker, the minister there stood and said in the statement that is on the Hansard that the culprit is under police custody and that he was handed over to police. When hon. Anthony Okello stood, he stated and said, I am speaking with authority that this gentleman was never handed over to police.

Madam Speaker, after that statement now the minister gets up to say that he instructed the commander - which he did not put in the first statement, to have that person because they wanted a statement.

The minister read the statement to the conclusion, nobody stopped him and whatever is on the Hansard is what he had brought; when we get the information, the minister changes. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for a full Minister of Defence - not even any other ministry but Defence - that protects the integrity of this country to come and change goal posts because he wants to meet what we want to hear to say that he even handed over some of this information to the rightful people?

Madam Speaker, we are investigating and we are interested in this area. Is it in order for the minister to come on the Floor and lie before the House, the public and even before you that the officer is in police custody? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Now, we are in the digital age, I want the Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of the police to send a message now to confirm that the man is in police custody? I want you to do it now. I think let us get a confirmation about where this man is. (Applause) 

I am saying this because one day, honourable minister, you stood on this Floor and said that the people who are burning boats in Namayingo were from Nigeria and yet they had a flag of Uganda - you said that here and I was here when you said it.

COL (RTD) ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, all that was conducted in the army detach was done by the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), the District Police Commander (DPC) DISO, LCI and the culprit was taken to police of Amolatar. When I was compiling this report, the culprit was in police.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs, who is in charge of the Police, is going to tell us whether the man is there or not. Honourable members, we have guests in the VIP gallery- a delegation from the National Assembly of Gambia, the Committee of Agriculture. 

We welcome hon. Momodou Ceesay, hon. Alhagie Sillah, hon. Sainey Jawara, hon. Alhagie Darboe, hon. Assan Touray, hon. Lamin Sanneh, hon. Kajali Fofana, hon. Foday Drameh, hon. Dembo Camara, hon. Omar Darboe, hon. Kaddy Camara, hon. Musa Nyassi, Mr Omar Sonko, Ms Sarata Bojang Committee clerk and Mr Lamina Fatajo FAO officer who is accompanying them to Uganda. You are welcome.

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to raise a procedural matter. When hon. Anthony Okello mentioned about the victim and also the Minister of State, the name of the victim was mentioned.

Madam Speaker, in protecting the victims of sexual violence, it is required that their names be protected. Since we have it on record, I wanted to ask that the name of the victim be protected and expunged from our records because it will point to the future. 

It is already known but for going forward it is better that, she is not on our official record so that she is protected. As we move forward, we had better refer to her as a 16 year old or 13 year old girl rather than by name. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is important to protect a situation.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you made a very wise ruling that we halt the business of this House until the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs comes to this House, tells us about the torture by the UPDF in the lakes, extortion that is taking place and the impounding of vehicles and picking money from people unlawfully.

Madam Speaker, when I was listening to the minister, I expected him to talk about this to brief Parliament comprehensively about what is happening and how we are solving this immediately.

When I was going home, I watched on television and the gentleman we talked about was burning fish nets - I think most of you watched Niwagaba burning fish nets. He was saying I am going to even do this more as Parliament continues to speak.

Madam Speaker, could we seek your indulgence, to make the minister report to this House and give us a solution how we are going to end this vice. Not just that, give us a report in the passing and of a specific case in Amolatar because these cases are happening everywhere.

Madam Speaker, I stood up to seek your indulgence so that the minister today and now gives us a comprehensive report on what is happening in the lakes - the torture by the UPDF so that we go back with what to tell our voters and Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: I will rule on it but let us hear from hon. Migadde first. 

12.32
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I came prepared for the minister’s response as far as fisheries is concerned. In his submission, it is as if he was praying that the young girl was raped so that he can cover up those other issues because he only chose to respond to the rape case. 

If he was to analyse yesterday’s Hansard, he would have noticed that a number of fisheries issues were raised. This is the third time that this issue has been raised but whenever it comes to fisheries, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs does not respond on the Floor. This is apart from the meeting we had with you, Madam Speaker. 

We are breaking off today and we are going to have a long recess but these issues are not yet answered, much as they have appeared here a number of times. What message are we going to take to our people? That is the message we have –(Interruption) 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank my honourable colleague, hon. Migadde. Concerning the response that the honourable minister has just given, I still want to confirm that he lied. I have just spoken to the Station Officer in Charge, who is acting as the District Police Commander. He is called Maxman Okello and his phone number is 0771303129. 

He has informed me that the culprit is not anywhere within the vicinity of Amolatar Central Police Station and they do not know his whereabouts. Hence, the information I am giving is that the report of the minister is misleading. At an appropriate time, we need to move a motion. 

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, I was getting information from my colleague.  I do not want to borrow hon. Okello’s words but as far as fisheries is concerned, I also speak with authority because I am a fisherman and I come from a fishing family. I have a lot of evidence to lay on the Table. That is why I wanted the minister to respond so that we can lay this on the Table. However, now that he has chosen to stay silent about fisheries, Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this document on the Table. 

I would like to first declare my interest as far as fisheries is concerned. I was educated using money from fisheries, I am a Member of Parliament representing a fishing community and my delicacy is fish. Therefore, at no time shall I condone illegal fishing. My interest is to see that we have fish but that we also follow the right procedures. 

A number of people have been paying money to the Fisheries Protection Force and I have been undertaking my own undercover investigations. Today, I would like to lay some documents. In the month of October on Lubya Island - I have 52 islands and this is one of them. 

Madam Speaker, these people set up a fuel dealer where people pay money under the guise of buying fuel. In the evening, this money is picked and shared. The owner of the engine is given a receipt that he submits to the barracks or detache so that he is able to get back the engine.

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention this: 

    i. On 13 October 2019, a one David paid Shs 360,000 at Kiwa and Sons Fuel dealer in Lubya Island;
    ii. On 21 October 2019, Gowa paid Shs 495,000 for the same, purported to be for 110 litres; 
    iii. On 26 October 2019, a one Baguma paid Shs 360,000 purportedly for fuel; 
    iv. On 21 October 2019, a one Steven Opolot paid Shs 650,000 purportedly for fuel; 
    v. On 13 October 2019, another Kibirige paid Shs 350,000 purportedly for fuel. This money is picked in the evening and shared;  
    vi. On 1 October 2019, a one Nathan Kanana paid Shs 490,000 purportedly for 110 litres of fuel;
    vii. On 14 October 2019, a one Julius Kizito paid Shs 300,000;
    viii. On 13 October 2019, a one Abdu paid Shs 270,000;
    ix. On 21 October 2019, a one Wilberforce Wabwire paid Shs  540,000 purportedly to be for fuel but was later picked in the evening;
    x. Paddy Gitta paid Shs 360,000 purportedly for fuel. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 
    xi. On 8 October 2019, a one Joseph Kakooza paid Shs 1,440,000 purportedly for fuel. 

Why the fuel issue? In the past, when we raised issues that there was extortion, the minister came here to deny those claims. They then changed the tactic so that you go and deposit this money with a fuel dealer, then you give him the balance in the evening. That is Shs 1.44 million. 

xii. On 12 October, a one Ivan, the other name withheld, paid Shs 1.2 million, purported to be for 250 litres of fuel. 
    xiii. On the 7 October, a one Mugwanga paid Shs 480,000 for fuel. 
    xiv. On the 13th of October, Jackson Musisi paid Shs 180,000 purported to be for fuel. 
    xv. On the 27th, a one Kassim paid Shs 300,000 purported to be for fuel. 
    xvi. On the 19th of October, Kaziba Robert paid Shs 180,000.

All these, when you total them – this is just one island and one month and only a few receipts; there are many more – it goes to over Shs 15 million from one island within a month. I have 52 islands. 

This is evidence that much as we want fish – that is actually our delicacy – but we do not condone extortion. Much as the fish is back, the only reason for the fish being back is not only due to the operation. 

The Kenyans are right now bringing most of their fish to Masese because there are issues in Kenya as far as fisheries is concerned. 

Our people are going for Christmas – you have heard the Minister of Cooperatives here saying that we encourage our people to save – they can no longer save because their savings are being handled by some officers somewhere else. 
What we want is how we can – we heard the minister say that they are working with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we appropriated money here and in a quarter, UPDF operations receive over Shs 300 million from this ministry. 

Madam Speaker, we want a cure for this. This is what Parliament should help us to do. We do not want to use the Lake for bathing; we want to use it for fishing. 

The fish is back and we do not want tourism from the lake – that other countries should move to Uganda to see how big our fish is. Our fish should be harvested at the right time. 

Our people today, whether you are using the right gear, operatives cannot fail to get an excuse. They either ask for the receipt one used to buy the engine – they ask for this deep in the waters. How does one carry the receipt they got for buying the engine deep in the waters? They might also ask for something like ice for the big fish. 

We are not against the UPDF because there are good UPDF officers but there are also a few who are bad and those are the ones we want to cure. 

Can these people whose names have been mentioned consistently be suspended as investigations are ongoing.

I do not need to mention the names again. Madam Speaker, you have a report. We have been mentioning these names that reoccur in every area. Can they be apprehended and relieved of their duties? The UPDF is not short of personnel. If these ones are misbehaving, let – I have seen UPDF bringing back soldiers from Somalia and replacing them with another team. Why is it that when it comes to fisheries, it is only these from January to December? We would like them changed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what you are proposing was a recommendation from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They had already recommended that these people should be changed but they have become fixtures. 

I am also very disappointed because I spent about four hours in a meeting with the Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Chief of Defence Forces and the Members from the island constituencies discussing these very issues of extortion, illegal detention centres and the motor vehicles in Nakasongola. 

This was in July and the minister has not come back to tell me what he has done and yet we gave him names. These Members have the information. We gave you the names of the officers, what they do, where they do it from. Hon. Adolf Mwesige has never come back to me to say, “This is what we have done.” 

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for taking those strict measures on what UPDF is doing. I would like to request you to allow me go and review what is going on and come back with all this. And also see how the names that have been mentioned can be handled. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the minister, yesterday, the House was suspended with very serious orders for the Minister of Defence  and Veteran Affairs and to come here and give us a comprehensive explanation. Now the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs has appeared with a flimsy explanation. I am happy that the Minister of Internal Affairs has now arrived with some good news. (Laughter) 

It would be prudent for the minister to admit that he is unable and maybe Parliament should find another alternative solution because coming back again and again – I am told that the minister has a record of coming up with flimsy reports. I think this is not right for Parliament. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much. I have had the benefit of reading the curriculum vitae of the minister, hon. Charles Okello Engola. He is the former artillery officer. In the army, the artillery just fires without a specific target.  (Laughter) 

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I represent UPDF. I know how we recruit, retain and utilise. The army is like any other institution. It has got absorption and rejection. We absorb the useful and we reject the un-useful. 

What the honourable member is saying about the history of the current minister is irrelevant to the discussion. We are asking, “What have you done?” We have always taken orders and reported. In fact, we do it in public. We have shot people on site. I do not know what these people are saying. 

The point of order I am raising is: how are you going to micromanage the defence of this nation with things, which are not applicable? Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Madam Speaker, the point I was making, if Gen. Pecos Kuteesa had allowed, is that the minister had requested to be allowed to go and review. I was bringing that history because it forms part of his opinion that now that he has misfired – in firing the artillery you go back and review and readjust so that you can shoot at the target. (Laughter) Therefore, we should allow this minister, having wandered around, to go and come back with a proper statement so that he addresses all the issues that have been raised.

DR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am of the view that we call for a serious inter-ministerial statement - including Defence, Internal Affairs and Fisheries – on this Floor.

THE SPEAKER: We have done that already.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have already given us the history that you, the highest authority in this institution, engaged the relevant authorities to discuss this and you did not come up with a clear answer. We have information that the Officer in Charge of Operations on the water bodies does not take orders from the Chief of Defence Forces. He takes orders from one person only –(Interruption)

MR OGUZU LEE: Thank you. The information I would like to give you is that yesterday, hon. Odur tabled a letter from the President, indicating that all officers who have been implicated in extortions and raping girls should not be punished and that letter is in this Parliament. What more report do we expect the minister to come with when His Excellency, the President has directed that those officers should not be reprimanded?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, today, I am not in good health but I am constrained to rise on a point of procedure. A colleague has raised very useful but disturbing information that the Head of State in Uganda can write a letter saying “do not punish criminals who defile our daughters, rape our sisters or torture innocent people” our people. He said the letter was laid on the Table. 

Is it not procedurally right, therefore, that we recall that letter and read it, letter by letter, to ascertain whether that is what it says? To me, it sounds criminal even on the part of the President that before a person is taken through the due process of the law and is convicted, so as to call into play the prerogative of mercy, the President can interfere with the potential or prospective prosecution. 

Guide me, Madam Speaker, whether it is not appropriate that we recall that letter, read it and ascertain by ourselves and see how to access the President for proper advice. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I believe the letter is available. I think it was copied to Members from Amolatar and Nakasongola.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the letter was copied to all Members of Parliament from Lango. I have a copy of the letter in my pigeon hole.

THE SPEAKER: I have got it. This letter is from State House and it was written on 19 November 2019, to the Chief of Defence Forces at Mbuya to inform all stations. The letter reads: “Report into the Fisheries Protection Unit  Operations at Kyebisire Landing Site on Lake Kyoga. I have read the reports compiled by the board of inquiry. Given the facts, I do not agree that Lt. Nshekanabo should be punished for over-reacting and beating the arrested wanainchi after one of them, Godfrey Maleka, cut the finger of Pte Okello. This is because, apparently, he himself had been earlier on attacked by illegal fishermen who were legally arrested and handed over to the police but were corruptly released by the police. They were never tried. 

Lt Nshekanabo should instead be guided that beating people is unnecessary and illegal. Cordoning, searching and arresting is in order but no beating. Actually, Lt Nshekanabo should be commended for his soldiers not shooting Maleka, the one who cut the finger of soldier Okello and for not killing the wanainchi (the illegal fishermen) that attacked Nshekanabo earlier.

It is, therefore, not correct, given the cascades of illegalities to start with Nshekanabo who had acted legally for most of the way. He should be told that beating spoils his otherwise correct actions. The cascades of illegalities are: illegal fishing, attacking Nshekanabo, the police releasing the attackers of Nshekanabo, Maleka cutting the finger of Okello, the police force that lived peacefully with the fishermen.

I, therefore, direct that the following should be done: the policemen who released the attackers of Nshekanabo must all be arrested, charged and sentenced and dismissed from the Police Force and never to be employed again in the Public Service of either the Central or local government. Secondly, all the attackers of Nshekanabo must be arrested and charged with attempted murder. Thirdly, the attacker of soldier Okello should be arrested and charged with attempted murder. Fourthly, Lt Nshekanabo should be counselled never to beat anybody again. It is wrong and not necessary. 

However, the soldiers should be sensitised in the right procedures of handling wrongdoers: warning, etcetera. They also have a right to use firearms in self-defence against violent criminals like those using pangas to attack our soldiers. The pangas can cause bleeding, leading to death. They are not sterilised. They can cause infection. Nobody should, therefore, cut our soldiers.

Yoweri Museveni,
The President.

Copied to: 
The Vice-President
The Speaker
The Chief Justice
The Prime Minister
The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs
The Minister of Internal Affairs
The Attorney-General
Members of Parliament for Nakasongola
Members of Parliament for Lango.”

That is the letter.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we have mentioned time and again that we have an over-bullying President who overrides institutions and systems in this country. So, it is the duty of this Parliament to protect all citizens without exceptions. 

First, you do not need a presidential directive to prosecute a person who attacks a soldier or any other person. When I hear that one, even after agreeing that Nshekanabo breached the law, he says “charge others, convict them.” The President is using the words: “I direct…” meaning he is directing the court system on the verdict to be reached, the sentence to be given and he is pronouncing mercy on another evident criminal. The person I am talking about is the Fountain of Honour. We are here grilling my comrade hon. Engola notwithstanding whatever is happening here.  I am not embarrassed to refer to you as my brother. We are grilling this man. 

Madam Speaker, we have received information that these people report to no one else. Is it, therefore, not procedurally right that since the minister requested for time, we give him one hour to come back with a report after consulting the culprits mentioned on the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs?

1.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, you asked me to confirm whether the suspect in this rape case is in police custody. Allow me to give a brief sequence of events yesterday and today -(Interjections) –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I am not a robot to say yes or no. I am an honourable member like you.

Yesterday, after the event, there was a parade of the soldiers who are involved; parade of identification. The police, the OC of Amolatar, the Resident Police Commander and the District Police Commander together with the Criminal Investigation Officer went to the scene. A parade was done and the culprit was identified. After his identification, he was taken to police custody   yesterday. 

Meanwhile, the police took charge of the victim and she was taken to the medical facility. She was examined and the Prima Facie evidence was that there was a rape.

Later in the evening, the detache commander and some of the soldiers came and requested that this man must be taken to the detache. There was an objection from the police. The objection reached a level, where the exchanges were a little too hot and the police yielded and the man was taken under force to the military detache with the following promise –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, listen. 

MR OBIGA: The promise was that the gentleman would be brought today. As of now, I have talked to the RPC, DPC, the RDC but the gentleman has not been produced to the police. That is the situation.
Madam Speaker, this is what happened as of yesterday and today. I do not know when the minister made his statement. Probably, by the time he made it yesterday, the man was in custody but that is the position. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Gen. what is the way forward?

1.07
GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like Members have rightly observed, yesterday, we suspended the House because of this issue. However, you had directed that the minister gives a report to the effect of the things that had been reported concerning Fisheries Protection Force.

We had also made proposals since this matter has been on the Floor for quite some time but we have not seen actions being taken. Therefore, I propose that the submission that the minister be given one hour will not be enough because of the many issues and they are far reaching. 

We had just heard a letter from his Excellency the President. I, therefore, propose that we need time to give our report and findings to the minister to cause a bottle of inquiry by UPDF for them to be able to tell us –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the Member to give her proposals.

GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Speaker, I am saying this because we have investigated and reported but no action has been taken. The silence from the leadership – they either do not accept our findings or otherwise.

My submission would be that we should use our findings. They should report case by case. If we reported death, they should come and tell us whether it is true or not. If it is true, what action is taken and if it is not true, they should tell us what it is.

Madam Speaker, that is what I feel.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just told you that in July, I spent four hours with the Minister of State for Defence, the Chief of Defence Forces in my office discussing these issues; item by item, name by name, death by death, extortion by extorting but they have not answered. In fact, the man who was drowning people in Namayingo was promoted. He is now a Major.

1.11
MR ASUMAN	BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As part of the way forward, I would like to propose that this Parliament directs that the UPDF ceases to manage the fisheries sector in the meantime.

Madam Speaker, the law governing the fisheries sector does not envisage UPDF managing that sector. It talks about the chief fisheries officer, authorised officers and it even explains the authorised officers. It talks about the police but not every police officer. It even designates the ranks of those who are supposed to manage that sector.

In the absence of that, we would be having this same problem and I think the minister while making the statement was talking about a timetable. I think in the meantime, the fisheries sector be exclusively managed as envisaged under the law. Otherwise, what is happening now is that and the learned Attorney General is here.

Madam Speaker, under our law, UPDF has no connection whatsoever with the fisheries. The law is very clear; both the act and the regulations made under that Act. Therefore, the deployment of the UPDF on our waters to manage the fisheries sector, with the greatest respect, was done outside the law.

Finally, I am concerned by the minister’s statement. As an advocate, the chain of evidence for this matter of rape has been disrupted. I am worried that eventually, this girl may not get justice. Those of us who have argued cases in defence of these victims know that the moment the scene of crime is tampered with and the moment suspects are protected, the end result becomes negative. Why, for example, did the army go and pick the suspect from police? Was there any justification to take the suspect from police custody? It was not there.

That tells you that other pieces of evidence could be disrupted and interrupted with and at the end of it all, that chain of evidence will be destroyed –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Basalirwa, for giving way. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, as a way forward, I would like to give information that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should instruct the DPCs and OC Stations to take complaints from the public against individual officers who misbehave under the UPDF. There is an order for them not to take complaints from victims of these army officers on the water bodies. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you for that information. As I conclude, these officers who went and forcefully asked for the suspect to be taken to the army barracks should be brought to book because what they did was wrong. This suspect was rightly in the custody of the police. Why were they forcefully taking him away? They should also be brought to book to explain why they were breaking the law. Thank you.

1.14
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE BIRAAHWA (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the jeshi la wananchi, which is supposed to protect the fishing communities, among others, is now exhibiting conducts of piracy and overrunning police stations. What they did was overrunning a Police station.

We are aware that this enforcement is a task of none other than the Constitutional Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs who is the President. None of the ministers that we are asking to give us a solution can actually give us one. 

I come from Bugunga fishing community as you know, and we have been fishing on lakes Kyoga and Victoria. We have an incident where a truck hired by 48 widows who were taking fish to Arua on a ferry through Panyimur was taken to Nakasongola without any due process of the court. The widows, together with their orphans, went to Arua Market to wait for the lorry to come, only to be told that the lorry was in Nakasongola. The fish was found in Bwera Market and Bunagana. This matter requires the President. 
If it is possible, the President should come to this Parliament and address the nation on the issues of fisheries. You are aware that for over seven years –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MUKITALE: Can I move a motion, Madam Speaker? I would like to move a motion that the President, as the Constitutional Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the one who put the Fisheries Enforcement Force in place, comes to Parliament to explain to the whole country the challenges in the fisheries sector. 

We are also aware that Government has not invested in the fisheries sector for the last 30 years. We have only come to the sector to enforce but there is no budget provision for the fishing communities. Government has not even invested in giving us the right fishing gears. The last time this was done, it was ACCORD and Fishing Scheme (RFS) that did it. 

I move that the President comes and addresses this House before we adjourn. He should come and inform the country on how he intends to deal with all the problems of fisheries, including revamping the fisheries sector, giving fishing communities the right fishing gears and making sure that the police, local authorities and the fisheries department take charge of the sector as opposed to the UPDF coming in, as if for post-mortem. 

I would like to move that the motion be seconded and agreed to. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before you second the motion, the House is rising today, which means the meeting cannot take place until next year. What you are proposing is, therefore, not feasible.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I perfectly understand the spirit in which my brother, hon. Mukitale, is bringing this motion. However, we are guided by the law. We are also guided by the Rules of Procedure. The State of the Nation Address is the only way through which the President accesses Parliament. That is the first point and it is a constitutional matter. 
Secondly, under our rules, the President can only be heard in silence –

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, when we wanted to discuss security, we invited the President. We sat and had a meeting with him through which we could exchange. We do not want an address, we want a –

MR SSEGGONA: Then I am happy.

THE SPEAKER: We need to end this discussion. We have spent three hours on this matter.

1.20
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU NANTUME (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion. Following all the procedures that Parliament has taken to solve problems that are caused by the Fisheries Protection Force on Lake Victoria and all other water bodies, the Fisheries Protection Force on all water bodies of Uganda should be suspended with immediate effect. 

Secondly - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The Member of Parliament who is talking on the Floor shot a person some time ago and she was in court over it. Does she have the moral authority to talk about the army? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that is rumour mongering. Let us get serious. What do we do about this issue? 

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance –(Interruption)

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, this is a very contentious matter. It has taken us a lot of time; we need a way forward. My point of order is that; is the House proceeding well, when the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are not here to guide this House, especially when we see that suspects are being taken out of police custody by the army and some alleged criminal elements, without a court order? Are we really proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Attorney-General has been seated here. I think he is in the neighbourhood; he has been sitting here. However, please, let us have a practical solution. How do we move on, on this issue?

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you for your wise guidance. Actually, hon. Kakooza’s submission – like you have guided – is simply rumour mongering.

Considering all that we have debated for over a year and no action has been taken, I would like to move a motion that all the activities of the Fisheries Protection Force on the water bodies of Uganda be suspended with immediate effect.

Two, because we need fish in the lake, we ask Government, with immediate effect, to bring all processes that must be followed before you bring back your enforcement officers. I beg to submit.

1.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion of the Member from Buvuma. My argument is based on Article 8(a) of the Constitution that governs this country. That Article gives us mandate to debate and make any law that is in the interest of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, you told us that as citizen number three, you engaged people who are concerned but did not get the fruits that people are suggesting to fight for. As we fight to bring people to book and to bring authorities to debate this, we shall not get a solution.

We, as Parliament, are entrusted by the rest of Ugandans to make laws for them. As I second the motion of hon. Nantume, the House should suspend activities on water bodies by the UPDF. Whether the UPDF takes orders from us or not, that is another story outside this Parliament. 

However, as Parliament of Uganda, we pronounce ourselves and use the laws that we have, to suspend the operations concerning fishing activities by the UPDF on water bodies, until the meeting you held with the concerned authorities yields results.

Two, as citizen number three, if whoever is in charge, as we are told – because the information we have is that they do not receive orders from other authorities apart from citizen number one. After we suspend those activities, if citizen number one has any interest with the UPDF on water bodies, he should relate or consult you as the head of this institution and you come up with a way forward between the two of you. 

Therefore, let us suspend those activities as we go for the holidays until whoever is concerned gets back to you as head of this institution and map a way forward. As we suspend, we request the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to withdraw the statement that he read on the Floor, since it does not hold water and is not authentic. Since the statement has been challenged, we request the minister to withdraw it with immediate effect. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, taking into account the information from the Ministry of Internal Affairs that a criminal was arrested and rescued by the UPDF, what are you going to do about it?

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I told the august House earlier, I need some time to review what happened. By the time I was compiling this statement, this culprit was still in police custody. I request that I am given time to go and we review what happened later on and then handle even the issues, which have been brought by the august House, then we compile and report back. However, what I would like to inform the august House is that it was wrong if the culprit was released by police. So –(Interjections) – 

THE SPEAKER: Let him tell us what he is going to do about the soldiers who went to remove a criminal from the police station.

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: What we have to do now is to first bring back the culprit to police, then arrest even those who went and picked the culprit from police and also bring them to book.

THE SPEAKER: Report to us when we resume. 

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: If it is true that they removed the culprits from police by force, then they should also be arrested. I will report back to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a report from you. However, on the second issue, I think that it is important to engage with the Head of State. We have been talking with him for two years  since February 2018 but it has continued. So, we need to arrange a meeting so that he comes and we have a discussion.

So, we shall invite him to come and address the House, not from here, but speak to us in a dialogue meeting. I think we have finished with us. Let us go to item No.3(2). We have finished with the issue of the UPDF.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your constructive leadership. One of the reasons I walked in a little late is that I was trying to interest myself in the Hansard, specifically on the proceedings of 11 December 2019. 

I was moved beyond words and touched beyond description when I took a look at what you said. The Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, who is number three, had this to say: “Are you aware that I have been threatened for speaking about those issues? I, the Speaker of Uganda.” You went ahead to say: “…yes, I have been threatened with death.” 

Honourable brothers and sisters, threatening the Speaker of Parliament with death is not a small matter. I think time is now or never to tell the world that we can lead. “Well done” is better than “well said”. The more you say the less people will remember. 

My procedural issue is: yes, you have given your illustrious leadership but there seems to be in the intermediate. What is it that is going to happen in the immediate term? The honourable brothers and sisters that come from the fishing communities and I will be confronted by the voters going through the same anguish and anger. What is it specifically that can be done for now? Much appreciated.

The speaker: What do you propose? Yes, hon. Ouma Abott.

1.35
Mr George ouma (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I concur with you and the House that while we engage the President, the people whose names were mentioned to have terrorised and killed people, be suspended from now. 

1.36
Mr Robert centenary (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the mood in the House across the divide agrees to the fact that in the meantime, we pronounce ourselves clearly on the activities of the UPDF both on the water and in the markets.

My honourable colleague has just told me that they even went to somebody’s kitchen and the woman paid Shs 1,000,000 to be exonerated from police. 

Can Parliament pronounce itself on the halting of the activities of UPDF until we get a clear mode of operation and host the President? Wouldn’t we be proceeding well to request that the minister withdraws his troops until this matter is put to a logical conclusion?

The speaker: Honourable minister, the proposal is that the people under you halt their operations on the water. What do you have to say about it?

COL (RTD) OKELLO Engola: Madam Speaker, I requested you to allow me go and review everything that the UPDF is doing. I will also consult the Commander-in-Chief to advise us on what to do. 

I will also take the opinion of the august House to him.

The speaker: Let us proceed with item no.3. We are wasting time.

1.38
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, we are leaving this hanging. It has already been said that the activities of the UPDF be suspended from water bodies. However, it should go even beyond to the kitchen and markets. Somebody’s kitchen was also raided.

What we would like to hear from the minister is the pronouncement that he is going to suspend all this until further notice. 

col (RTD) okello engola: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Suspension of operations is not done by just one person or the minister. An operation should be discussed and shared by the Commander-in -Chief –(Interjections) – that will come but the advice you have given –(Interruptions)

Mr katusabe: Madam Speaker, leadership is about knowing the way, showing the way and taking the way. You are the Speaker of Parliament. You do not need clearance from anybody.

This Parliament is the only institution that is given the constitutional mandate to make laws. My request is that you direct as the head of the institution. It is up to them to take your directive or to ignore it.
 
Otherwise, let there be one voice from this great House that we stood with the people and the people that do not care about how citizens decided otherwise.
My point of order is – 

The Speaker: Order.

Mr katusabe: Is my honourable brother – and I will respect him – in order to insinuate there could be other people outside this House that have a constitutional mandate to determine the public affairs of this country beside your seat; the honour, authority and influence of your seat and the power this great Parliament has?  Thank you.

The speaker: Honourable members, we make recommendations and directives but the implementation is with the Executive, not us. That is the problem. 

Mr sseggona: Madam Speaker, let us not lose track. You have ruled on this matter. When we resume this afternoon, the minister will report.

Let me indulge my colleagues that the minister comes back, I am very sure he is not going to escape or abscond. Let him come back and make a firm commitment.

I think it is only fair that we give him time because we are dealing with a serious matter involving the security of our people and the minister is prepared to come back this afternoon. Let us see what difference he is going to make.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, his request was to return when we resume after the recess. 

1.42
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I sat quietly here, you know I had an accident. I was quietly listening to what we are talking about today. I think this is the most difficult time when the power of Parliament is being tested.

We have three arms of Government and when we are going to make decisions in this House, we should not depend on something, which is done wrong by another arm of Government. We have read the letter from the President. We know that the letter is not correct.

However, the problem we have here, people cannot speak the truth. The position we can make as Parliament should be our position. Whether they are going to implement it or not, it is on record that Parliament has delivered on this.

I, therefore, think what is important now is not to dilly-dally around but Parliament should direct that the operation of the UPDF should be suspended. (Applause)

Secondly, those who are involved in torturing Ugandans and doing illegal things be arrested and brought to book. Then the suspect must be brought to book. We have done our work. Whether they have implemented or not, Parliament, the arm of Government charged with this, will have done its work and that is the most important thing. Thank you.

1.44
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I rise to support what the honourable colleague has said. The Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws for the good governance of this country. It empowers us to stand and speak for our people.

Madam Speaker, Parliament must pronounce itself on this matter. Parliament must express its dismay on the behavior of UPDF. It must be expressively stated that Parliament representing the people is not happy with the way UPDF is behaving.

The second one is amending the Fisheries Act. We should engage our Office of the General Counsel, in charge of legal affairs, to ensure that we make that Act watertight so that UPDF is barred from illegally engaging in the Fisheries Act. The law is there but there is a gap, which we must seal so that they cannot use that gap for the President to just appoint and direct them to go and do whatever, where there is no law controlling them.

Madam Speaker, I want to agree that let us pronounce ourselves as Parliament. Let the high authority know that this Parliament is not happy and we want to protect our people.

Madam Speaker, what has happened to Amolatar District is just the tip of what is happening. Many people have been killed in the lakes, stones tied on their waists and just sank in the waters and many people have been raped and maimed. 

This Parliament cannot keep quiet. We must speak. We must not wait for the minister. 

Madam Speaker, the statement by the minister should be dismissed with disgrace because it does not address our issues. It should be rejected in totality. We should not even allow him to withdraw it before we have made our statement. We have rejected it and it should be thrown out to the dustbin. He should come with another statement, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, taking into account the debates on the Floor of this House in the Second Session, the Third Session and this Fourth Session, relating to the conduct of the UPDF against the citizens of Uganda, this House directs that the operations of Fisheries Protection Unit be halted with immediate effect.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Item no.3(ii).

1.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ Ujanga): Madam speaker, Government under NDP II prioritised investment in the energy infrastructure, with focus on the exploitation of abundant renewed energy resources including hydropower so as to increase power generation capacity from 825 megawatts in 2012 to 2500 megawatts by 2020 and indeed the expansion of national electric power grid network.

In that regard, considerable progress has been made in the area of increasing electricity generation capacity through construction of hydro power plants such as Isimba - 183 megawatts that was commissioned in March 2019, Karuma Hydropower 600 megawatts to be commissioned during the first quarter of 2020 bringing a total install capacity to over 1800.

Other projects under construction include Agago- Achwa Hydropower Project 83 megawatts and a number of renewable energy projects under   Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff (GETFiT) programme totaling over 72 megawatts. These are Siti II- 16 megawatts, Kyambura hydropower plant- 7, Sindila hydropower plant- 5.3, Nyamughasani II- 5 megawatts and Kikagati- 16 megawatts.

According to the most recent Uganda Bureau of Standards electrification survey, the national electricity access rate now stands at 50 per cent with 28 per cent on the grid and 24 on the off grid.

According to Vision 2040 for Uganda to achieve the desired social economic transformation, it requires to have 41,738 megawatts by the Year 2040, thus increasing them country’s electric consumption for capita to 3668 kilowatt hours per capita.

In addition, access to the national grid will also have to increase from the current 26 to over 80 per cent. The 25 industrial parks to be constructed will need huge volume of power to accelerate industrialisation, value addition and job creation. The excess power we are currently having will be absorbed as soon as these industrial parks are completed.

The demand for power is growing at about 10 per cent per annum implying continuous development of renewable energy sources including hydro, which is one of the cheapest forms of renewable energy.

In the effort to realise the target set in Vision 2040, a number of projects are being studied. This includes Kiba- 400 Megwatts, Oriang – 392 megawatts and Ayago – 840. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question was specific. I do not know why you are going into all that. The question is, have you now, as Government, changed – In August, you were here and you said nothing is going to happen. Tell us. That is what we want to know. We do not want to hear about those bridge things. 

MR D’UJANGA: For those who have the report, this is paragraph 12. On 26 August 2019, Cabinet was apprised of the power developments in the country, among which was Uhuru Falls and halted the process of development of Uhuru Site. 

In order to make a scientifically informed decision, on 2 December 2019, Cabinet reviewed the decision and agreed that a feasibility study is undertaken on the Uhuru Falls Site since Uhuru Falls and Murchison are separate falls that are adjacent to each other. 

In making the decision, Cabinet considered the need to have the feasibility study undertaken because that is the only scientific way to determine the impact of the project on the environment, tourism and ecology at the proposed site. 

The feasibility study will include assessment of the technical, environmental, socio-cultural, economic and financial viability of the project. 

Government will ensure thorough supervision of the feasibility study so that its interests are taken into consideration, including benchmarking where similar projects have been previously undertaken in ecologically sensitive areas. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Who is undertaking the study? 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the best is for Government to undertake the study. The best for us, as the people of Uganda, is that Government undertakes the study. 

1.54
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We stood on the Floor here and spoke and the minister assured us, three months ago, that they would not tamper with our heritage. If we are not careful with these so-called investors – I think about eight months ago, there was a meeting organised by a colleague, whose names I cannot mention. They brought some Indians who were chased by Idi Amin. They are in the UK and are coming back as investors. 

In that meeting, held in one of the rooms in Parliament, they were trying to convince us, as members of Parliament, to urge Government to set up a solar power project. Because of the language that one of the men used, I just walked away. He said, “you just have to twist the arm of Government and they will accept.” This means that the arm of Government can be twisted anyhow. This is the statement he made and that is what is happening in this country. Investors with ill intentions come with very good projects to destroy our heritage and our Cabinet simply endorses. 

We have security cameras. Some are put in dark places without electricity. Tell me how they are working. They simply go and twist the arms of the President - that is the language that was spoken in that meeting. I believe that this project is in bad faith – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. D’Ujanga, you are being evasive. You said the Government should – What is the decision you took in Cabinet? What did you agree there, which you went to read at the Uganda Media Centre? Who did you agree with to undertake the study? 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, there is no decision yet as to who is to carry out this study. That is why I am saying, in the best interests of the nation, it should be done by us.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister.

1.57
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from the supreme law of the land. If you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, number eight, it states: “The State shall protect important natural resources including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda.” This is very important. 

When you go to number 27 of the same national objectives, it reads: “The State shall promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations.” The State means Government and the people. 

It goes further to say: “Utilisation of these natural resources shall be managed in such a way as to meet the development and environmental needs of the present and future generations.”

If I apply these principles to what is being proposed of Uhuru Hydropower along River Nile - I have physically visited the basin and delta in which Murchison Falls Park is situated and I can share with you that this is the most spectacular falls in the world. It is the most powerful falls in the world at a speed of about 300 cubic metres of water per second. This is found nowhere else except here. 

It is also the largest tourist attraction for the country. Last year, about 100,000 tourists toured this place. It is really fantastic. 

The emphasis is, if you are going to have balanced and sustainable development, then the issue of Parliament making decisions on this matter must be informed empirically and scientifically. If we do not do that, it would mean you cannot change the status quo. For you to change the status quo in a balanced manner so that you do not sacrifice the beauty and at the same time it is not zero-sum – if you had technology to allow you to have the beauty and have development –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 

THE SPEAKER: What are you saying? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: What I am saying is, what has been proposed by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development of a feasibility study is to ensure that no decision should be taken that impairs the beauty, which is protected by the Constitution. Only when this feasibility study shows that it can be done without impairing this beauty will it be carried out. If it is not, then it will not. That is the point; that is the message.

2.01
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the statement from the minister and then the submission from the former minister in charge of tourism. 

I have been working with him on the same. I am on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, and I know how passionate he is about tourism. We all know that the falls in Murchison Falls National Park are the best in Africa. And now he has mentioned it that in the world, the falls in the national park - the Uhuru Falls - are the most cherished and that is why we can attract more and more tourists every year. 

We all know that the number of tourists in this country is increasing every year. And it is because of the falls which we have and are unique in the whole world. 

It has been mentioned by the Ministry of Energy that the power we have at the moment, we cannot use it. We need more investors to use the power, which means it is idle. 

I need to understand from the Minister of Energy, why are we struggling to destroy the resource we have which has been giving us money, so that we can get power and make it idle?

We know that the scientists we have in Uganda are creative enough to look for other sources of power. There are other sources of power. Now, I need to know –(Member timed out.)

2.03
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to thank hon. Kamuntu for reading to use the objectives of state policy and affirming that we need to protect the beauty of this nation - our natural resources - for future generations. And for all the reasons he has given, the beauty of the Murchison Falls, unequaled beauty - forget the fact that it brings tourists but the beauty remains for our children and our children’s children. Then of course the added advantage that because it is very beautiful, it attracts tourists and they bring in the financial resource that we want very much. 

Hon. Timuzigu has highlighted it; we have more power than we can consume right now, as a nation. We have excess power. Even if you want to construct power stations along River Nile, it is very long. Why do you want to construct a power station over the falls, destroy the falls, when you can use the river at any other point? 

I know of course, this is a narrow gauge, which can produce power faster but what is more advantageous; the electricity that can be produced anywhere else along this river or any other source in Uganda, or keeping the beauty of the falls? 

I think this is an issue of priorities among priorities. We can get money from any – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members please, just go to the point; we need to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: We need to take a firm decision as Parliament that we shall preserve Murchison Falls in its current form for our children. Government can construct a power station anywhere else in any part of the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wanted to remind you that there is something that used to be called Ripon Falls; it is no longer there. It is there in name. Those who come from the East to Kampala, there used to be a massive flow of water, at the Owen Falls Dam. It was a sign that you have reached Jinja.  It is not there anymore.

2.07
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Uganda is located along the Equator. That means that we experience sunshine for almost 12 hours a day. In Germany, where they experience sunshine for only two hours, they have invested in solar power. We can invest in solar energy. There is no need of destroying that Murchison Falls because it was created by God. If we destroy it, it will be disastrous to Uganda.

If we have investors who are willing to invest in Uganda, they should invest in other sources of energy, not destroying Murchison Falls.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also know whether we have exhausted the other plants. Have we exhausted all of them? 

2.08
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

If you can read the Hansard, when the minister accepted that they are not going to build a dam there, I stated here that they will go back to Cabinet and they will come back to Parliament and say: “We have got wise counsel from our President.” And today, it is exactly what they have done. 

They are just playing games, but in the real sense, they have already approved that this power dam should be put there. As Parliament, we need to make our position very clear. 

In India, they are now producing many megawatts of power through solar, and we can do that. Just our neighbour here in Kenya, President Uhuru Kenyatta, about three months ago, opened about 300 megawatts of solar power and that is even more than what they are going to produce from those falls. 

Why don’t we use solar energy to produce more power? After all most of our energy is all about lighting and everything, we can still do much on solar. I want to agree that we need to explore more energy from solar.

2.09
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Basing on the submission of the Minister of Tourism, he has guided me very well - when he said that these falls are the most beautiful and fastest in the world. I therefore base on that argument, that who are we, the Pearl of Africa, to have the best falls in the world, in times that countries are making their falls to attract tourists? The Chinese are doing it. The Chinese General Apollo is here, he will give you evidence. 

As I speak now, the beauty of the entry to the eastern region of Uganda was killed when they destroyed the Ripon Falls. Whenever things like this come, you know it is august House done deal. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know one time, your ministers will box each other in Cabinet. When I remember the submission of the hon. Kamuntu saying that this is the best falls in the world, and the minister, my good friend of energy says we need a dam there, I see the leaders fighting each other without being physical.

Therefore, I advise cultural leaders of Bunyoro where this falls is, to denounce this, denounce any leader who supports this, let the leaders know that they are destroying not only the best tourist heritage, but destroying the best tourism heritage of Uganda and of Africa and the whole world – according to hon. Ephraim Kamuntu. That is my submission.

2.11
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, my good friend, hon. D’Ujanga, said this feasibility study is going to be done by Ugandans. What I know is that Ugandans have already pronounced themselves that there should be no dam there. So, which Ugandans are going to do this study when we have already made a decision that this dam should not be there?

I, therefore, appeal to the two ministers to abandon this futile exercise. Ugandans have already said, “Please, do not go to that area.” Look elsewhere solar, wind, Agago and wherever but leave that place alone. Thank you.

2.12
MS STELLA KIIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to the voices opposing the creation of a dam at Murchison Falls for two reasons. One, the natural creation will never be recreated. Two, it is economically benefiting Ugandans; they bring in tourists and dollars. Three, we have many alternative sources of energy, among which you said, there are two more. We have sugarcane where yesterday you heard that farmers are going to produce their mills to make sugar. There is a lot of energy coming from sugarcane byproducts. We have biogas and the problem of garbage here and investors are interested in coming to turn garbage into gas, which we have not yet exploited.

I conclude by saying that let the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development exploit all those alternative sources of power and we retain Murchison Falls. Thank you.

2.14
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Katakwi County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should not accept the construction of any energy project on Murchison Falls. If you even read on the Internet, you realise the majority of tourists were coming to our country just because of the scenic beauty - Uganda is rated as one of the best countries. One of the major attractions that are rated is Murchison Falls. If the Government wants power, Eastern Uganda is full of sunshine. Let solar energy be brought to supplement power. On top of that, we can also explore the option of atomic energy. Murchison Falls should not be touched because it is a national heritage.

2.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, as we are mourning the loss of Ripon Falls, somebody is trying to bring another loss; this is not acceptable. It pains me that somebody wants to do a dirty thing. As Americans are busy trying to impeach a president, we should also be impeaching this idea. We must not tolerate it. We must expunge it from our thinking. Nobody should even dare say let us carry out a study; study for what? 

If you want a study, we should study how to improve and make it better but not putting a dam there. Do you know what it took God to make that place the way it is? Who are you to destroy it? It should be a universal decision of this House that, that place stays as natural as it is. 

Today we are talking about a blue economy and we are talking about circularity; these are new concepts. We must thrive from the waters and we must support these waters because that is the beauty of this country. I am a domestic tourist but you are denying me the right to tour –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that the interest is not about energy but the pocket. Some people must have brought gold dealers. They must have even brought billions of dollars. The information I would like to give is that the mafias have taken money from investors. 

MR AOGON: Thank you for the information. Everybody is aware that we walked against corruption. Why should somebody continue doing what is not accepted in this country? Nobody should construct anything on Murchison Falls.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, this country has been struggling to rid itself of corruption. As we were debating this issue, I kept on looking at the minister responsible for finance and I felt like asking how much money is there for this project. Before I could access him, my brother Waluswaka – a senior NRM cadre – rose to inform the House that it is not about power but money – and he said from information. We are now in Parliament, which is charged with the duty of protecting Ugandans and their money. I believe him when he says he has information because he is an insider. (Laughter) He is a senior NRM cadre. Is it in order for him to leave the microphone without giving further and better particulars for us to be able to deal with the suspects?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate, hon. Waluswaka?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, to substantiate what I said, it is very clear that we pronounced ourselves that we do not want the dam at Murchison Falls and the Government is supposed to work on the dam on behalf of the people and we are the representatives of the people. They want the contractor to come and give a commission and there are bribery allegations in most of these projects. The information is that people must have pocketed money or they are going to pocket money. It is not about power because we have enough power.

2.20
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bunyoro, the host community of that very important heritage, which saved Kabalega – Kabalega crossed from the older Murchison to Acholi. Otherwise, he would have been a captive of the colonialists. It is that very location. The Albertine-Buliisa-Butiaba Corridor from Pakwach is one of the heritages. Therefore, we can actually make a lot of solar. The UPDF protection of the Nile Perch – the Nile Perch and Angara, you like so much, is a native because of that high water. You can make research. We only brought to you that Nile Perch in 1954 by Commissioner Stoneman of fisheries and so, it is a breeding area.

Madam Speaker, the biggest tourism fishing is below there. What economics would anyone want to give to justify tampering that economic gain?

Madam Speaker, as Bunyoro, we are happy with Parliament and we are here to pray that we pronounce that a “no go area”.  Otherwise, in public trust doctrine, which is the principle we derive the Constitution is that we have to protect for generation.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister give us information and then the Member for Kilak will follow.

PROF KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House that Uhuru Hydropower Station, which is being proposed – In first place, Uhuru falls developed in 1962. This is why the information is useful in decision making.

It was developed in 1962, as a result of excessive water that came during El Niño and the water could not be swallowed in the existing gauge at Murchison Falls. It dug an alternative falls   and this alternative falls is seasonal. 

Consequently, for this fall to sustain hydropower generation, you need a study whether it is possible. In fact, a study might save the debate. That study would simply show you whether or not it is possible so that you make a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you say that the falls is seasonal, why are you wasting time on it? This is common sense.

2.23
MR ANTHONY  AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, when I talk about Murchison Falls, I feel the pain as a Ugandan and as a person who comes from the area. The cultural institution of the Acholi has denounced the plan of the Government on Murchison Falls. 

On 5th of this month, I participated in a debate “Frontline” on NBS television. Two government officials were there but when I came out from there, we started a discussion on Murchison Falls.

I feel annoyed when the minister comes to lie on the Floor of Parliament that they are going to do a feasibility study. They have already done the feasibility studies. It is unfortunate that I do not have my iPad. I did not know this matter was coming today. Otherwise, I would have come with the report.

Madam Speaker, the feasibility study was done by the company that wants this project; it is not the Government of Uganda. They have already done and discussed it in Cabinet and they have planned to start the project. You wonder how a whole minister can come here and lie that Government is still planning to do a feasibility study. Madam Speaker, I have the report.

Secondly, when you are saying that the consumption of our power is still low, have you asked yourself what is driving you to go and put the project when you know that the consumption is still low? In fact, the number of people who visit that falls is higher than the money that you are going to generate from that electricity that you are going to build in that place.

The point I am trying to make is that Ugandans do not want the project and therefore, we do not want the feasibility study to be done again. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How can this Government invest in a seasonal fall? 

2.26
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like most of my colleagues, I disagree with the construction of the dam on Bujagali Falls because of the following reasons.

First of all, if that place is well developed, we are going to get more income than what we are going to get from the power generation. 

One time, I visited China. They took us on artificial water falls as tourists. Their water falls are smaller than what I have in Buhweju but we were paying a lot of money to go and see it. Now, imagine someone just comes up and says we should destroy what we have here; I disagree with that.

Besides, we have enough sources where we can go and build the dams. I would like to therefore tell the minister not to destroy Uganda. Otherwise, we still need the beauty of our country. Go and look for other places where you can do your things than destroying our area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.27
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose the proposal by Government to construct a power dam at Murchison Falls mainly because the problem of Uganda is not about the availability of power. 

The biggest challenges Ugandans have is the small percentage of less than six per cent, who are using this. We actually have a lot of power available. Instead of wasting a lot of energy in doing research, concentrate on distribution; take power to the villages so that people get what to do. That is where the problem is.

Madam Speaker, we have a lot of power and people need it yet you are not distributing it but you want another feasibility study. We are talking about foreign exchange and tourism is the leading sector. This is actually one of the areas, which is contributing. There is no way we are going to destroy this falls moreover it is seasonal. Why do you even take a study? It is already informed by nature that it is seasonal and so, the project is not viable. Let us put our resources in distribution and lower the cost of power for Ugandans to use.

Madam Speaker, this is the most important area –(Interruption)
 
MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament, you assigned me as a lead counsel to an ad hoc committee of this House to investigate energy sector.

We received information that explains why we are not generating electricity anticipated in Jinja. Hon. Hilary Onek, then minister advised his comrades including the technical staff as an engineer that construction of a second dam would bring down the water levels, and we would not generate electricity in either of them because they would share the water and all their levels would be low.

When they insisted - I do not know for whatever mischievous reasons. That explains why we are not producing what we anticipated.

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, there is no point for this House to support such proposal. We want to oppose it in the strongest terms possible. Otherwise, there are better ways of generating power.

My colleague has told you that we have eastern and we have a lot of sunshine. Explore other options. Leave the nature that is providing for other generations. We do not want to finish everything. What about our children? Where are they going to earn a living from? We are not going to accept everything to be taken because people are going. Let those who are going leave the rest for the generation that is to come.

Madam Speaker, I do not support this because this country belongs to all of us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Waira, join me in welcoming a delegation of 130 ladies from the Women Guild of Lira Catholic Parish. They are here. Please stand up. They are very smart. They are represented by hon. Joy Ongom and hon. Jimmy Akena. Welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I do not know when African governments will start respecting their populations. In Switzerland, you cannot even build a road until you have asked the population in a referendum: “Shall we build a dam here?” They ask everything. However here, a seasonal falls is now up for investment.

2.31
MR KYEWALABYE WAIRA (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It should be on record that the Ripon Falls were killed under the leadership of hon. D’Ujanga. He is now looking for another candidate to kill. 

We should not allow our natural heritage to go just like that. In Busoga, we lost those falls. All schools used to go there, the falls were visible from the road side. The ministry came with their report from the World Bank and consultants that they wanted to divide the water. They eventually did so. 

Like hon. Sseggona has said, even if you are not an engineer, you just know that once you divide the water, the force reduces. Even after killing our Ripon Falls, the price for electricity has never gone down. At least kill the falls but let the price of electricity go down. However –(Interruption)

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give Parliament is that even when we have excess power, in Busoga, people cannot access it. We have excess power in Uganda but a poor woman cannot light even one room. Why do we want to create another disaster by destroying Murchison Falls? I will not allow that.

MR WAIRA: Thank you. As I wind up, let us not allow this. If the investor has already put in money, let them sort themselves out on that side. As Parliament, we cannot allow that. Thank you.

2.33
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Feasibility and science studies were done before the proposal to implement the project and a report was presented to the Cabinet. Unless the Government has a hidden agenda, why are they now seeking for further feasibility and science studies? 

The 2,550 megawatts that are going to be produced from the proposed project cannot outweigh the benefits that we are getting from Murchison Falls. Therefore, we must stand firm and reject that project. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.34
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that the very people we entrust to take care of our country are the ones destroying nature. We cannot undo what is already damaged. Recently, we were discussing the destruction in Lwera. Today, it is a fact that the road is damaged. When you use Masaka road, you can see that the road is curving in and the Ministry of Works and Transport is trying to repair the road. 

At River Katonga, the dumping that has been done by the Chinese is already causing damage to the river. If we are to put a dam at Murchison Falls, the destruction is not going to be restored. I therefore move, as a minister in waiting, that this project be rejected right away and the minister goes back to explain why we have excess power, which we cannot even consume. I beg to move.

2.36
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We must pronounce ourselves first on those particular ministers who, after answering questions on the Floor of Parliament, go to the Media Centre and give contrary answers. There is a ghost hovering over this Parliament that we have failed to censure some of these ministers.

There is no way that this Parliament can operate because whenever issues arise here, ministers give us the right answers and then go to the Media Centre and give contrary statement, as was done with Bujagali Falls.

I was not in Parliament - I was teaching at Shimoni - when they were building the dam at Bujagali. I do not know whether hon. Basalirwa still remembers but there was a move to save Bujagali. Hon. D’Ujanga and his team said, “We are going to construct a dam at Bujagali but the falls will remain in existence”. Can we bet that the Bujagali Falls are still in existence?

In Bunyoro Region, they have discovered oil and this is already causing problems to tourists. If you add a dam, how will you get there? 

What is happening in this country is the lack of respect for this Parliament. I grew up seeing Owen Falls Dam, which was a tourist attraction to a number of schools in the country. Students would go to see how electricity was generated at the dam but –(Member timed out.) – Madam Speaker, if you could give me one minute please. Everybody would enjoy taking pictures. Go and look for the primary book entitled, “Uganda and Beyond”. It had all those pictures. 

What is happening? Hon. Atiku is not around but there is a priest in Arua who has a radio station called Radio Pacis. This priest is manufacturing power using solar energy and he wishes to sell this power to Government but they are not willing. When you go to Kalangala, there is an area that can generate windmill power but they are not doing that. 

As hon. Waluswaka stated - and some of you took it as a minor issue - there are deals going on but we shall not accept this. While Prof, Kamuntu was talking, he kept digressing. He gives very good information and then goes to collective responsibility. We cannot accept such kind of fooling in this House. 

Honourable members, take your positions and be serious. Let us not play with our heritage – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear a few other members, please.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a very important matter. Prof. Kamuntu was seated here but now he is running to the edge because he wants to move out of the House. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: The professor has been here for some time. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Member to give a wrong impression that I have sneaked out of the House and given wrong information when what I was really confirming to the House was that there is nothing being done that contradicts this Constitution? If the Constitution says these are natural assets for us and future generations, that cannot be violated. What can be done, Madam Speaker – and this is the point really. (Interjection) I am not deviating, my colleague from Masaka.

What I am saying is simply this: That this is not a zero-sum game - that you have hydro and do not have the beauty. If the feasibility study shows you can only have hydro when you lose the beauty, that hydro will not be established. If you do not get the feasibility study –(Interjections)- that is what I am telling my colleague from Masaka.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have already told us that the falls are seasonal. Why is Government spending money on seasonal falls?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, what I said was –(Interjection)– No; look, Madam Speaker, I could have been taught by hon. Kiwanuka, the first Prime Minister but this is immaterial. The point is simply this: A feasibility study would show that the hydrological history of these falls is either sustainable or not. And you make a decision –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, should the Government be spending money on speculation? Instead of building roads, you say, “Let us find out whether there is a seasonal river.” No; you guys!

2.42
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of the feasibility study, I would like to remind this House that when Government was confronted with the issue of Bujagali – and hon. Ssewungu talked about the Save Bujagali Crusade – I was chairman of the Save Bujagali Crusade, Makerere University branch. There were other branches across the country.

I recall that the proposal by the minister arose at that time. There was a feasibility study and even an environmental impact assessment report. In those two documents, there was a statement to the effect that the falls would be preserved. A dam would be constructed and the falls would be preserved. 

I foresee the direction that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is taking - to create an impression that it is possible to have a dam and the falls at the same time. What we discovered at that time, Madam Speaker, was that the technology had not been fully developed to preserve falls and at the same time have a dam. It was not fully developed and the same situation applies today.

The other aspect was that it was extremely expensive to have a dam and at the same time have falls. So, the direction that the minister takes – with the greatest respect – is not going to yield results. I think it is better, as country and Parliament, to take a –(Member timed out)

2.44
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement presented by the minister points to a very huge contradiction within Cabinet. As you can see, the Government has been telling Ugandans and this Parliament that tourism is one of the sectors that they have earmarked to enable Uganda to achieve Vision 2040. 

The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, who also came here, presented his ministerial policy statement. In line with that, the Ministry of Works and Transport has been constructing what they call “tourism roads”. We have procured Uganda Airlines, supposedly to bring tourists in the country. We are constructing an airport in Hoima so that we can promote tourism. That is what the Government has promised.

With this huge contradiction coming from Cabinet, they have now decided that one of the biggest tourism attraction centres in the country must now be destroyed!

I, first of all, feel that the tourism minister should come here – and I can speak authoritatively because we were colleagues with him in UPC; so I know him. For the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to now come and turn around and give away his ministry and say, “I am okay with it; you can go ahead” - it is not correct.

I would suggest that this Parliament has a duty –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this House resolved and sent a message that the Murchison Falls should not be touched for construction of a dam. We sat in Cabinet and agreed that we do a further study to inform Cabinet –(Interjections)– Just a second! For record purposes, Cabinet has not taken any decision to build a dam on the Murchison Falls.

Is it in order for the member holding the Floor to say that the Cabinet of Uganda has decided to destroy the Murchison Falls, when we have not actually done that in Cabinet, where he does not sit?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was simply speculating. However, honourable members, what are our priorities? A few weeks ago, we were asking for Shs 5 billion to add the Higher Education Financing Scheme but we could not get it. However, the Government is prepared to spend money to check on seasonal falls. I do not know! Please conclude.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, if you and the House listen, we now know that a South African firm – and the evidence will be brought by hon. Akol – conducted a feasibility study and Cabinet is aware. So, we are not hiding anything here and you can see the contradiction.

Today, we are told blatantly in this House that they are not going to do anything. So, why do you even go there now if you do not intend to construct the dam? Why do you carry out the feasibility study? Everyone knows that a feasibility study can only be done as a preliminary –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, honourable member. The information I would like to give you is that after a very careful study of the government’s decision, I have come to the conclusion that we seem to be running this country without following the policies. The principles that should basically guide action are no longer being followed.

The information that I would also like to give you is that Government has been steadily relocating giraffes from the Murchison Falls National Park. They have discovered oil there. They have allowed encroachment on the vegetation and these all tantamount to regional tourism sabotage. 

There is a deliberate attempt to reduce the number of tourists who visit that beautiful part of the country. This is a very deliberate decision. There is evidence to show that this Government is not serious about having tourists in northern Uganda.

Finally, they now want to destroy the Murchison Falls so that the people of northern Uganda and Bunyoro Sub-region continue to languish in poverty. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I think that in this House, Article 8A should guide us that we take a decision that is in the best interest of the country and is clear that whatever Government is doing and cooking is not in the interest of the country. Therefore, I call upon my colleagues that we should reject it flatly. 

2.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious matter. Actually, the minister gave us very important information from the Constitution. He clearly read the guidelines to the Constitution, which states that the state must protect and try to minimise the damage and destruction to land, air and water resources resulting from pollution or other causes.

I thought that as a senior minister, reading of this national directive to the Constitution, would be followed up by a resolution made by Parliament. He should have lobbied Parliament to help him stop this scheme, which is going on. 

We cried here about ranches being given away to investors. We thought that it was just gossip but as we speak, most of the ranches we were talking about have been given away. The indigenous people cannot use some of them. We cried about fish and it has now become a reality.

Therefore, we take a position today - we could even take a position by resolution to reverse some of the decisions that Government has taken. How can the Government say they have not moved ahead with Murchison Falls when hon. Akol, who is a Member of Parliament, has declared that there is a feasibility study made by an interested person in that particular investment? 

We must take a decision to bar Government from going ahead and we must investigate who ordered the feasibility study on Murchison Falls. 

Should the Government go ahead with this, Parliament can lead a protest. We can walk on foot, led by you, Madam Speaker. We will put on our boots and walk to Murchison Falls. Let the Government come with their guns and seize the Members of Parliament first before they can go ahead with their investment. 

I beg to move that the project on Murchison Falls should not go on as long as Ugandans live. 

2.53
Mr lyandro komakech (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to put up a voice, on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality, that River Nile is the longest river in the world. Secondly, it is the only river that flows in the opposite direction in the whole world; it flows against all other rivers that flow to the south. 

To have a dam to generate power at that place is illogical, unthinkable and unbelievable. Indeed, our generation will curse anybody who will take such a decision.

During this time of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, when this matter comes up and we take a wrong decision, ladies and gentlemen, it is going to be wrong on us.

When we met the team from the Parliament of Ethiopia, their Speaker said that the Blue Nile has the capacity to generate and transmit power in the entire Horn of Africa up to Tanzania.

What is this force of logic that we are generating power and that, that is the only thing we should be doing? I think that it is very misplaced thinking –(Member timed out.)

2.55
Ms joy atim (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had very beautiful natural resources most especially the forests in this country. Right now, where are the natural forests? Talk about Mabira; it is nowhere. They are doing lumbering day and night.

Tourism is the biggest foreign exchange earner in this country. Murchison Falls is one of the sources of foreign exchange earning yet the country is trying to play around with it. It is unfortunate that we are getting information that it is the investor who is doing feasibility studies despite Government getting money. Our ministers are a bit redundant. They come to inform us when they are not informed themselves.

I would like to know the cost-benefit analysis of the dam over tourism. If it is not feasible, we are not going to support it. It is not the power that we are lacking in this country. We have enough of it yet the price is still too high. 

Why doesn’t the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development work on reducing the cost of energy or put solar on the electricity grid? Why don’t you utilise the available sunshine to tap into the grid other than tampering with our source of power? (Member timed out.)

2.57
Ms margaret Baba diri (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to protest against building a dam on Murchison Falls.

These are the only falls left for Uganda. We gave away Bujagali, Owen Falls, and Isimba in the name of power and now that is the only natural gift left.

You do not spend money for people to improve it instead you just make a road to go to the falls. The tourists are coming. Tell me of other falls, which we will substitute for Murchison Falls if we destroyed them?

In the 6th Parliament, we were blamed - and we are still being blamed - for delaying Bujagali. Today, we are saying “No” to Murchison Falls. The Government must know that there is a reason for protecting these falls. We should not be blamed again in future that we have prevented the construction of this power dam. 

There are many other sources of power. There is sunshine from which we can generate power. We can even put it everywhere rather than at Murchison Falls. That is the only beauty and only source of revenue we have in tourism, which brings in a lot of money. I stand to be counted as saying that Murchison Falls must be protected.  Thank you.
 
2.59
Ms hellen asamo (NRM, People with Disabilities, Eastern):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose the destruction of Murchison Falls. 

It is only in Uganda where we respect investors more than Ugandans. In other countries, people take pride in their citizens before they think about investors. Here, the first priority is to the outsiders. How can somebody come to do a feasibility study? Whether it has been discussed by Cabinet or not, we are not supporting it. Let the Cabinet be on notice that Parliament is not supporting that agenda and it should be dropped immediately.

As people’s representatives, we are already suffering with climate change. We are paying the loan we borrowed for the power that we are not using. Again, we are creating another system to say there is somebody coming to do that and we destroy it. 

Tourism is one of the best income earners in Uganda but then somebody says let us go and put there a dam. On behalf of the people I represent and Ugandans, I am not going to support this and I want to say that let us think for Ugandans. We are here today as Members of Parliament, we could be ministers but what comes after that- think for Uganda and think Ugandan. This Parliament should stand on its foot, for this one, we are not supporting. Thank you.

3.01
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to members and I would like to thank them for their good submissions. For and on behalf of the people of Bunyoro who would be severely affected by tampering with that Murchison, I plead with you members to stand with us to resist and oppose the intended activity on those falls.

In fact, it is a bit provocative for the honourable minister to present a report and say, “We are in the process of conducting a feasibility study”- on whose cost? On the cost of Ugandans! Whom have you consulted?

Honourable colleagues, without further ado, you would permit me to move a motion to resolve this issue as we oppose the intended tampering with the Murchison falls. I beg to submit.

3.02
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our country Uganda already appears on the world map as far as tourism is concerned. Uganda is a very good destination to visit. Now Murchison Falls or Uhuru is a God given.

As it is written in the Constitution, as a nation, we should protect our valuables and our heritage. Madam Speaker, I stand to say that I do not support the construction of the dam because as tourism is concerned, that is what feeds us. If I could say it the other way round; it is like cutting the hand or the fingers that feeds you. Therefore, for that matter, Madam Speaker, I do not support the construction of a dam on those falls. Thank you.

3.04
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not agree with the idea of constructing a dam at Murchison Falls. I would like to advise Cabinet as they go ahead with their feasibly study; they should explore the option of underground dams instead of destroying that beautiful scenery.

Secondly, go to Kenya, ask President Uhuru Kenyatta to take you to Turkana where they have commissioned the largest wind energy project. He mentioned that they have raised the bar for Africans. As a neighbor and cooperating member of the East African Communality, visit President Uhuru Kenyatta and let him, teach you how to generate energy without destroying the environment.
Madam Speaker, I also like to state that one of the reasons why we talk about generating more power is industrialization. There is a report that is now available showing that our industrialization process lacks focus. It might not even be able to generate the jobs that this country needs.

We are implementing a model that is only informed by directives from the President without any thorough feasibility studies. Madam Speaker, we are not going to allow our natural heritage to be destroyed when we know that –(Member timed out.)

3.06
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to oppose the motion from an economic point of view. When you take a cost benefit analysis, honourable minister, here you are with natural resources, not investing in the resources, and from the former minister of tourism, his statement says this is the best in the whole world and it is attracting tourists.

Secondly, in your report, you are not giving the justification for why you are making an alternative. You have not looked at the other alternative sources of power. If you look at the power we have, it is more than enough to the extent that we can even use power to catch grasshoppers.

We are now putting our eggs in one basket and yet we should spread the risk. You are investing in a venture, which is seasonal. You are not even sure of the return. Therefore, why don’t you go back and do your homework? Look at alternative sources, look at the idle power we have which is not used, the risk you are going into by venturing in a risk which is seasonal –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honorable member, for giving way. Actually, the Minister of Finance is pondering on why he is not meeting the targets of revenue collection irrespective of the fact that we have surplus power. This means that actually surplus power does not mean improving the economy per say. I think there is something much better to be done. I think you need to reflect on your strategies.

MR TWESIGYE: Finally, Madam Speaker, when we visited Kakira sugar factory, the manager was showing us that the power they use in the factory is got from the sugarcanes and that they are even selling excess power to the national grid.

Therefore, minister, I do not know whether you have time to visit Kakira and get that information so that it can help you to change your mind so that you drop the idea.

3.09
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people of Namisindwa District to oppose this motion. When I was young, coming from Namisindwa - which means the highest ranges of Mt Elgon where the waters making the people of Bunyole suffer come from. Supposing the Government harness this water to make electricity, it will be too much. 

If you go to Karamoja, it is like a place of sunshine 24 hours. If you put a solar factory there, it can serve the whole of Uganda.

Coming down to Bukedea then Busoga, it is a beautiful place. I think you have forgotten something. Last time we heard that Mabira Forest should be slashed and plant sugarcane but this time Busoga, is crying that they have too much sugar cane and do not know where to take it. 

Now we have power, we even have uranium. We can wait and use uranium, and we shall be the most powerful country with all the power in Africa. Why hurry to touch Murchison Falls? 

This time “Inzu Ya Masaba”; the House of the King of Bugisu, has just texted me and told me that this time, we should not touch Murchison Falls. He even told me to tell the members of Parliament that Uganda should not touch this issue of –(Member timed out.) 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I invite you to look at the way the Gen. Moses Ali is seated and guide us on whether it is in order to sit like that in Parliament; as if he has a problem with his stomach? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he is seated nicely. He is listening well and I think it is okay.

3.12
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very painful to stand here and dwell on a subject on which Parliament has pronounced itself before. I think there is an element of contempt of Parliament whenever we make serious pronouncements here. 

Parliament expressed its displeasure at tampering with Murchison Falls and the minister made an undertaking that nothing would be done to tamper with Murchison Falls. Now, here we are seeing Government declaring its serious intentions. 

I do not know if the ministry is serious. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals has a very long line up of facilities that can generate power, if developed. Uranium is one of them, running from Kibaale through Kiboga. The Atomic Energy Council, supported by Government, is supposed to do the job of ensuring that such facilities are developed. 

I wonder why they should go ahead to tamper with the heritage of this country. The strength of Uganda’s tourism is based on our natural resource endowments, Murchison Falls being one of them. I do not know what our economists are doing because the opportunity cost would justify that keeping this facility would have a better pay off than the power itself –(Interruption) 

MR ALERO: Thank you, member, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Due to the uncontrolled use of our natural resources, excavation and diversions here and there, around Pakwach, we recently had serious floods, which stopped traffic from Arua. In fact, the whole of West Nile was cut off from the rest of Uganda.  

Goods that were supposed to be taken to Congo and Sudan were all stopped at Pakwach and goods that were coming from West Nile to Kampala were also stopped on the other side. This deterred economic progress in that area. Thank you.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, at the moment, we have sufficient power and the problem is evacuation and distribution. We should concentrate on that in the interim period as research utilises the other facilities that we have. I therefore see no need, at the moment, to go ahead and tamper with Murchison Falls.

3.14
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice to the members and say, no. What will we tell our children? Will we say that once upon a time we had falls but we have to go elsewhere to look at falls? 

What is important today is planning. The energy output that we have, by the end of last month, was about 1,117 megawatts. The consumption is only 500 megawatts. It means we still have excess. It also means that consumers are paying more because they have to pay for what has been produced.

We appreciate that we need to plan. The problem is the licensing. I need to inform members that it is not Government that does a feasibility study. When a company wants to build, it goes and asks for permission to do so. They license it to do a feasibility study and they present it before they get the license to begin constructing a dam.

We have been complaining that despite having this much power, we are licensing thermal generators whose power production cost is very high. We are licensing mini hydros whose power production cost is very high. In the meantime, we are borrowing. They bring the loans to Parliament - we passed Karuma and Isimba. Soon, all the turbines in Karuma will be on the network. We are asking one question, “What about uranium?” We have put an embargo, as Government of Uganda, on exportation of uranium because we know – Actually, the President made that speech in the United Nations – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: The President said, all the dams in Africa cannot satisfy our energy demand. We need to tap into nuclear energy for electricity. 

Madam Speaker, we have a lot of uranium in Uganda. We actually want a report here; how far have the plans for nuclear energy development gone? We instituted an Energy Atomic Council and the only problem is poor funding. The Energy Atomic Council is working. We have a department for nuclear development in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We need to hasten plans for nuclear energy production so that by the time the demand grows, we are ready. It is nuclear energy that can save our natural resources. 

Finally, I would like to inform this House and I can be quoted that people hurry to license companies because once a company is licensed to construct a dam, they continue earning from the tariff. Whenever you pay the tariff, the owner of that mini hydro who was licensed, is paid. It is free money. We need to stand up. 

3.18
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to oppose this move. I was on record here when the former Minister of Energy and Mineral Development was on the Floor and deceived this House. Now, her lies have caught up with her. I pray for my brother, Eng. D’Ujanga who has been left to spearhead this scandalous investment. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I think this is my first time to rise on a point of order in this House but this time, I was forced to rise because my younger brother is going personal. Instead of debating national issues, he is going personal. Is he in order to be personal while debating in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concentrate on the policies. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I meant hon. D’Ujanga, the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development, who is directly in charge of electricity. Uganda, like any other East African country, shares the endowment of fauna and flora, which attracts tourists in this country or in this part of the world. 

When you go to Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda, all the beauty that you find in these countries is the same but there is one unique thing that Uganda has over these other East African countries - and that is the beauty of the Murchison Falls. 

I have a picture here which I have just extracted from the honourable minister, indicating where Uhuru Falls is and where Murchison Falls is. There is no way one can do a dam here and not affect the Murchison Falls.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it becomes ridiculous for anybody with technical knowledge and expertise to come and convince Parliament that they are going to do a study for possible construction of a dam at Uhuru Falls, without affecting the natural beauty of the Murchison Falls. 

As hon. Cecilia Ogwal proposed that we organise Parliament to march to the Murchison Falls, I would add that on that day, let the entire country match in two directions, one to Murchison Falls, and the other to plot No.1 to evict those who are making these wrong decisions that affect the future of our country. I thank you and I want to submit.

3.22
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by saying that this was a dead deal. On behalf of the people of Ngora, this one is a dead deal. On their behalf, I will not support this. 

Let us begin with the name; what is the meaning of the word ‘Uhuru’? Uhuru is a Kiswahili word, which means independence or freedom. 

If we make a mistake and allow the ministry to do whatever they want to do in that area, the eco-system will be destroyed. Which type of independence are you going to talk about? I do not want to waste time to emphasise this by saying this thing called Uhuru dam should actually be stopped. We should not even be thinking about it.

They are saying that the electricity demand is increasing by 10 per cent; even in Kampala city, about a month ago, we had load shedding here. Load shedding when we have enough power in Uganda? Load shedding in Parliament; we had it here. All of us were here.

When you go to whichever part of the country, there is still load shedding and yet according to Government we have enough electricity - in fact, excess electricity. Now when you talk about excess – 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The thinking of having Uhuru dam that is going to destroy our environment, should not be allowed. I am saying that as a Member of Parliament; we should explore other alternatives instead of destroying our environment and our River Nile. It is the only historical site, in my opinion – there is even a motion that we should protect and preserve our historical sites and one of them is actually River Nile. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

If we look into our Article, Objective Number XXVII, it is about our environment and it is about sustainability. At the moment, we are suffering very much as Ugandans due to calamities which are befalling us because of human action on the environment. 

Besides, let us look at these falls; it is a beauty. Why do we want to tamper with it? We have enough sunshine, if we want to invest more on energy, we can also tap on the sunshine. Leave alone, the suggestion of the nuclear energy. Why do we have to tamper with our falls, which is almost only one and is a beauty? 

This brings me to tell Ugandans that we are not going anywhere; we are remaining here. Why don’t we behave? Sometimes we behave as if we are guests or visitors and we are here temporarily and we are running away. Why do I say this? On the environment; I know that hon. Nzoghu brought here the issue of Semliki, where the untouchables are finishing the forest. We all agreed that the forest cover is already too low, that is probably why we have problems in our country. 

Do we have the authority to go and deplete the national park because we probably fought in the bush and we are untouchable?

Let me conclude on this; I know that a committee has been told to investigate this, but before the committee brings this in Parliament, they will have finished the big trees in Semliki National Park completely. These are the home for our birds, snakes and wild animals. Why do we do this? It is a shame! 

This is why we suggest that ministers should be people who are not Members of Parliament, so that we are not kind to them. When they are Members of Parliament, we look at them as our colleagues and then we are kind to them. They do whatever they want. This is very bad for the country. We are just going to let the country go completely. I do not know what is going to be there for our children if you see the damage on the environment. Let all of us be mindful about the environment. If a development, which is not going to brings us much - after all we have more than enough energy for our consumption. We should always prioritise keeping our natural resources.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 35 Members have contributed in this matter. I have allowed them because of the importance of the subject. I think we need to bring it to a close. 

Honourable minister, I have not heard any one, other than your colleague, supporting the proposal for a survey. No one in this House other than your colleague has supported the proposal for a survey. 

I think that is the message we are taking to you that the people of Uganda, through their representatives here, do not want you to even undertake that study on the Murchison Falls. I do not know what you have to say to that.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, I have taken note of all the comments. There are two or three things I would like to clarify on, if you permit. 

One issue, and it has repeatedly been stated on the Floor, is that we have excess power. Indeed we have excess power but the demand is growing at 10 per cent per annum, and the hydro power station takes five to seven years to construct. Therefore, it is wiser to do the study and preparation in advance so that we do not get caught up with what we went through in 2007. That is with respect to excess electricity.

The other thing that has been said repeatedly is the issue of solar. By the way, we already have 60MW of solar power in this country and we are doing more. When we are designing solar power we consider that the sunshine will be there for six hours out of the 24 hours. Therefore, solar cannot replace hydro power. When the sun is not there, you need another source of energy to take over the load you would have connected on the solar. Solar cannot stand on its own but it needs another source of power. Therefore, solar could work very well with hydro.

Madam Speaker, the Member for Kumi made a statement which I do not think most of us took note of. He said if you are going to study, you better study for survival of the falls. Indeed, if scientists normally make decisions after studies; if you are going to study an area you also study for the sustainability of the falls: are these falls going to last another 100 years or not? Is the beauty going to be there or not? You need a study to answer those questions. Therefore, it would not be right to say, “Do not study at all”.

On a lighter note, my younger brother said I am the one who destroyed Ripon Falls. Ripon Falls was destroyed in 1954 and by that time I had not yet understood electricity so I could not have been there to destroy it. However –(Interjections)- 

SPEAKER: The Honourable members, please, we need to complete this subject. We have other work. Please, conclude.

MR D’UJANGA: As I said, we have taken note of this. Finally, we are going to have a nuclear power station but it will be in 10 to 15 years. At the moment, we are preparing because you know the issue of nuclear is a bit sophisticated. We are training personnel in nuclear engineering and we will go systematically.

Above all this, hydro is the cheapest and easiest to operate. We are doing wind studies in Karamoja and there are good results coming up about wind power. However, with wind energy, you will have energy only when the wind is blowing. We also have a few people who are doing geothermal in western rift valley and the results are encouraging. I think in the next three years, we should be having some geothermal energy. However, we need all the energy sources to have a meaningful mix in order to be sure of having electricity. Geothermal power is providing about 450MW. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need our Committee on Natural Resources to follow up on the information that there is actually a study going on and it is being done by an interested party. I think the company is called Bonang Energy. The committee should follow up this and update us as soon as we come back. The minister is saying “we are going to” yet there is report that somebody is doing it. We need to understand that.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure on a matter that touches integrity in this House. Yesterday’s proceedings revealed the involvement of this country’s Attorney-General, hon. William Byaruhanga, in an investment programme where the Government is required to spend money and in a matter where as the constitutional legal adviser, a conflicted Attorney-General did not pay attention to our code of conduct as envisaged in Appendix F(3)(b). 

I have been trying to rise on his procedural point in anticipation that he would be about to escape from jurisdiction. Now that we are lucky that he is here, I am requesting for your guidance whether it is not procedurally right for him to justify to this House why he should not be referred to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to be investigated on the seemingly unfair deal that the country is about or likely to get involved in? 

I am aware that you asked the Prime Minister to investigate and report back. This House has a history of investigations conducted by the Prime Minister and undertakings of the Prime Minister, which are not honoured. Since the Attorney-General is here, I seek a procedural guidance whether he should not show cause why he should not be referred for disciplinary action. I am concerned because he is the head of the Bar.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we adjourned yesterday he had come to explain but the environment was such that there would probably not be listening. Since he is here, he will probably say something about it.  I will call him later.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE KENYAN LAND (AMENDMENT) LAW OF 2016 ON UGANDA’S PROPERTIES IN KENYA

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Government of Kenya has not sent us the information that we had requested. However, we are working with our ambassador in Kenya and the Office of the Attorney-General to ensure that we receive this information.

THE SPEAKER: You will have to report at the resumption of Parliament in January. Honourable members, I would like to amend the Order Paper to allow the first reading of a Bill by one of the members. I invite hon. Namayanja to make the first reading.

3.39 	
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 4 September 2019, leave was granted to hon. Niwagaba to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” In accordance with Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Clerk wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for a certificate of financial implication in respect of the Bill. However, 60 days elapsed and subsequently, the Deputy Speaker instructed the Clerk to gazette the Bill. The Bill was subsequently gazetted on 13 December 2019.

Madam Speaker, it is against this background and on behalf of hon. Niwagaba that I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. I beg to move and lay the Bill on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Honourable members, the circumstances surrounding the Bill have been stated. I, therefore, commit the Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. Attorney-General, you can now respond before we go to item No.4.

3.41
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Alex Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to respond to this matter that was raised yesterday.

I came here yesterday after finding out that this matter had been raised because certain information had been brought to my attention. As you have correctly said, I found the debate on the matter of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There was an allegation that a company called Pine Investments, in which I am director, was intending to sell a piece of land to the Government at an exorbitant price. I would like to set the records straight. 

There are two issues. First of all, it is factual that I am a director of that company, Pine Investments.  About two or three months ago, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development put up a tender for bids for the provision of land for Afri-Exim Bank, which is headquartered in Cairo, Egypt, to come and build their headquarters here.

At the time, I was at The Hague in the Netherlands. I understood that, that company, whose other directors are one Charles Lubega and another one Henry Lubwama – we are actually three directors - participated in the bid; they put in their documents in order to try and have that property considered or purchased.

Madam Speaker, as soon as I came back from The Hague, this matter was brought to my attention. I immediately wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Secretary to the Treasury stating that I was a director in this company and seeking immediate withdrawal of our company from this tender process. I also asked the directors who were in active participation of the company - I have not been for the last three years - to immediately withdraw our tender.

Madam Speaker, there has not been influence peddling. There has not been any purchase. I understand that the evaluation of the bids is ongoing. I would like to lay on the Floor of Parliament both the withdrawal letters by the company and withdrawal letters by myself, which were written over a month ago.

I would like to also tell this House that as far as I know, the evaluation process is proceeding but the company in which I already said I am director is not a participant. I beg to lay the letters on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OKUPA: One of the allegations that were made, which the Attorney-General needs to clarify, is that the land that you wanted to sell to this bank in Nakasero was fraudulently acquired from Nakasero Primary School. You should clear your name and tell us whether you own that land or not. If you own it, how did you acquire it? That is the other part of the allegation.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is preposterous to suggest that we got the land from Nakasero Primary School or that it was fraudulently acquired. We have had the land since the year 2005. We bought the land and the records are there and they speak for themselves. We have had physical and legal occupation of that land for the past 14 years. The investigative organs were three – (Interjections)- We bought the land from a registered propriety whose name I do not remember but that can be found out –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Attorney-General, when you return, lay on the Table the copies of the title so that people can follow up. 

MR BYARUHANGA: I can do that.

THE SPEAKER: You bring them. Thank you very much. Let us go to item No. 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as a member of the Parliamentary Commission, you have asked me to lay these documents -

THE SPEAKER: Yes. The minister is a commissioner of Parliament 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek procedural guidance on the matter, which we have just dealt with by the Attorney-General. Does it then follow that if a minister, or a Member of Parliament or a politician for that matter owns a company, they cannot bid for any business in Government? Unless there was something more sinister than what the Attorney-General has explained, this could be misunderstood. 

I thought that if the Attorney-General owned property and there was a bid, he has a right like any other Ugandan to submit. I am seeking guidance on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not had time to study that situation. However, I think our code of conduct requires us to declare our interest if there is a matter that comes to us in the course of our work. That is what we are expected to do. Let us go to item No.4. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to on the Table the annual performance report for financial year 2018/2019 for the Education Service Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal and report back. 

MR BAHATI: I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Registration Services Bureau annual report for financial year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the annual report on the state of equal opportunity in Uganda, 2017/2018 is not available. It will be laid on the Table at the next sitting. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Uganda Registration Services Bureau annual report for financial year 2018/2019 should go to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs not the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual budget monitoring report for financial year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2020/2021 to financial year 2024/2025.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has fulfilled the requirement under the Public Finance Management Act to ensure that the National Budget Framework Paper is laid here before the 31st of December. It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. It is also available to the rest of the House.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week I raised an issue regarding some documents, which were laid on the Table by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They were both entitled, “The Annual Budget Performance”. 

It was laid twice on the Table. However, I have had a look at these documents and they are different. One time we asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us which document the committee should take as the correct one. To date, we have not got that response. The Deputy Speaker asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget if the minister can tell us which document is the correct one. Which one should the committee look at?

If you allow me time, I can go and pick the copies that were laid here. They are completely different; so, which document will the committee deal with?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it would be better if you brought them because I do not know which document you are talking about and which is right and which one is not. It is better if you bring them so that we can look at them.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE MEMBERS OF THE RICE BUSINESS SECTOR ASSOCIATION LIMITED AGAINST THE DISCRIMINATIVE AND UNFAIR TAXATION OF THE RICE IMPORTERS, LOCAL MILLERS, FARMERS AND CONSUMERS BY UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY

3.51
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a petition by members of the Rice Business Sector Association Limited against the discriminative and unfair taxation of rice importers, local millers, farmers and consumers by the Uganda Revenue Authority. The humble petition of the Rice Business Association Sector Limited is presented on their behalf by me. 

First, the subject matter of the petition relates to Uganda Revenue Authority’s discriminative, unfair and selective charging of Value Added Tax (VAT) on imported milled rice. Secondly, previously, milled rice imported by the petitioners was not subjected to 18 per cent VAT because –

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the details. Present the introduction and the prayers.

MR WAIRA: The petitioners pray that:

    1. Parliament intervenes in the matter and carries out an investigation into the taxation regime of the rice sector in order to ensure fair taxation to all rice importers, millers and farmers in Uganda.
    2. Government, through the Attorney-General, ensures expeditious disposal of the case in the Court of Appeal and pursues the lifting of the injunction, which is causing unfair taxation.
    3. Government takes keen interest in the rice sector in Uganda along the whole rice value chain from production, importation, and exportation of both milled and un-milled rice.

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, I had required the Attorney-General to come and explain to us how an injunction had remained in force for seven years but he has not yet done so. I hope he is coming back.

In one of these cases, there is an injunction, which has been a temporary injunction for seven years, and it is causing untold suffering to the population. I hope the Attorney-General will be able to come and respond to that particular issue. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ARISING OUT OF THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF OVER 300 FAMILIES IN KYABISAGAZI VILLAGE, KIGOROBYA SUB-COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the chairperson.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, I raised this matter on 26 February and it is a humanitarian crisis. The committee has reported but whenever the time to discuss this report comes, either the ministers or the committee members are absent. 

We have just discussed a matter where security forces - the army and the police - are in conflict. However, in this matter, this is a situation where the army and the police, in the guise of borrowing sister forces, connived and named people rebels and evicted them. As a result, people are dying daily. They are grazing in the bush and hunted to be arrested as rebels. 

The report was tabled in this House. I would beg that we either issue a directive that will compel all the parties to be here or we debate it the way it is since it is now our property. Otherwise, we are massaging a calamity that will one day – Good enough, I have seen one member of the committee. She can ably take clarifications from the House so that we pronounce ourselves on this matter. Otherwise, from February, a humanitarian crisis – Already, people have harvested in two seasons. 

Madam Speaker, since the report is our property, we can ably debate it so that we clear our table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agree that the matter has been in our domain for some time. I would like to propose that we go to item No.7 as they look for the chairperson of the committee, as we gave him responsibility for that matter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 51 OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT ACT, 2019, ACT NO.5 OF 2019 TO APPROVE THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT (DECLARATION OF KALAGALA – ITANDA FALLS SPECIAL CONSERVATION AREA) ORDER, 2019

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion was presented to Parliament and the only problem was the petition. It was presented on the 3rd and the Speaker ruled that we should consult further with the petitioners. We consulted them and reached a consensus and I would like to report to the House. 

Madam Speaker, we were here to seek declaration of Kalagala-Itanda area to be considered a special conservation area. It is true that the petitioners happened to be within the proposed area and the Nile Riverbanks Conservation Investors Association. 

Their first concern was on the land rights - the 100 metres protection zone, which is in the National Environment (Wetlands, River Banks and Lake Shores Management) Regulations, No. 3/2000. We agreed that we can coexist and for the rest of the land, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development had carried out valuation and we are ready to commence with compensation in January.

The second reason was on existing infrastructure. We have agreed that NEMA will guide in line with the law on a case-by-case basis. This means individual projects, and not group projects.

The third one was on the joint validation of the 100-metre protection zone, which we have agreed to commence in January 2020, led by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The other one was on the expediting of the Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA’s). We accepted that approval of environmental and social impact assessment reports by NEMA will be done, once Parliament approves the statutory instrument, because you cannot do so without having the approval of Parliament.

The other issue was on the tax exemption. Our mandate is in conservation; we could not handle the tax exemption because it is a mandate of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the ministry has to study it. In our conservation plan, we have a sustainable management plan which has no tax exemption. However, on that one, they agreed that we go to Parliament and get the approval so that we can proceed. The tax issue will be handled on a case-by-case basis. 

I am here to seek the approval of Parliament to declare Kalagala and Itanda special conservation areas and also to proceed to issue the statutory instrument, in line with section 51 of the National Environment Act, 2019. 

One of the Members of Parliament, hon. Moses Walyomu, representing Kagoma County, is one of the petitioners. He attended our meeting and they have added input because there was something they wanted to say. Their participation in the sustainable management plan is in writing because they put notes and we took note. The evidence is there; the circulation has been done. So, hon. Walyomu, we thank you for representing your people well and for reaching a consensus. 

4.02
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to confirm that the meeting and debate we had over this resolution took place. So, whatever the minister has stated is what we agreed upon. I am here to stand and request this House to approve this resolution to declare Kalagala and Itanda a conservation area.

In that meeting, we had Nile River Investors and Conservation Association (NIRICA), the Local Council III (LC III) leaders and LC I. I also informed my honourable colleagues, hon. Baseke and hon. Musoke, and we agreed that we need the approval of Parliament, so that we can really conserve the area of Kalagala and Itanda. Therefore, we are in agreement, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I may not come from that area but I know the place; I have been there. Not everyone from that place is a member of the association. There are people who are living there. Some of them have land titles; others do not have land titles but they are not members of the association that they are talking about. When it comes to payment of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), it becomes a very big burden in most cases for Government to clear all of them. 

Madam Speaker, with your guidance, we should send a relevant committee to first see which people are affected and living there, then we get to see the financial consequences of what Government will go through after declaring it, so that we get a win-win situation in all this. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the Government does not know the quantum?

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, the observation that I have is that there are over 2,000 families in that very area. Not every family is a member of that association that we are talking about. I would beg that we move slowly by sending a committee to see what is there and then we get to know the impact that it will have, after sending off the families from that very area. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR WALYOMU: Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give my colleague is that it was not only NIRICA but I also said the leaders and community members were involved. They moved from subcounty to subcounty and village to village, consulting the communities. These consultations were done.

MR KIBUULE: Madam Speaker, consultations were done, with over 300 signatures of people, and we availed this before the presentation of the motion. It was at that time that NIRICA came in to petition. It is not that we had not consulted them. Evidence was there that we had consulted, through all stakeholders in the affected area. However, NIRICA came out to write to the Speaker. We called for a meeting again and reached a consensus. 

To respond to my colleague, hon. Aja’s concerns, it is not that we are going to evict these people. A conservation area means we can even co-exist with them, if they follow the conservation guidelines in this matter.

4.07
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, thank you. When the minister was advised to go back to the people, we were here in this House. There are a number of issues that came up but the minister has not ably addressed them.

From the look of things, it would seem that the minister simply went and co-opted a few politicians – as we seem to see – to come and back him here on the Floor of Parliament to aid him in –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, who are the other members who are complaining? I have not received any other petition other than the first one.

MR OGUZU: I am giving the information.

THE SPEAKER: No; speak from a point of knowledge. Who are those others who are dissatisfied? What have they said and to whom have they said it?

MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, I am here to complain because we want the best for this country – (Interjection) – Yes. There are issues that were raised and we expected that there must be evidence to the fact that one, the minister has addressed all issues that are related to the cultural practices in that area which should have been –(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, we come to this Parliament to represent. Much as it is a national Parliament, we have a duty to represent our constituencies. We have heard submissions from Members of Parliament from these specific areas. I have not come across any Member of Parliament who represents more than one constituency in this Parliament. (Applause) Therefore, the best information that we can get as far as the best interests of members from these communities are concerned is from the area Members of Parliament. When it comes to my colleague’s constituency, we shall get the best information from him –(Interjection)– Yes, this is a national concern, just like you can have national concerns in your constituencies. 

Is the honourable member in order to contradict the most interested member of that community, who is the Member of Parliament, and not only one but also other Members of Parliament from the same area. Is the Member in order to continue contradicting the best interests of the area Member of Parliament who petitioned this Parliament over the same? 

The speaker: Honourable members, I would have been happy if hon. Oguzu had come with another petition from some people. He is playing the devil’s advocate; he is out of order.

4.10
Mr Lawrence biyika (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, last year, I was the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. That was the time we reviewed the National Environment Management Authority Act before we tabled it in this House. One of the issues passed by this House was the declaration of Kalagala-Itanda Special Conservation Area.

Based on what was already passed here, much as there are other issues that will follow - maybe issues to do with compensation and clearing the petition - the declaration does not do any harm. Instead, it protects that resource around Kalagala and Itanda. For that reason, I beg that Members support the minister to declare this place a special conservation area. I beg to move.

The speaker: Honourable minister, would you like to give some information?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the honourable member is saying there are no financial implications yet indeed there are. However, the most important thing is that earlier on, we were debating Murchison Falls and the House was in support of protecting the environment. This issue we are debating is about supporting and conserving the environment. I thought that it would even take less than a second.  Thank you.

The speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the declaration of both Kalagala and Itanda falls as special conservation areas.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I was looking for the chairperson of the select committee but he is not here. I do not know whether there is any member willing to take up the task. Let us look at the humanitarian issue; who is going to take up the responsibility? Honourable member, you are the petitioner; leave other people to speak.

BRIG. flavia byekwaso (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I have just called the chairperson. He said that he is on the way coming. In the interest of time, I can stand in for the moment. Otherwise, if there is another item, we can proceed as we give him time to arrive.

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Afande Flavia Byekwaso has accepted to step in but this is a sensitive matter. As we debate it, she might keep referring to the person that we are waiting for. 

I would like to request that you use the voice of your office to go through an extra person to tell that person that the Speaker has instructed him to be here in the next five minutes. They should equally tell the minister to do the same. When they hear that statement, they will be here in the next five minutes.

The speaker: Honourable members, yesterday I indicated that we may not be able to proceed with item No. 8 because I have received a number of petitions from Rubanda and Kabale districts. I think I would rather push it to the start of the Third Meeting.

Ms opendi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that you have given us the information regarding petitions, and also aware that when my colleague, hon. Medard Sseggona, made a presentation here he submitted the different council resolutions, wouldn’t it be wise that this whole matter is referred to the committee instead of moving in circles? The committee would then table a report to the House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to move in that direction? 

There may be other petitions. We are not going to proceed with this matter until maybe the House resumes. In the meantime, the matter could be before the committee for them to look at it. I am just proposing.  Thank you.

Mr Bahati: Madam Speaker, still on this very matter, if you look at the Hansard of 5 December 2019, the House agreed that we will move forward and approve the cities in principle. Those that are clear would move on while those that need further consultations would be worked on later. The issue was to do with the numbers in the House.

Regarding the debate and consultations, we agreed that those that have issues - (Interjections) - they were mentioned –(Interjections)– If you could allow me to mention them; we agreed that in case of Moroto, Nakasongola, Wakiso and Kabale, by April 2020 we shall have concluded our consultations.

The principle of approving the cities is fine but for those that are not ready and need further consultations, we would go on, consult and come back. 

The speaker: Honourable members, I think I indicated that it is better if we did them together in January when we return. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

The speaker: Honourable chairperson, is your report ready? Honourable members, I understand the report was uploaded. Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the second reading?

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we had not specifically laid on the Table the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance accompanying the National Budget Framework Paper. I beg to now lay it on the Table, with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the certificate has now been provided to complete the process of laying the National Budget Framework Paper.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. You can justify. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you aware, in June 2019 this House referred the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill, 2019 to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

This law provides for regulating public sector procurement and disposal of public assets in Uganda by providing for rules, methods, principles, processes and procedures, powers, roles and responsibilities of the key players and actors, and incorporating emerging good practices, strengthening the use of procurement as an economic tool and strengthening good governance in the public sector procurement.

Madam Speaker, this Bill comes in to address specifically issues to do with e-government; administrative levels of disputes; help strengthen the public procurement system in our country and reduce the corruption that has been going on through the public procurement system but also help us to strengthen implementation and service delivery to the people of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, are you ready to report?

4.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill entitled, “the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2019” was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure.

The committee scrutinized the Bill and made the following observations:

1. 	The Bill proposes to alienate powers to conduct an investigation from the Authority. Generally, as a principle, whenever the law establishes an authority and bestows to it powers to manage a particular activity, the same will always empower such an authority with the mandate to institute investigations in case of any misconduct. The proposed amendment is negating that as it is seeking to repeal the investigative powers, ability to summon witnesses, examination of parties, among others, which in fact may not be desirable for a supervisory entity. 

The Authority should retain the power to investigate and act on complaints that are not subject of administrative review. The power is necessary to enable the Authority to effectively execute its mandate to administer and enforce compliance with all the provisions of the Act as specified in section 7(c) of the Act.

2. 	The Bill seeks to give the minister and the Attorney-General the mandate to approve other methods of procurement, particularly in respect to procurement of complex, specialized and strategic goods. This opens a window for discretion and hence likely abuse of process. It will also draw the minister responsible for finance into the procurement and make him or her equally accountable with the accounting officer. 

The Act places overall responsibility of the procurement with the accounting officer and therefore the minister should not be brought to the operational level of approving methods or procurement nor the Attorney-General. 

3. The PPDA Act, 2003 has been a major challenge to speedy implementation of Government projects. This is supplemented by public officers/people engaged in execution of procurement processes and facilitated by the weak sanctions under the current law which need to be addressed. There is need to strengthen sanctions for breaching the legal framework for all respective stakeholders and reduce the length of procurement timelines in order to improve efficiency.

4. 	The Bill proposes to remove PPDA from the administrative review process. This will reduce the levels of administrative review from three to two. The introduction of the PPDA Appeals Tribunal in 2011 was due to the backlog in the Commercial Court, which was delaying Government projects. However, the existing administrative review levels of accounting officer and PPDA were never reviewed as had been proposed. This led to the lengthy review periods in the law as they were increased to three levels. 

The PPDA should be removed since it is a regulator, to reduce time spent during administrative review and speed up the procurement process. Removal of PPDA from the administrative review will increase the workload on the PPDA Appeals Tribunal. There is need to increase the number of members of the tribunal so that they can be able to have different panels sitting at the same time and avoid delays in handling administrative reviews.

5. 	Regulatory authorities regulate through issuance of guidelines from time to time based on the changing operating environment. However, the Bill seeks to amend section 97 of the principal Act by substituting “Authority” with “Minister” and thereby removing the regulatory function of issuing guidelines from the Authority to the minister. 

The minister should be in charge of policy, laws and regulations as is the Government practice. The regulator should be responsible for issuing guidelines since it is working closely with the procuring entities and is better placed to issue guidelines depending on the changing environment.

6. 	The Bill seeks to provide for management of unsolicited bids which are submitted to the procuring and disposing entity to be subjected to requirements of Part V and Part VI of the PPDA Act. Part V of the PPDA Act provides for public procurement and disposal rules while part VI provides for methods of procurement and disposal. 

However, it is not possible to subject unsolicited bids to the provisions of Part V and Part VI as they envisage a requirement in the budget and the procurement plan. 

Unsolicited bids cannot be subject to competition. Putting them in the law will bring distortion of work plans, procurement plans and budgets. This will also bring a conflict with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act under which the procurement budgets are approved. 

7. 	The Bill seeks to transfer the function of accreditation from the Authority to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. During the implementation of the PPDA Act, there were several situations where it was difficult to strictly apply the law. In such situations, the current law, under section 40A, was amended to give the Authority mandate to consider special circumstances and grant accreditation to allow use of alternative systems. 

The Authority has established a credible system of accreditation, which it is using to manage special circumstances. The Authority has, to date, received 35 requests but has only accredited 13, as other requests could not meet the set criteria. This is a matter of operation that should be handled by the PPDA with the procuring entities. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should handle policy matters, for which this is not one. 

8. 	The Bill seeks to provide for sustainable procurement. The concerns of environmental protection, social inclusion and stimulating innovation should be made part of the procurement principles since there may be difficulties in evaluating them if they are made part of the statement of requirements. 

Madam Speaker, with these observations, the committee recommends that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law, subject to proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. It has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. Are there any comments? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes, other materials and supporting documents, which the committee perused in the process of considering the Bill. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. 

4.32
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee and I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. 

When you look at the law as is, it confers the accounting function on the accounting officer. To allow politicians to interfere in procurement processes is to cause them do an accounting function. Some of our colleagues here, like our friend, hon. Sarah Opendi, has been trying to do her work very well. I do not want to see you in the procurement process because at the end of the day, you will be subjected to the Public Finance Management Act and to Article 164 of the Constitution, which requires you to account, by virtue of your participation. 

I would like to implore colleagues that we support the motion and adopt the report with the amendments as proposed. I beg to move. 

4.33
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the principles that were laid, it is true that procurements in this country have experienced challenges, so this is the right time that the law is amended. However, I would like to point out one aspect that stands out from the recommendations of the committee, and we need to applaud them. 

I think the Bill was seeking to give discretionary powers over procurement by stating that the minister can have authority to recommend particular procurement methods at any time. One of the cardinal principles of procurement is what is called procurement planning. It means that at the beginning of a financial year, an entity plans their procurements. Therefore, to allow somebody to come in the middle and then divert the attention of the plan by recommending a method - I would like to applaud the committee for standing firm and bringing that recommendation because it will allow for transparency, retain the competitiveness of procurement and ensure that we can always get quality. 

Based on this, I would like to implore Members that if we do not mind, we could proceed straight away to deal with the issues so that we save more time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether Members have internalised the amendments because there are 22 of them.

4.35
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I think we need time. There are even other proposals that have really dogged the Government and the whole procurement process. We used to have the central purchasing authority, which was abolished and it puzzles me that now, every agency can procure a car at a different price in the same government. 

I think we need more time to the extent that as private Members we need to put some – There are common goods that we can procure as a Government in order to save the resources that we are wasting at the moment. I think we need more time to analyse the amendments and then a way forward will come in the future. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Kasule that Members need more time to internalise the report. This is a very important piece of legislation that can change the way we have been doing things in Government; it affects implementation and service delivery. Therefore, any amendment that we make should be able to improve on the current level of service delivery. I agree that we can handle it at the next sitting but I hope that members will also have time to read through this report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when I was listening to the chairperson, I realised that the proposals are far reaching and I think we need time to internalise them. 

Honourable members, go and study the report and the proposals. If you have amendments, you should give notice and bring them in time. Please, go and read the report and the Bill. Debate on this is differed to the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that if Members have amendments, since we now have time, it would be important that they bring them to us and we look through them so that we harmonise them before we come back. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, no surprise amendments on the Floor. Go and think, study and make concrete proposals for our consideration. Thank you. 

We had sent for the chairperson, hon. Mugoya. I believe the report was presented. Hon. Mugoya, please update us. 

4.37
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This report was presented. Allow me to register my dissatisfaction because we are dealing with land, which is the basic and primary factor of production. 

I thought that since we have had land evictions all over the country, we would give this report the urgency that it requires for purposes of debate. In order to refresh your memory, I would like to take you through page 14, just for emphasis purposes and for you to get to know what this report is all about. These were the observations of the committee. 

We said on page 14 that the so-called cordon and search operation, was merely a conduit for the security agencies to hand over the disputed piece of land to Mr Edgar Agaba, free from any encumbrances. Therefore, they carried out an illegal eviction under the guise of flashing out a militia or rebel group. 

Two, we emphasised that the security agencies acted on concocted information of the existence of a militia or rebel group. Therefore, there was some high level of unprofessional misconduct by some security personnel and we named them, including but not limited to Gen. Sam Okiding; Maj. Esau Mwebembezi, the intelligence officer of the artillery division; Mr Kisembo Araali, the Resident District Commissioner; former DPC of Hoima, Etima Twaha, who commanded the unlawful or illegal eviction. 

We also mentioned, on page 15, that the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, Mr Ernest Kiiza, fully participated in the preparatory meetings and also presided over some of these meetings that culminated into the unlawful evictions. 

It suffices also to note that strong tribal sentiments expressed by both Edgar Agaba and hon. Ernest Kiiza while appearing before our committee were likely to exacerbate the tribal conflict in the region. The duo openly told the committee that the Banyoro were left with no option but to defend themselves against the non-Banyoro.

Madam Speaker, if you go through this report, you can see what is happening in this country; it depicts a situation where the weak have no recourse where to seek justice. Also, those that form the majority in a given social setting are not going to allow the minority to survive in the same setting. This is what this report is all about. 

I indicated to you that what you are seeing here is merely a tip of the iceberg of what is taking place in the whole country. 

The report, in conclusion, clearly shows the country that what you term as an eviction is something that is fully planned by agencies of Government, and they do so because they are in control of all the state apparatus. Therefore, the weak have nowhere to report their cases. 

This is the House and it remains the only House and forum where those grievances can be brought. Unfortunately, we seem not to be serious with some of these grievances. I implore this august House, as we debate this report, to take stern actions. I so submit.

THE SPEAKER: Any recommendations in your report? What did you recommend?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, we gave around 14 recommendations. We said that the Minister of Relief Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should urgently provide humanitarian relief.

The committee recommends that evictees who were occupying the land as bona fide occupants prior to the acquisition of the same by Edgar Agaba should be verified and returned to the land or adequately compensated to the value that was lost.

We also said the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and Uganda Police Force should restrict themselves to their core mandate provided by the law. 

In order to secure a maximum degree of effective legal protection against the practice enforced or unlawful evictions for all persons under their jurisdiction, the Government must take immediate measures aimed at conferring security of tenure to all persons with interest in land, like how we had the bibanja certificates. 

Number five, the affected persons should be screened and helped to acquire national identification cards because they were all destroyed. 

We said Mr Agaba’s involvement in the forceful eviction of the displaced persons must be further investigated by the responsible Government agencies and face the justice system.

Government should be held liable for the unlawful conduct of its officers, including the Minister of Bunyoro Affairs. 

The UPDF and UPF officers who participated in this illegal action should be held responsible both in their personal and their official capacities.

The minister responsible contacts the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions to issue a nolle presequi for the release of the accused persons including the four juveniles that are languishing in Hoima Prison. 

We said Government should strengthen institutions such as the district land boards, area land committees and local council courts mandated to handle land administration to effectively address land matters.
 
The ministry responsible for lands should closely supervise the operations of district land boards and district land offices to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in their operations.

The minster responsible for lands should update Parliament on the status of the eviction guidelines in compliance with the court order given by Justice Musa Ssekaana. 

Government should also sensitise communities on land matters.

Finally, recommendation No. 14, we said the committee further recommends that Government puts in place involuntary displacement safeguards as pioneered by the United Nations (UN), where those affected can sit with Government to determine the fate of their destiny or future. 

That is how we concluded and said that the problem of evictions is enormous and if not handled with the utmost justice it deserves, it will soon plunge this country into regrettable consequences. We beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. I believe the – let us hear from one grandfather first before we come to you. 

4.47
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): With due respect, he is the one who presented the issue, but I have a concern before we proceed. 

Madam Speaker, when this report was presented in the House three weeks ago, we could not proceed because the four ministers mentioned in that report were not here. Up to now, they are not here, save for hon. Obiga Kania. The Minister of State for Defence, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and the Minister for Bunyoro Affairs are not here. What is more perturbing is that those who are evicted from Kigorobya are all scattered within my constituency, without relief. Children are suffering, people are taking shelter in tobacco shades, some in the forests; that is perturbing. 

In the same report, the committee observed that 30 people were reported to be in custody in a Government prison, but when they visited that Government prison, they were not there; so, those 30 people are not accounted for. How are we going to continue with this kind of scenario? How can we proceed when the officers implicated are not in the House yet this is very urgent? Are we procedurally right to continue like this?

THE SPEAKER: Of course, they must have got the report - Are they hiding? We should then adopt the report if they have not given themselves the opportunity to come here and explain.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, it is true that you asked me to convey the directive to the Prime Minister. I did so and the ministers were informed. However, the ministers in charge of disaster preparedness have not been around because of what has been going on around the country. Therefore, they requested to be given more time so they can appear here. Now that most of the areas have been covered, I think they will be able to report at the next sitting.

4.50
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for reporting on this matter. We are following this report very closely from West Nile because we have a very big population that had settled there for decades but which has also been evicted. I plead that we give this matter justice by allocating it enough time and having the principals who have been mentioned in this report present.

The urgent matter that has been raised here is in regard to the welfare of the women and children who have no shelter and food because whatever they had was destroyed during their eviction. As the ministers in charge of disaster preparedness are roving over the country, this group has not been attended to because the ministers have blocked relief from reaching this group. 

Madam Speaker, it would be important to use your powers to compel the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to also treat these people as deserving people in need. The most vulnerable – children and women – have been affected and they need urgent attention.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in respect to the issue of welfare, we should just give a directive that the minister in charge of disaster preparedness attends to this issue because these are Ugandans who have been displaced.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, when you read the Hansard of 26 February, a directive to supply aid was made here but that relief was denied. It was actually hijacked on the way. Even this directive may be passed today and the relief never reaches there. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say this: People are grazing in the bush; they established an Internally Displaced Peoples (IDP) camp and it became a hotspot for arrests. People were always picked during the day and night and taken to different jails and never resurfaced. Therefore, they are actually grazing in the bush. 

If we debated this thing wholesomely and implemented the recommendations, step by step, they are well doctored to restore livelihoods of these people. We could take them back to their homes, and we know where to find them. Otherwise, they are now grazing in the bush.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do?

MR MUHEIRWE: I propose that we adopt the report, whether these ministers are here or not. We have spent more than three weeks without them.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I have looked at the report. It is clear that these ministers were given an opportunity to appear before the committee and they appeared. In any case, they were heard over this matter. Therefore, it is not true that when we proceed without them, they would be prejudiced in anyway. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask whether the Minister of Internal Affairs has something to say since the Uganda Police Force has been mentioned here.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, you recall that when this issue happened, I made a statement here. It was from the statement I made that Parliament set up a committee to go and investigate. My role at that time was based on the statement, which I made and I never appeared before the committee for investigations. 

We did our part, in as far as police was concerned, to ensure that those people who could be accounted for were accounted for. Those who were taken in custody were charged, if they had charges, and virtually all of them were released. Yes, I am mentioned as a minister in the report but I do not see any other role that I could play. However, I thank the committee for the investigations they did because it helped us to get more facts, which probably we did not get as a ministry and we are fully agreeable with the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us adopt the report and the Clerk will write to each ministry indicating the section concerning them and ensure that they take action.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I am happy that the committee came up with a very good report. Actually, this area is in my constituency and the eviction was carried out when I was out of the country. Yesterday, I went there because the floods have not spared the bridge that connects my constituency with Masindi and the whole place is now a sugarcane plantation. 

The big issue for me, as the representative of the people, is to make sure that those who settled on the land way back in the 1950s are given at least alternative land for settlement. As hon. Kasumba has said, they have increased on the insecurity in the neighbouring place; children cannot go to school; the source of livelihood is not there. I am really happy with the report and I think the House should adopt it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the report and the recommendations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, you will now transmit the recommendations to the various ministries.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for coming up with this detailed report. I also thank this House for actually listening to me and picking interest in the matter since it is a humanitarian issue.

Madam Speaker, on pages 14 and 15, we are naming the people who exacerbated and were behind the whole of this move. We named all of them but when it comes to the recommendations, we have not named them; we have given institutional blame not personal blame. I think we should go ahead and unveil those individuals; otherwise, up today, someone tells you “I am an RDC, I can order your eviction” and tomorrow it will be the Attorney-General to be taken to court.

Madam Speaker, up to when shall we keep massaging individuals who are beating us daily and fighting nationals? Remember, this is a situation, where police and army –

THE SPEAKER: Is that a vote of thanks or a submission?

MR MUHEIRWE: I am thanking the House but I wanted to bring - Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the end of year party and I think the staff are beginning to assemble. Today, we have a joint one - the staff and Members. However, as we come to the end of the Second Meeting of the Fourth Session, I would like to report the following:

    1. We have had 60 sittings between June and December;
    2. We had two oaths administered;
    3. Eight Bills were passed;
    4. Twenty-seven resolutions were passed;
    5. Forty-five ministerial statements were made;
    6. About 213 urgent questions responded to;
    7. About 214 questions responded to by the Prime Minister; 
    8. Two questions for oral answer were responded to. I think here we have not done well because some are still pending.

There have been no reports from delegations abroad. 

As I informed you, the House is adjourned to 7 January 2020 for the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. Thank you very much. Have a Merry Christmas. Let us go outside and do some dancing.

I also thank the Clerk and her team, the Sergeant-At-Arms and all staff. We thank you for the work done during this part of the year. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 January 2020 at 2.00 pm.) 

