

Wednesday, 05 December 2018

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I look forward to the expeditious handling of the issues on the Order Paper. 

I have two announcements: The Centre for Legal Aid is engaged in a blood donation drive and is inviting Members of Parliament to go to Nakasero Blood Bank on Saturday morning. You can donate blood from 08.00 a.m. to 03.00 p.m. This is to support the restocking of the National Blood Bank. Members are encouraged to go and assist the health sector in that area.

Secondly, we have been talking about promoting Uganda. There is a young Ugandan who is promoting Uganda in the Miss World competition. She is called Brenda Abenakyo (Applause). I would like to appeal to Members to vote for her because she represents Uganda daily. The website is www.missworld.com. Please vote repeatedly. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I would like to talk about the pending work in this House. Sometime back, I read a number of Bills which were outstanding for several days. I would like to do it again;

i) 	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010 – given first reading in 2015
ii) 	The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015
iii) 	The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009
iv) 	The Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015
v) 	The Law Revision (Penalties and Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015
vi) 	The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015
vii) 	The Security Interest Removable Property Bill, 2018 – First read on 27 March 2018
viii) 	The Succession (Amendment) Bill; read for the first time on 27 March 2018
ix) 	The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018; and on this Bill, I really would like to appeal to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that the Judiciary has been waiting for this Bill for almost 20 years. Let us get it off our Table please.
x) 	The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016
xi) 	The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017
xii) 	The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 2017
xiii) 	The Roads Bill, 2018
xiv) 	The Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015

Honourable members, can we try and run through these before we break for Christmas? 

A number of Members were granted leave to introduce Private Member’s Bills but have not done so. These are;

    1. Hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa – the National Community Works Bill. He has not requested for the Certificate of Financial Implications. The Clerk should do it for him.
    2. Hon. Benard Atiku – the Prevention and Prohibition of Human Sacrifice and Harmful Practices Bill. Clerk, please put in the request for the Certificate of Financial Implications.
    3. Hon. Rosette Kajungu – The Succession Act, 2017. The Clerk should request for the Certificate of Financial Implications. 
    4. Hon. Paul Akamba – the Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill. The Clerk should put in a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the certficate. 
    5. Hon. Edward Makmot – the Trustees Bill, 2018. A request should be put to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Certificate of Financial Implications.
    6. Hon. Mwine Mpaka – the Uganda Development Bank (Amendment) Bill. The Clerk should write to the minister.
    7. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal – the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill. The Clerk should write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

There are Members who were granted leave but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has deliberately avoided giving them a certificate. These are; The National Graduate Service Bill by hon. Majegere and the Local Content Bill by hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe.

I am going to use my powers under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to permit the presentation of those Bills without the Certificate of Financial Implication because a certificate has been sought for, for over 60 days. I invoke Rule 117 (4) so that we can present the Bills and proceed with business whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development likes it or not.

Honourable members, I would like you to take your responsibilities seriously. Under Article 91, the Constitution says we should appoint committees for the discharge of our obligations. Your work, as sectoral and standing committees, is clear. However, the main thing under sectoral committees is that on behalf of the House, you scrutinise these Bills because you cannot have a 300-people committee looking at one Bill. That is why we send these Bills to you to carefully scrutinise them and bring them back. I know that our collective brains have enriched a lot of the legislation which is brought here. It is not for nothing that we have committees. 

Therefore, I would like to remind you about the 45 days rule. If you are unable to do it in 45 days, come back here and say, “We have been unable to do it in 45 days; can we ask for an extra month or fortnight?” However, committees just avoid coming here and they sit out there with a Bill; they are not here and we do not know what they are doing. 

Therefore, I would like you to follow the 45 days rule. Under Rule 140, we can give you extra time but under 140 (3), if you continue, we shall take up the Bill and handle it without further delay. You must find a way of completing these Bills especially the oversight role of Parliament, which is very vital in our work.

There are going to be sanctions for committees that fail to deliver timely scrutiny of the Bills and those who fail to report their findings to the House. I would like to ask the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to find a way because at the moment, there are no sanctions. We simply say that if you are late, come and report here. The rules committee should now look at our rules and see what sanctions we can impose for that situation.

Finally, Uganda will mark the Anti-Corruption Day on 10 December 2018 at Kololo Independence Grounds. The theme is “Citizens Participation in the Fight against Corruption: Sustainable Path to Uganda’s Transformation.” It is hosted by the Inspectorate of Government, who is an officer of this Parliament. Members are invited to attend it in the afternoon on 10 December 2018. It will be a Monday. 

Please find time to go and support the IGG and an officer of this House, in the fight against corruption. I understand the President will officiate.

2.52
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I think we need to develop a tracking system such that the Office of the Clerk is able to monitor the progress of a Bill from the time it is presented to when the 45 days elapse and when the 45 days elapse, those chairpersons should be asked to come and report.

They should be able to present to you a list indicating that these are the committees that were given the Bills and 45 days have elapsed but they have not reported; such that they are made to account.

Secondly, is the issue of the loans; you will recall that you met the new Country Manager for the World Bank. There are two loans and if they are not passed by 20th and 27 December 2018 - like the one on gender-based violence, then they will elapse. Unless we are not interested, we need those to proceed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We are developing a tracking system with the Committee on Information and Communications Technology (ICT). You know the bureaucracy in all these things – we have been working on it since January.

I would like to call upon the Clerk to ensure that the Committee on ICT reports quickly because I also want the public to be able to give their views online. If they cannot come here for a hearing, they can sit in Kitgum District and say to the committee, “I have a problem with clause 6” before they come to report.

2.53
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to unusually respond to your communication that touches on the work of this Parliament.

Being a committee chairperson is a very difficult job. The Bills that are before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - all the older Bills that you read out like the Human Rights Enforcement Bill, 2015 and the Law Revision (Penalties and Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill 2015, we have just concluded and signed four reports today. We started yesterday. 

On the Marriage and Divorce Bill, I thought I would get you in your Chambers yesterday and we talk. It is also available and I am just seeking your guidance with instructions to the Clerk, to write to the Director of the Legal and Legislative Services Department so that they can print out the copies of the Bill and find a way in which the report of the Ninth Parliament is given to the Members early so that they refresh their memories because it was a shelved Bill.

Madam Speaker, we feel like we are failing this House but we need to do something. If there is a parliamentary forum with a ready allowance of Shs 100,000, a committee member will dodge a committee meeting. If you want us to shame ourselves, we should go all the way. As a man who comes from Tororo, I will never die alone; we shall have to expose some of the challenges.

One of the challenges is that committees are competing with parliamentary fora. The sitting allowance comes three months after; there is quick fixing and it kills the morale of the Members.

Madam Speaker, as you instruct the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, the terms of reference should be to the effect of how we can harmonise the work of the various parliamentary fora and the work of the committees. It is hard and I would like to thank the Members who are committed to their committees. They need medals. What do we do with those ones who are moving here and there for – and we are killing the main objective. Should fora replace committee work so that we all join? This is killing us.

The sitting of the Standing Committees - about eight members of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges are also members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs including the chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges are also members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Madam Speaker, without quorum, you cannot do much. Therefore, we seek your guidance as you guide the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. Those benefiting from these parliamentary fora need to be woken up and embarrassed that we are failing this Parliament on its mandate to perform. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, the fora are not part of Parliament. The foras are clubs. They should meet on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. They are clubs and not part of Parliament at all. They should not compete with our committees.

I am the patron of all these fora and if I find out that you are conducting your business on those days, I will do serious things. Leave the sitting days of Parliament for parliamentary work.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the point you have emphasised in reference to what hon. Jacob Oboth has raised, is that if you are a chairperson of a committee and you have a Bill before your committee and the 45 days elapse, come back to the House and ask for more time. 

As a chairperson of a committee, you do not need quorum to do that. That is also an issue we need to resolve. Other administrative issues can be handled probably in the Parliamentary Commission or in any other forum. Nevertheless, hon. Jacob Oboth has raised it on the Floor of the House and we need to follow it.

Madam Speaker, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to seek your indulgence; if you can give us probably one week to resolve the issue of the Certificates of Financial Implications for the two Bills you have mentioned.

We also would like to request the Clerk, when writing to us, to give us copies because sometimes they write to the accounting officers and we never get copies yet we are supposed to respond.
I request for one week to handle those two Bills and the rest of the Bills will be handled in two weeks. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, similarly, the law should catch you. If 60 days elapse after we have put in a request, we should just move. Now this is more than 60 days on these two Bills. In one of them, the minister said that he does not support the Bill but that is not his business; that is why I am saying that we should just move so that the 60 days can also catch you.

Clerk, you should ensure that when you write to the minister, you also write to the state ministers and accounting officers to make sure that the certificate is handled.

3.01
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to comment on your communication. Every 10th December is the International Human Rights Day. We expect that all government departments should respect this. 

This year, we celebrate 70 years of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and a statement will be coming. It is surprising to hear that Government departments have fixed a major programme on this day. I would like to urge that all Ugandans respect the International Human Rights Day.

THE SPEAKER: Now this puts me in a difficult position because here, I am just a messenger. The Inspector General of Government wrote to me and said that they have a big activity on corruption. 

Can you help us? What is the activity for the Human Rights Day? Is there a function also in Kololo or are you going to Jinja or Mbarara?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, there will be a march in the city and the celebrations will be at the Railways Grounds. The Chief Justice will be the guest of honour. We expect that the minster will come here with a statement tomorrow. 

However, this is a day that every Government department should know, especially the Office of the IGG and all of us should be seen to promote human rights on this day. That is our cry and there should be better coordination in Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we can do both. Since it is a Monday, we can go for the human rights activities in the morning and in the afternoon, we can be with the Inspector General of Government (IGG). Let us be visible because both are officers of this House. However, I take note of your issue that we have not given it the significance it deserves.

3.03
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also responding to your remarks. As a member of the Committee on National Economy, we also have challenges. Hon. Okupa has raised an issue of a loan whose time is expiring soon. There are times when we also get constrained. We receive a loan request and we are told that in the next one week or so, its time should have elapsed; so, we equally get challenged. 

Therefore, I think this should not only be on the committee leadership to fast-track but it should also be on the Front Bench to fast-track to ensure that these things come to us early enough such that we take time to execute our responsibilities and report here when we have duly attended to the loan requests so that we do not create any doubt. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we think that there is going to be a stampede, we should reject the request because sometimes it is true the ministers come and say, “We have a deadline.” The other day – there is a Bill coming here – the Bank of Uganda rang me asking, “Where is the Bill?” I asked what Bill they were talking about. It had just come a week earlier and they were asking me. 

The minister wrote a “hot” letter that we have delayed his work; that we are attending workshops - eh! (Laughter) When I looked at the - no request had been made to the minister for any workshop. I told him that the committee you are harassing has done 31 Bills of yours without a workshop. By the way, he has not said anything about my letter but I fired back at him. He was attacking Members for no reason yet they have been doing their work. 

Therefore, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also put his office in order. You should not stampede us because we may not do good work yet you want quality work.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we try our best to coordinate but sometimes these things happen. On the issue of the World Bank loan, it is true it has a deadline but we also have a window and this morning, I met with the Country Manager of the World Bank and we agreed to request for an extension of a few months so that we allow Parliament to do its work. 

In addition, we keep telling the development partners to go to the right place. We are there as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development coordinating with them and when they come to you or to the committees and other places, it creates the impression that there is a crisis when actually there is no crisis. Thank you.

3.06
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a presidential pledge to Sironko District. The pledge was made at the burial of the late Prof. Dani Nabudere in 2011. 

On 1st August last year, a team from the Ministry of Education and Sports led by a one engineer Opio went to Sironko District and mobilised members of the community. They pointed out to us that it was time for the people of Sironko to receive this institute. This was a presidential pledge and it was in recognition of the professor’s good service to this nation in the Constituent Assembly as a delegate. 

Parliament appropriated Shs 751,980,418 to this project to be kick-started. However, I spoke to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports and to my dismay, he informed me that this fund was being diverted to other institutions that had been started sometime back but have not been completed. Unfortunately, Sironko does not have one of those institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I think this is a very serious matter to the people of Sironko. It is violation of a presidential directive and a negation of appropriation of Parliament.

My prayers are that:

    1. The ministry desists from shifting funds from one project to another. 
    2. The ministry immediately embarks on this institution as it will be the first and only project in Sironko District. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I last visited Sironko, that is one of the things that the people brought to my attention and I also wrote to the President about it. However, I think the serious issue is that the ministry has directed a diversion. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should come here and tell us whether they have diverted the money and if they have not, they should tell us when they are going to start the construction. Therefore, the ministry should come to us next Wednesday and report on the issue of the Dani Nabudere Memorial Technical Institute.

3.09
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a measles outbreak in Kiryandongo District. Kiryandongo is facing a serious challenge of the outbreak of measles. So far at Kiryandongo Hospital, we have registered more than 50 deaths and we are surprised that even children who were immunised against measles are also dying. We have tried to crosscheck and we have found that they have their immunisation cards and they were fully immunised against measles.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that:

    1. Government should intervene immediately with different measures to mitigate the measles outbreak.
    2. Government should investigate the possible causes of the epidemic.
    3. Government should investigate the quality of the vaccines used because the health teams think the drugs could have expired or the storage was not okay or transportation or administration was - 

THE SPEAKER: No, do not provide reasons.

MS KAHUNDE: I pray that they investigate the quality of the vaccines. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Health is requested to urgently examine the situation of measles in Kiryandongo Hospital as well as the cause of deaths and report back to this House at the earliest opportunity. They are not here but we need to get a response by Thursday, next week.

3.11
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance to do with insecurity of life and property. 

On 2 December 2018, a one Rasul Guma, a businessman who hails from Maracha District but living in Arua Municipality, was gunned down by some people. He died between 08.00 and 09.00 p.m.

Madam Speaker, this incident happened at a time when people were still busy moving around doing business in the early hours of the night. The killers parked their vehicle, a numberless Premio, in front of his premises. They shot him and sped off in the same vehicle. He was buried on Monday, 3 December 2018 in Oleba Sub county, Maracha District. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Madam Speaker, there have been a number of insecurity related incidences in Arua. Before Rasul was murdered, on Thursday, 29 November 2018, some unknown people robbed a gun from a guard at the Electoral Commission Regional Office. 

On Friday, 30 November 2018, gunmen robbed money from Don Supermarket between around 09.00 p.m. In the same night – 

THE SPEAKER: You have two minutes only. What do you want us to do? Conclude in half a minute.

MS AYAKA: There are a number of gun related incidences. Yesterday, we also had a robbery that happened in one of the supermarkets; so it now happens on a daily basis. The residents are very scared and we wonder what the security agencies are doing.

Madam Speaker, we request the ministry responsible to come up with a statement to explain why these incidences are rampant, why they have not been deterred and what measures are being put in place? 

Madam Speaker, we also would like the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to explain the rampant power outages. Otherwise, these incidences happen when power is off. Therefore, we need an explanation about these incidences because it is now unbecoming and people are living under fear. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the power outages, I believe hardly month ago, there was a statement here on that issue and so, we cannot go back to it. We had a debate here on the power outages and under our rules, we cannot bring back the same issue in the same Session. 

However, on the security matters, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and address us on the issue of insecurity in Arua and what he is doing about it. Thank you very much. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received the report and debated it. We should just go to Committee Stage and I hope you have read your report. 

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION, TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Annet Nyakecho): Amend C1ause 1, by substituting it with the following:

“(1) Application
This Act shall apply to a person, institution or public body collecting, processing, holding or using personal data within or outside the territorial jurisdiction of Uganda.”

The justification is to provide for extra territorial application of the Act.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I have no objection to the proposed amendment by the chairperson of the committee except that I propose that the provision is re-drafted for purposes of clarity and to recognise the limitations of extra territorial application of laws. 

It should be re-drafted as, “This Act applies to a person, institution or public body – 

    a. Collecting, processing, holding or using personal data within Uganda.
    b. Outside Uganda who collects, processes, holds or uses personal data relating to Ugandan citizens.”

It is in the same spirit but for better drafting.   
	
MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I have no objection to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 will be handled last; the interpretation will come last. . 

Clause 3

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, we need accurate data. Therefore, I propose to amend 3(d) by adding the word “Accurately” to the words, “fairly and lawfully” so that it reads, “Collects and process data fairly, accurately and lawfully.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, whereas I appreciate your intention, three weeks ago, I informed this House that if any of you had an amendment, you should circulate it in advance. I am sorry we shall not consider your proposal.

I put the question that clause 3 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

New clause 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 3 to read as follows:

“Establishment of the Personal Data Protection Office

    (1) There is established a Personal Data Protection office responsible for personal data protection under the Authority, which shall report directly to the Board.
    (2) The Personal Data Protection office established in sub section (1) shall be headed by a National Personal Data Protection Director appointed on such terms and conditions as may be specified in his or her instrument of appointment.
    (3) The National Personal Data Protection Director shall be a person of high moral character, proven integrity and with the relevant qualifications and experience relating to the functions of the Office.
    (4) The Personal Data Protection office shall consist of such other officers as may be necessary for the proper functioning of the office appointed on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the instruments of appointments.

The justification is to establish a personal data protection office responsible for the implementation of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, without being seen to challenge your ruling, I beg for your indulgence. Sometimes as the Bill is being discussed, a new insight comes -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I do not know how many times we have talked about this matter. You do not know how many problems you cause us by bringing in amendments which have not been considered by the committee and we do not know how to fit them in.

That is how we got the other problem which I will not talk about. My ruling will not change; send the amendments in advance. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to insert a new clause immediately after the new clause above to read as follows; “Functions of the personal data protection office. 

(1) 	For purposes of this Act and in addition to its functions under any other law, a personal data protection office shall -

(a) 	Oversee the implementation of and be responsible for the enforcement of this Act.

(b) 	Promote the protection and observance of the right to the privacy of a person and of personal data.

(c) 	Monitor, investigate and report on the observance on the right to privacy and of personal data.

(d) 	Formulate, implement and oversee programmes intended to raise public awareness about this Act.

(e) 	Receive and investigate complaints relating to infringement of the rights of the data subject under this Act.

(f) 	Establish and maintain a data protection and privacy register.

(g) 	Perform such other functions as maybe prescribed by any other law or as the office considers necessary for the promotion, implementation and enforcement of this Act.

(2) 	The office shall have all powers necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act.

(3) 	The office, in performing its functions under this Act, shall not be under the direction or control of any person or authority.”

The justification is to spell out the functions and powers of the office in implementation of this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you just finish all your proposals?

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I again propose to insert a new clause after the clause above; providing for the functions of the data protection office to provide as follows;

“Data Protection Officer
For purposes of this Act and so far as it applies to an institution, the head of the institution shall designate 
a person as the Data Protection Officer responsible for ensuring compliance with this Act.”


The justification is to designate a responsible officer for personal data protection and to ensure they take responsibility in the management and protection of personal data. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clauses be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clauses, agreed to.

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 4 by substituting the following; 

“Consent to collect or process personal data.

(1) 	A person shall not collect or process personal data without the prior consent of the data subject.

(2) 	Not withstanding sub section 1, personal data may be collected or processed without prior consent of the data subject where the collection or processing of personal data is - 
(a) 	Required by law.
(b) 	Authorised by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) 	Necessary for the proper performance of a public duty by a public body or prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or punishment of an offence or breach of law.
(d) 	For medical purposes.
(e) 	For the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a contract.

(3) 	The consent or objection by the data subject required under sub section (1) shall be in the prescribed form.”

The justification is that national security is already covered under clause 4(2)(b). The use of court also enhances the principle of accountability. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The amendment being proposed is creating an exception where if the permission is by law or a court order, then somebody can collect personal data.

I wonder why we should put that in the law that where it is permitted by law, then somebody should collect personal data. To me this is unnecessary. Is it really necessary for us to state that if it is by a court order, then somebody should be able to collect personal data? I think those two should be deleted. Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with the amendment and I propose that we retain clause 4 in its entirety. The justification is that the amendment proposed by the committee is similar to the current one in clause 4 in the Bill in terms of subject matter. However, clause 4 in the Bill is clearer from the drafting point of view; it also makes an exception for the collection and processing of personal data for national security and to fulfil legal obligations to which a data controller may be subject.

National security is a public interest, matter and can be limited under Article 43 of the Constitution. Borrowing from the regulation of the Interception of Communication Act, 2010, national security of Uganda includes matters relating to the existence, independence or safety of the State.

Further, we should retain clause 4 because the proposed clause 4(3) is unworkable, in my view, since it is unnecessarily restrictive and makes it difficult for data collectors, processers or controllers to comply with the law. 

With the advent of digitisation, there are many ways consent can be obtained and not necessarily in a prescribed form. With the emergence of new technology, I propose that the data collectors, processors or controllers be given the freedom to determine how this consent will be obtained as long as explicit consent is obtained. I request that we retain clause 4 in its form.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about abandoning you proposal? Do you have a rationale for it?

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, during discussions in the committee, there was fear that the issue of obtaining data for national security could be abused in certain instances. However, it is for the House now to decide. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any other contrary views? The proposal is that we retain the old clause 4. 

MS NYAKECHO: Then I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

New clause

MS NYAKECHO: I propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 4 to read as follows -

“Personal data relating to children
A person shall not collect or process personal data relating to a child unless the collection or processing thereof is –

    a) Carried out with the prior consent of the parent or guardian or any other person having authority to make decisions on behalf of the child.
    b) Necessary to comply with the law or
    c) For research or statistical purposes.”

The justification is to safeguard the privacy of personal data of children.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any objection to that?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I have no objection, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS NYAKECHO: I propose to amend clause 5 by substituting sub clause (1) with the following –

i. (a) 	A person shall not collect or process personal data which relates to the religious or philosophical beliefs, political opinion, sexual life, financial information, health status or medical records of an individual.

ii. 	In sub clause 3, replacing the word, “information” with the words “personal data” to read: “(3) A data collector, data processor and data controller may collect or process personal data specified under subsection (1)”

The justification is to include health status, financial information and medical records as special personal data and secondly, for consistence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about the researchers - when they are doing their research? Can’t they collect this data?

MR NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, this data is categorised as special personal data and it is data which is related to your financial information, health status, sexual life and this data should not just be availed without prior consent. It should not be easily accessible by a researcher or any other person.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, mandated bodies of researchers - because a researcher goes to the National Council of Science and Technology for clearance; UBOS which collects data about tribes - all those in the law are given exceptions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the exception?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I will show it to you in a short while, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, you have no objection to this proposal.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to oppose the amendment because financial information was originally a preserved asset but is now a public good. The European Union recently passed a law providing for financial institutions to share data on history of any company or individual about their credit status. Why should we hide that information that might be vital in the development of the country?

Madam Chairperson, you have just told off the Europeans about homosexuality and we passed a motion here appreciating you for that. What are you saying about your sexuality? It doesn’t seem to be - let us get rid of that. I oppose it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, can’t you ask children in a primary school of their religion? Can’t you collect data in Kamwenge Primary School and ask the children to give you their religious data?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the amendment because it stops the data collector from accessing my personal data without going through the lawful means. Now if you are collecting data about my family history for medical purposes, you are allowed. If it is my school, for example, the Parliament of Ugandan knows I am a Munyankole so they have recorded but they have an obligation towards me as a data controller.

Therefore, we are in agreement with the committee - and that is the same agreement Members raised yesterday; how do we protect careless sharing of personal data and from being misused? You can collect it but you should have it in mind that you are a data controller. You will be within the ambits or the law.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not understand the honourable minister when he says “careless data.” Data usefulness can be defined by individual to individual. The definition of careless data to the honourable minister may not be the same definition that I attach to that data. 

Therefore, I would like the honourable minister to be clear and state what careless data he is referring to. We use data for different purposes and he may take it to be careless yet I may consider it useful. Let him clarify before we move to the next step. What is the careless data that you are defining in that context?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with personal data. Personal data is defined in the interpretation clause of the law, which we stood over. It means information about a person from which the person can be identified that is recorded in any form and includes –

    a) Data that relates to the nationality, age or marital status of the person. 
    b) Data that relates to the education level or occupation or personal data that relates to a financial transaction in which the person has been involved.
    c) An identification number, symbol or other particulars assigned to the person.
    d) Identity card and other information which is in possession of or is likely to come into the position of the data controllers and includes an expression of a PIN about the individual.

This is not data that anybody should collect about you without your information. 

Madam Chairperson, yesterday you raised a point about identity fraud. That is how it comes, if we do not regulate how anybody can get data about you; your marital status for example.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS NAYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we redraft clause 6 to read as follows: “A data processor or data controller shall not collect, hold or process personal data in a manner which infringes on the privacy of a data subject.” 

The justification is for consistence because a person to whom the data relates is the data subject; and for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 7 as follows –

    1. In sub clause 2 (c) replace the words “the information” with “personal data.”
    2. In clause 2, delete paragraphs (e) (2) and (5)
    3. Replace paragraph 2(g) with the following; “(g) it is for the purpose of historical, statistical or scientific research and the data is not published in a form lightly to reveal the identity of the data subject.”

The justification is for consistence and secondly, enforcement of the law which imposes pecuniary penalty is already covered under sub clause 2(e) (1) to guard the act against abuse.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, first I have no objection to the proposal for clause 7(2)(c). However, I am humbly opposed to the proposal to delete clause 7(2)(e) (ii) and (iv). I propose they get retained. 

The justification is that Clause 7(2)(e) (ii) and (iv) deal with different matters. For instance, clause 7(2)(e)(i) does not cover civil and criminal matters, which are covered in clause 7(2)(e)(ii).

Thirdly, I do not agree to the proposal to delete clause 7(2) (e)(v) because we have already decided on it. It is on national security, so this will be a consequential amendment.

The justification is that national security is a public interest matter that may affect a personal right to data protection and privacy. That is a consequential amendment following what we agreed.

I also request the chairperson that we do not delete clause 7 (2)(g). The justification is that there are circumstances where it may not be possible to obtain the consent of the data subject. This is already acceptable in the provision of emergency health care.

Madam Chairperson, it is similar to what you raised. What if I have an emergency where I am under health quarantine by virtue of the disease I have, for instance Ebola. For them to isolate me and ensure the area is safe, they will have to talk about the victim. Therefore, if we forbid getting personal data in all circumstances, then we will make life unrealistic. Thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, the amendment was already agreed to earlier; so, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we maintain the original one?

MS NYAKECHO: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 8 by replacing the words, “Person or public body” with “Data collector or data controller.”

The justification is to maintain consistence in the use of the phrases in the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 9 as follows -

    1. In paragraph (a) (i) by rephrasing as follows; 
a) 	The nature and category of data being collected.

    2. Split Sub-Clause  (i) (b) into two separate paragraphs as follows;
“b) 	The name and address of the person responsible for the collection of data.
c) 	The purpose for which the data is required.”

    3. i) Delete paragraph (g) of sub clause (i).
ii) 	Delete sub clause (iii)(b)
iii) 	In sub clause (iii)(d), interchange the word “Revenue” with the word “Public’.

The justification is for clarity and consistence.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I agree to the amendments proposed by the honourable chairperson of the committee for clause 9 (1)(a). 

I also agree to amendments to clause 9(1)(b), Clause 9 (1)(g). My only disagreement, which is a consequential amendment, is with the proposal to amend clause 9 (3) (b) because it is the national security provision we had previously amended.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Please talk about it.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 9 (3)(b), which they propose to delete is following the earlier amendment she had proposed, for which we said we should retain the formatting of the Bill. 

I agree to the amendment to clause 9(3)(d). I am only disagreeable to clause 9 (3)(b), which is raising on the previous clauses on national security the amendment she had raised. They are following what we passed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, say it again. Everything else is okay; where do you have a problem?

MR TUMWEBAZE: She proposes to delete clause 9 (3)(b) in the Bill; information relating to national security, which principle we dealt with earlier. I am saying that we should retain this as per the previous ones we had passed.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, this is a consequential amendment, since we already provided for it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 11 by replacing it with the following –

“1. 	A data collector or processor or controller shall ensure that the data is complete, accurate, up to date and not misleading having regard to the purpose for its collection or processing.

2. 	A data subject shall ensure that the personal data given to the data collector, processor or data controller is complete, accurate, up to date and not misleading.”

The justification is;

    i)  To oblige the data subject to provide accurate personal data, which further enhances the principle of accuracy of data.

    ii) To obligate the data controller, data processor and data collector to collect, hold and process accurate data.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 should be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 12 as follows;

    1. In sub clause (2), delete the words “Or to provide the data subject with evidence in support of the data.” 
    2. Replace sub clause  (3) with the following,
 
	“Where the data controller is not able to comply with the request under sub-section (i), the data controller shall inform the data subject of the rejection and the reasons for the rejection in writing.”

    3.  I propose to delete sub clause  (4)

The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 13

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 13 as follows;

    1. In sub clause (1), interchange the word “Only” with the word “be”. 
    2. Delete sub clause (3) (b).
    3. Delete sub clause  (3)(c)(ii)
    4. In sub clause (3)(c)(3), insert the word, “Public” between the words “of’ and “revenue”.
    5. In sub clause (3)(c)(iv), delete the words, “or are reasonably contemplated”.
    6. Delete sub clause (3)(c)(v).
    7. Insert a new sub paragraph immediately after (4) to read as follows; 

“Where the processing is carried out in the public interest and such processing does not override the legitimate interests, rights and freedoms of the data subjects.” 

    8. In sub clause (3)(d), delete the words, “The further processing of data is necessary”. 
    9. Rearrange the remaining part to be a sub paragraph of (c) as (c)(vi).
    10. Delete sub clause (3)(f).

The justification is that it is for clarity, to guard against abuse and for consistency.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the proposed amendment of clause 13(1) by the chairperson. I only do not agree to the deletion of clause 13(3)(b), which says that the data is publically available or has been made public by the person concerned.

The justification is that it is internationally best practice that once information is publically available, it is no longer private. Madam Chairperson, it is similar to what you asked; if I have shared everything about myself on my verified twitter handle and some researcher somewhere quotes my information, which I have voluntarily published, what offence is that?

Therefore, we could leave it - not to prohibit sharing of privately shared information, which has been voluntarily given out.

Madam Chairperson, I also agree to the amendment on clause 13(4). I also agree with the amendment of the chairperson on 13 (3) (c) (iv). I am, however, not agreeable to the amendment on 13(5). It is a consequential amendment because when they delete it, they are not providing for national security, which we have previously talked about. Therefore, that one is a consequential amendment.

Then the proposal to insert a new paragraph immediately after 13 is also not agreeable. The justification is that public interest by its nature overrides the interests of the individual for the benefit of the general public. 

The provision will make the use of public interest exception impossible due to the consideration of the interest of the individual. For example, if your personal rights on your data - and you have personal interest the like the example I gave of an epidemic where the data subject needs to be quarantined; where public interest overrides individual interest, we believe public interest should have leeway. That is the departure I have with the amendment.

The proposal to amend clause 13(3) is not agreeable because the amendment will make the provision unclear, in my opinion. The proposal to delete clause 13 (3)(f) is, however, agreeable.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I think clause (13) - further processing to be compatible with purpose of collection. The problem now is that clause (13)(1) attempts to mention - actually qualifies purpose and is talking about specific purpose. “…where a person holds personal data collected in connection with specific purpose.”

However, Madam Chairperson, the mistake is that we have not defined in the definition clause what “specific purpose is.” That is why it looks like the chairperson and the minister are clashing. 

For example, if the specific purpose for data collection is for my criminal record - I have gone to Interpol to get a Certificate of Good Conduct, I would be in agreement with the chairperson that there is no need of making that data under 13(3)(b) public. 

Unless we define specific purpose, then we will later come back and twist and try to see how we can protect this data. That the purpose for which, if it is not for public interest, then never make it public - it is just about me and for the purpose that the data is collected.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Still on clause (13) (1) where a person holds personal data collected in connection with a specific purpose. Unlike my colleague, I will assume that the specific purpose like in the music industry under corporate law, if I have authored a music file for you specifically maybe about teenage pregnancies but you want to modify my song for another purpose, you will be deviating from that.

Therefore, I propose that we maintain that further processing of personal data shall be only for that specific purpose as might have been collected for initially. Therefore, we maintain this because it agrees with the rights as enshrined in the Constitution.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, that argument is very right and the amendment for the committee does not in any way change it. Take an example; you go to your telecom company and avail them your details for purposes of obtaining a SIM card. Therefore, we are saying that you have, by law given them the information; so, they should use that information not for any other purpose. 

When you lose your SIM card and go back for a SIM swap, that is when they should use it. That is the specific purpose because there are laws. If it is UBOS, it is collecting data for a specific purpose of national planning. Anyone that collects data has a purpose.

Therefore, it would be specific to the mandate of that data collector. The law is prohibiting you from collecting my data for purpose X of communication and then you use it in a market in your audience.

MR ANYWARANCH: If that is the case, then we are speaking the same language. It then means the chairperson’s amendment stands.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, the issue of the sub paragraphs and the clauses will be handled by the drafts people.

Clause 14

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 14 as follows;

In sub clause (2) delete paragraphs (b) and (c).

The justification is for clarity and consistency.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, what the chairperson proposes to delete is what we have already decided on; so, it is a consequential amendment. 

Clause 14(2) is on issues of national security, which we have already decided on. Therefore, I beg that she concedes on her amendment because it is a consequential amendment to what we had agreed on.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, it is a consequential amendment since it was already agreed on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we leave it as it is. Members, I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 15 by redrafting it as follows: 

“Where a data processor or data controller processes or stores personal data outside Uganda, the data processor or data controller shall ensure that -

(a) 	The country in which the data is processed or stored has adequate measures in place for the protection of personal data at least equivalent to the protection provided for by this Act;
(b) 	The data subject has consented; or
(c) 	Such processing or storage is for the benefit of the data subject. 

The justification is to enhance the conditions for processing or storing personal data outside Uganda.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to understand from the Committee Chairperson how this is going to be enforceable; that somebody will have to prove that the other country where you went to had similar or equal measures as Uganda. What is the amount of check for you to be able to enforce that such that we do not just put an amendment or we adopt a clause which we cannot implement? Thank you. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, my problem with clause 15 is that it is creating gazettement of so many data storage centres moreover outside the country.

If you collect data, process it and you are going to store it outside the country, there must be a legal framework that recognises the gazettement of such a place for storage of data. I thought you collect records and send to them to the National Data Storage Centre. Clause 15 is a fallacy; why are you creating another storage centre outside the country, which is not gazetted? 

I have a problem with clause 15. In a nutshell, once you collect the data and process it, then send it to the National Data Storage Centre. This is bio data and we need to be clear on this. If we create so many other storage centres, then our data is in trouble. 

Therefore, clause 15 should be deleted or we should amend it in such a way that we do not give powers to them to store. Just collect, process and send the data to the National Data Storage Centre. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the chairperson was trying to improve on what the minister had proposed but is it practicable? 
   
MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, what the draftsmen tried to do is – it is not about storage but we are talking about realistic cases. Hon. Anywarach, whether you like it or not, you will buy things from Amazon, which is not in Uganda. For you to buy things from Amazon and have them successfully shipped to you, you will fill in those personal data details; who you are, whether they are not dealing with a robot online and so much more.
 
Much as Amazon is far away, it is dealing with Ugandans or East Africans. We are trying to make sure that they are also obliged – Amazon is collecting data from you because of the service you demand from them. 

Take an example of Facebook; if you open an account with them, you must fill in your details. If you do not do so, they will not process your account. Hence, these are some of the things that may be beyond our control but are driven by the need of the service we have. 

Therefore, we are saying if you give your information to Amazon, it should be obligated to keep it safe and process it in acceptable international standards. This is because this law, in a way, also rhymes and compares well with other jurisdictions. If we delete it, it means you are not safe with the information you are giving to those people outside the country. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, will this person processing the data produce a certificate to say that the measures are good enough? It reads, “… shall ensure that the country in which the data is processed has adequate measures in place for the protection of the person.” How will that be done? Will they issue a certificate to say that they are good enough? How will this collector ensure that? 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, if Members had followed the debate yesterday, they would realise that most of those foreign countries where most of our data is stored, have been forced  because of reasons of abuse of data and exposure of personal data to people who should not even see that data. 

They came up with a General Data Principle (GDPR) that oversees and even gives principles to countries that do not have laws. They are now obligated to follow those principles. Those principles are the ones that even us now, as the Parliament of Uganda, have used to come up with this Data Protection and Privacy Bill, which is now going to be consented to and made into an Act. 

People use Facebook, Google, Amazon and all these other international websites and social media but you are not sure of where your data is kept. We are trying to put a little bit of strength on that issue that at least if your data is being stored in that country, probably in Australia, let Australia have laws that are equivalent to the one that we have in this country because most countries are now beginning to consent to the GDPR. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I think we understand the need. My problem is how this person is going to ensure that the laws in the other country are equivalent to this one. Isn’t that what you are saying; that it will be similar to our law? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: It is not easy to regulate only in space but if Amazon or Facebook is collecting data on their customers in Uganda - because you can collect data online or send representatives here. We are saying if you collect this data, you must store it and have an obligation on it. 

For example in the case of the Business Processing Outsourcing industry (BPO), you will be sent data from India or you send it there and work on it. If you are in breach of this domestic law, then there are many ways of sanctioning it. Your site can be blocked or international sanctions can be put in place and you lose the market. We are trying to put safeguards for the data being taken abroad. The question is how do we enforce it? We probably we need to look at the law in detail to see how we can enforce it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, apart from our laws, is there an internationally accepted standard that you can talk about? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I am not aware of an international protocol but the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) has made resolutions on a number of these communication practises. When this law was being drafted, we had to benchmark these. The International Telecommunication Union, which is a branch of the UN, has protocols on all this. All we need to study is whether this law fully rhymes with it. 

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, we should not depend on other countries’ laws. Our chairperson said that the country where the data is being stored should have a law. Therefore, we should not depend on our law. In Uganda, what measures are we putting in place to ensure the data outside is properly kept? 

Madam Chairperson, you guided very well on whether we are going to issue certificates to that country that is storing our data. What are we putting in place, as Uganda, to make sure that the data outside is properly kept? That is what we need to hear. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, we have already passed a provision for a data protection officer and we have given him the independence. That office, under the National IT Authority will be regulating collection of data, controlling and processing. Yes, you will be issued permits and there are sanctions to it. 

Therefore, if an international company has a branch here and is collecting data here, definitely any foreign company – if you transact business in Uganda, you will abide by the laws of Uganda. If you don’t, then you will cease to do business in Uganda. This is the reason we are providing for this. If we leave it as a grey area, abusers will do it from outside our jurisdiction as a country.

THE SPEAKER: I still have some difficulty about the applicability of our domestic law in that international arena. Honourable members, let us stand over it so that we can find out the international regulation. Let us go to clause 16.

Clause 16

MS NYAKECHO: I propose to amend clause 16 as follows;

    1. In sub clause 1, inserting the words “data collector” or “data processor” immediately after the words “data controller”.
    2. Substitute the word “person” with the words “data controller or data processor”

The justification is or clarity and consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

MR ANYWARACH: Just like in all these other clauses, we are trying to come up with control of data and then we are talking about personal data. We are talking about a data processor and a data controller who can work for a data processor but we fall short of pronouncing, after every part or clause where the language is a mandatory language - we do not pronounce punishment.  I am – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you dealing with clause 16?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, I am dealing with clause 16. “A data controller shall secure integrity…” there should be a clause there before going to clause 17, a clause of punishment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is ahead.

MR ANYWARACH: Not under the general clause punishments, specific ones. I seek for your indulgence – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The sanctions are ahead. Honourable members, the question is that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 17 as follows;

    1. In sub clause 1, replacing the word “operator” with “data processor”. 
    2. In sub clause 2, replacing the word “ensure” with “protect.”

The justification is for clarity and consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: honourable members, the question is that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 18 by;

    1. Substituting the head note with the following;

“Data processing”

    2. Redraft sub clause 1 to read, “A data processor shall process personal data only with the prior knowledge and authorisation of the data controller and shall treat such personal data as confidential.” 

Justification is that the words “operator or unauthorised person” are foreign to the Bill. According to the definition clause, it is only the data processor who processes personal data on behalf of the data controller.

It is also just for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you do not want the words “by operator or authorised persons” in the headnote. 

MS NYAKECHO: They are not defined, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why we go to clause 2 last because you may need to define it. 

MR ANYWARACH: The initial intention of this Bill is that data processed by the operator or authorised person should be the title. In other words, you are providing for specific - that if you are not a data processor or a data controller but you are an operator or authorised person, this is the discipline within which you should operate. I don’t understand why you should still talk about data being processed by a data processor when actually the whole of this law is about a data processor and a data controller.

On this, we are speaking specifically that if you are an operator, operating under a controller because definitely you will operate under a processor who gives you the authority or the sub contract - if you an operator or authorized person, at least, whether you are being licensed or you are being given power by the data processor or the data controller, both must abide by clause 18 – “Any operator or person who processes personal data on behalf of a data controller shall process the data only with prior knowledge and authorisation of the data controller.” This is so that the data controller does not abuse this power. I think we should leave the title as it is in the original Bill and sub clauses 1 and 2. It is clearer in the original Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, why didn’t you define operator and authorised person?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, to avoid ambiguities, the object of the Bill is to protect the privacy of the individual and of personal data by regulating the collection and processing of personal information and to provide for the rights of the persons whose data is collected and the obligations that relate to data collection, processing and data controllers.

We agree with the amendment of the committee and which we believe on our part was an oversight, “operator or authorised person” coming in as another category in the management of data; we believe the committee is correct to regard them as foreign to the Bill. That is why we conceded such that the Bill is about the data subject - the person, the one who collects, the one who processes and the one who controls; for clarity and for placing responsibility.

MR ANYWARACH: If you consider the international practice, a data processor is bigger than all these people. A data processor can allow other employees to be a data controller but you act for the data processor.

Where you have no data controller acting for a data processor - for example, Amazon has no data controller appointed here. You can have a data controller say in Canada but because Amazon is doing business with Ugandans, you will say, for this purpose, I am going to have a data operator on my behalf in Uganda in the person of Anywarach Joshua Carter – this may be a prophecy by the way – or you may say, “I have authorised so and so”. My acting here is for the controller and the processor. We cannot limit that; that is the international standard. 

However, my concern is that we should have a law on them. If I am authorised to act for a data processor who is maybe in the UK, there must be a discipline within which I am appointed and the law should be clear. Therefore, that operator or authorised person is international standard. That is why I am asking that we leave the clause as it is in the Bill. It captures the spirit of the law of data processing standard.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we can only leave it there if it has been defined otherwise, the word “operator” is foreign, according to the committee. In this Bill, the data controller is the boss of the data processor. He is the one in charge.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we ask the minister to define these words? We are still on other clauses and by the time we come to clause 2, you will have the definitions. Therefore, we will stand over that one because it was removing part of the headnote. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 19 as follows;

1. 	In sub clause (2), insert the words “data controller or data processor” immediately after the word “controller” wherever it appears in the clause. 
2. 	In sub clause (4) insert the words “referred to” in sub section (3) between the words “notification” and “shall”. 
3. 	In sub clause (4) insert the words “relating to the breach” immediately after the word “information”.
4. 	Delete sub clause (5). 
5. 	In sub clause (6) the word “may” should be deleted and replaced with “shall”.

The justification is for clarity since there is sufficient belief by the authority that the data subject would be protected by the publicity of the notification of data breaches. 

Secondly, for consistency in the use of words in the Act.

MR NZOGHU: I would like to seek clarification from the committee Chairperson. When you read clause 19(1) “…where a data collector or data processor or data controller believes that the personal data of a data subject has been accessed or acquired by an unauthorised person, the data collector, data processor or data controller, shall immediately notify the Authority in the prescribed manner, of the unauthorised access or acquisition and the remedial action taken.”

Clause 19 (2), “The Authority shall determine and notify the data controller whether the data controller should notify the data subject of the breach.”

We have the data subject and Authority and if there is any breach, it would be from the data that was collected from the data subject. Why would the Authority be informed first even before notifying the data subject? 

I am not comfortable with that because in sub clause (3), where the Authority determines that the data collector or data processor or data controller should notify the data subject, the notification shall be made by the following - I see a situation where the data collector could be charged with breach when the Authority has not determined that the data subject should be notified. I do not know whether this would bring in the element of transparency and accountability to that effect. 

Why wouldn’t the data subject be informed at the same time when the Authority is being informed since the information is from the data subject?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, this is about unauthorised access or acquisition of unauthorised information. He wants to know why you inform the authority but not the data subject.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we are looking at a scenario where a lot of public data has been breached and maybe the authority thinks it should not alarm the public to cause panic within the public. The Authority has to be informed about the breach and it has to take care of that scenario. Later, it can inform the data subject.

There are instances where it may not be necessary to inform the data subject but there are those instances where a breach may occur and maybe before the Authority is aware, a data subject gets to know about it. 

Therefore, the data subject has a right to complain and remedial action be taken. There are different scenarios really. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Here, it is about breaching - already, the data collector or processor is being accused of maybe leaking or carelessly giving out data. The data subject may be the one complaining; he is already in dispute. I am the one complaining that my bank or telecom operator has let out my information illegally. Therefore, we are now formalising a process for what this data collector should do.

He should immediately write to the arbiter - and the arbiter is the Authority – who will determine whether there was breach or not. By the involvement of the Authority, I am in dispute with the processor or the controller because the data processor or controller cannot report himself. There is already a disagreement on my data.

MR ANYWARACH: Additionally –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you supporting the minister? 

MR ANYWARACH: yes, in a nutshell, there could be either a data subject who has known about the breach or even if he does not know about the breach, the Authority pays expert attention on matters of abuse, handling of data or breach. 

When it comes even to the Authority’s attention before the subject gets to know, this clause is trying to impose on the Authority an obligation that once you get to know about that breach, notify the controller and tell the controller to notify the subject.

Now, if you want the controller to report himself to the subject, that may not happen. It can only come through the expert attention of the Authority. Therefore, what the Authority is trying to do is exactly what the minister is saying. In case, the data subject has not reported, then through his expert attention as the Authority, notify the controller that let the subject know that you have abused or breached his data.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you support the proposal by the Chairperson?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 20

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 20 as follows:
 1) 	Split sub clause (1)(b) as follows; 
(b) 	Give a description of the personal data which is held by the data controller; 
(c) 	Provide the identity of a third party or a category of a third party who has or has had access to information.

 2) 	In sub clause (4) insert another paragraph (c) immediately after paragraph (b) to provide as follows; 

“(c) 	Court orders.”
 3) 	In sub clause (5)(a), correct the word “indentifies” to read “identifies”. 
4)	In sub clause (5)(b) delete the words “from that data and” between “or” and “any”. 

The justification is for clarity and consistency.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the amendment of clause 20. I only request the chairperson that we redraft clause 20(4)(c) to read, “(c) Compelled by a court order.” 

The justification is to ensure clarity and proper drafting.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson. I concede to that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 21 as follows: 

    1) In sub-clause (1), replace the word “individual” at the end of the sub-clause with the words “data subject”. 
    2) In sub-clause (2), replace the words “person concerned” with the words “data subject”. 
    3) Redraft sub-clause (3) as follows: “Where the data controller gives reasons for non-compliance, a copy of the notice required by sub-section (2) shall be given to the Authority within 14 days.”
    4) Redraft subclause (4) as follows: “Where the Authority is satisfied that the data subject is justified, the Authority shall direct the data controller to comply within seven days.”

The justification is that this will ensure clarity and consistency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 22 as follows: 

    1) Redraft sub-clause (1) as follows: “A data subject, may by notice in writing to a data controller, require the data controller to stop processing his or her personal data for purposes of direct marketing.”
    2) In sub-clause (2), substitute the words “person concerned” with the words “data subject”.
    3) Insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (2) to provide as follows: “Subject to sub-section (1), a data subject may enter into an agreement with a data controller for purposes of using or processing his or her personal data for pecuniary benefits.”
    4) Delete sub-clauses (3) and (4). 

The justification is for clarity and consistency. Secondly, the data subject should retain the Authority over the sale of his or her data and not to be at the mercy of the data controller, data processor or data collector. Thirdly, there is already satisfaction that the data subject’s request is valid by the Authority, hence the use of “shall”.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I am agreeable to amendments to clause 22, except the amendment to delete sub-clauses (3) and (4). 

The justification for retention of sub-clauses (3) and (4) is that there has to be means of redress for a data subject where a data controller does not stop processing data for direct marketing after being requested to stop. I believe removing sub-clauses (3) and (4) weakens the rights of the data subject.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition, honourable minister, in your Bill under sub-clause (4), is this “complainant” or “complaint”?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I think it is “complainant” – “Where the Authority is satisfied that the complainant is justified, the Authority may direct the data controller to comply.” The “complainant” in this case is the data subject.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this a “complaint” or “complainant”?

MR TUMWEBAZE: The draft person meant “complainant” and I believe it makes grammatical sense.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, complainant is the person who complains and the complaint is what you are complaining against. Complainant is a person. Are you talking about being satisfied about that person or about the complaint?

MR TUMWEBAZE: “…where the Authority is satisfied that the complainant is justified…” That means if the Authority is satisfied that the complaint registered by the complainant has merit. Madam Chairperson, I beg that the draft team perfects it in case it has issues.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. We ask the draft people to clarify whether it is complaint or complainant.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, this amendment tends to assume that right from the beginning, data for direct marketing is bad in its intention. However, the standard has been that sometimes, you find marketeers sending you information because maybe you are on Google or Yahoo. When they send you information, they give you options of unsubscribing. 

Therefore, I think this provision should have started with consent by the subject matter – that “personal data for direct marketing shall only be with the consent of the data subject.” The reason is that it may actually not be bad that something being marketed has come to my attention. After that, we can go to where it is not done with somebody’s consent and provide all these other provisions from sub-clauses (1), (2), (3) and so on. 

Therefore, I think it is really consequential. I need to apologise that I did not take it to the committee but it is just what we always see on our emails. Those things come because maybe your data has been passed on by Yahoo or Google.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, what are you saying about clause 22?

MR ANYWARACH: I am saying that personal data for direct marketing shall be with the consent – (Interjections)- That is not provided for.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I remember the honourable member raised this under clause 13; “Where a person holds personal data collected in connection with a specific purpose, further processing of the personal data shall only be for that specific purpose.” Therefore, clause 22 is in this spirit. If you have my data and you want to use it for another purpose other than the specific purpose – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: The point of departure between the minister and I is that we are talking of data specifically for direct marketing and this is what we always get on our emails like some people advertising or sending messages but they give you the option of unsubscribing. If you do not unsubscribe, it means you belong there. That means they are seeking your consent. This is data for marketing purposes and that is why we are on clause 22. I am asking why don’t you put a clause and say “data for direct marketing shall be with the consent of the data subject”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what you are saying is interesting but you should have circulated your amendment. We are not allowing it. Even if it is consequential, you have to circulate it so that we know what you are going to do. I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 23 as follows: 

    1) In sub-clause (3), replace the word “intends” with the words “has taken”.
    2) Delete paragraph (e) of sub-clause (4).
    3) Insert another sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (4) to provide as follows: “Where the data subject is not satisfied with the decision of the data controller in sub-clause (3), the data subject shall complain in writing to the Authority within 14 days.”
    4) Redraft sub-clause (5) as follows: “Where the Authority is satisfied on a complaint by a data subject that the data controller has failed to comply, the Authority shall order the data controller to comply within seven days.”
    5) Delete sub-clause (6). 

The justification is that this will create consistency and clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

New clause
	
MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 23 to provide as follows;

“Right to transfer Personal Data

A data subject may request a data collector, data processor or data controller to transfer his or her personal data to another data collector, data processor or data controller.”

The justification is to provide for a right of data subjects to transfer personal data to other data controllers or data processors if they so wish.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Has there been a ban on transfer of data? Do you mean to say that I cannot transfer data from Instagram to Facebook?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with that proposal. If I want to provide my data to either Airtel or MTN, I do not have to instruct MTN to send it to Airtel; it should be left to me to determine how I should transmit it.

Madam Chairperson, what the committee is proposing is that the data subject should authorise this. Why would the data subject authorise when I have already –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, what mischief are you trying to cure with the new clause?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, it is not in good spirit.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, it is to protect a data subject. Otherwise, there are incidences where a data subject may want – Let me give an example of an insurance company. When you want to move from one insurance provider to another, instead of giving your data afresh, you can just instruct the insurance company like Jubilee and tell them “Please, I want to leave Jubilee and transfer my medical records and everything to the next medical insurance provider.”  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are going into the policies of those organisations. Why are you governing their - Why should this be in the law?

MR NZOGHU: It should be rejected.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What mischief are you curing? That is what we want to hear.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, although this is an amendment of the committee, I support it because the person we are protecting is the data subject. For example, I have given my information to my service provider like the Parliamentary Commission. Should the Parliamentary Commission give my information to any other person they feel needs it without my consent? Shouldn’t I have a right to tell them: “Give my data to Immigration for easy processing of my passport? 
	
Madam Chairperson, we feel it is -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why should it be in the law? You are saying that I may tell the Commission that they take it to the other place. It is something between you and me.

Honourable members, if there was a ban on transferring personal data, I would understand that, that is what you are curing. Is there a ban on transferring of personal data? Is there any law or practice? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: This same law will be stopping that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Because you cannot share my personal data without my consent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are talking about the data subject. What you are saying is that the data subject can tell you to transfer. Why should I govern your personal relations?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think you have asked a pertinent question, which has not been answered. What is the mischief you intend to cure? Could you answer that question? Once it is answered, we can move from there. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, the mischief it is trying to cure is that in case a data subject is tired of - (Interjection) –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are really going to tire the Minister of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance to supervise whether he should continue with Airtel – should I come to him for a law? I do not see any justification. 

MS KAMATEEKA: I would like to give an example. I might be out of the country and I am not in a position to process or provide data but I know that company A has my data.  I should be in position to instruct that company to pass my data to wherever I want it to go to so that I can access services in that other company.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who is stopping you from doing that? That is what I want to know.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, the law is saying that the data processor must protect the data. Therefore, for them to be able to transfer it from their hands to someone else, I must be the one to authorise. That is why this provision should stand.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, we were discussing the importance of keeping our information. Why should we involve a third party to share information about someone? Why can’t we allow the subject person to deal directly with that person who wants my data? 
	
MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, since this was a new clause proposed by the committee and the committee felt it was not provided for anywhere in the Bill, I can drop it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go to clause 24.

Clause 24

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 27 as follows:

In sub-clause (1) insert the word “the” between the words “with” and “Act” in the head note to read as follows: “Complaints against breach and noncompliance with the Act”

The justification is for clarity.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, I am not agreeable to that amendment. As a legislative drafting principle, I have been schooled that head notes are not proper sentences and so, I propose the retention of the head note in its current form.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it make a difference? 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, if you read the head note in the original Bill, it says “Complaints against breach and noncompliance with Act.”  The committee is just trying to make correction by adding the word “the”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you say “Compliance against breach and noncompliance”? Otherwise, it is the same.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, your guidance is right because this Act is already in clause 29.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to

Clause 28

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 28 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MS NYAKECHO: I propose to amend clause 29 by inserting the following words: “Apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for” between “two” and “compensation” to read as; “Where a data subject suffers damage or distress through the contravention by a data controller, data processor or data collector of the requirements of this Act, that data subject is entitled to apply to a court  of competent jurisdiction for compensation from the data collector, data processor or data controller for the damage or distress.”

The justification is to specify that the right to compensation shall be enforced by a court of competent jurisdiction, the provision in its current form is subject to abuse because it allows a person to infringe on the provisions of the Act as long as they can prove reasonable care and then for clarity.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, is she redrafting the whole of clause 29?

THE CHAIRPERSON: She is introducing something after “entitled to compensation”. She is putting a small addition in that sentence. 

MR KASULE: There is clause 29 (1) and 29 (2). That is why I am seeking clarification as to whether the chairperson is fully redrafting the whole clause.

MS NYAKECHO: I am only amending 29 (1) 

MR KASULE: With very many words? Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Reset your proposal.

MS NYAKECHO: It will read as follows; “Where a data subject suffers damage or distress through the contravention by a data controller, data processor, data collector of the requirements of this Act, that data subject is entitled to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for compensation from the data collector, data processor or data controller for the damage or distress.”

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I thought it would have been fair for the data subjects to have and preserve their rights in all that has been prescribed here and for this Parliament to possibly suggest a fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 30 as follows: In sub-clause (1) substitute for the word “minister” with the word “high court”; delete sub-clause (3).

The justification is that Article 42 guarantees the right of an aggrieved party to apply to a court of law in respect of an administrative decision taken against him or her. This promotes the rule of law and the doctrine of separation of powers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there no hierarchy?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, there is not so much disagreement but we feel that there is an administrative lacuna because the minister is answerable to this House and supervises the sector. 

The proposal will take away from the data subject the right to obtain an immediate administrative resolution to dispute before resorting to court; after all, court is always the last resort.

MR KASULE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I suggest we stay the proposal in the Bill. In this era where anybody can use information as a weapon, one can appeal to the minister responsible before resorting to courts, which are very expensive. So, as a call for the first response, let us stay the minister.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we approve the proposal from the committee, it will cause administrative damage as the minister said. 

There is no way we are going to throw away the minister when the issue deals with the ministry and yet, he is the one who reports here not the Chief Justice. Let us stay it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you insisting honourable chairperson?

MS NYAKECHO: I withdraw.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 30 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The right to go to court is available to any Ugandan; we do not need to include it in this Bill. You cannot just skip the Authority and go straight to court. Let us give the minister powers because he is answerable to us.

Clause 31

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to redraft clause 31 to read as follows; 

“Unlawful obtaining or disclosing of personal data

A person shall not unlawfully obtain, disclose or procure the disclosure of personal data held or processed by a data collector, data controller or data processor.

A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable to conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment for 10 years or both.”

The justification is for consistency and clarity and to provide for stringent sanctions for unlawful disclosure and obtaining of personal data.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you want the word “recklessly” there?

MS NYAKECHO: No. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: She could be right because it contains –“unlawfully”.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, “unlawfully” is okay. My only problem is, if this person is a legal person, what happens? If it is a company found in fault - because the data processor or controller can be a company. What are we going to do if a company is found in fault? What will be the standard?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The company law describes the person. There are both corporate and individuals. That one you know. We are going ahead.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the word here is appropriate, “knowingly or recklessly”. When they say “unlawfully”, you need to go to court to know whether it is lawful or unlawful. However, with information, people knowingly or recklessly slander you using information. Therefore, why should I -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you moving an amendment?

MR KASULE: No. I am staying what is in the Bill. He is saying; 

“A person shall not knowingly or recklessly-

    a) Obtain or disclose personal information…” 

Let us stay what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are not helping me. What she had wanted to do is to remove “knowingly and recklessly” and leave “unlawfully”. That is what she was proposing.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, let us stay with what is in the Bill. What is in the Bill is sufficient and what she is proposing of “unlawfully” needs to be proven in the courts of law. Therefore, let us stay with what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am sorry this is for the Attorney-General. You know, even the grammatical arrangement of this sentence is a problem. How do you “knowingly and recklessly” obtain? May be you can use “recklessly”.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is why we concede to the amendment because you cannot even measure recklessness. So, we feel you are either lawful or unlawful.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

MS NYAKECHO: I propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 31 to read as follows; 

“Unlawful destruction, deletion, concealment or alteration of personal data
 
    1) A person shall not unlawfully destroy, delete, mislead, conceal or alter personal data.
    2) A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not less than 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both.”

The justification is to provide sanctions against unlawful destruction, deletion, concealment or alteration of personal data.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 33 by re-drafting the clause to read as follows; 

“Offences committed by a body corporate

    1) Where an offence prescribed under this Act is committed by a body corporate, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer may be held liable for the offence committed. In addition to any penalties stipulated by the relevant provisions of this Act, the court may;
    a) Impose a penalty not exceeding four per cent of the corporation’s annual gross turnover or order the withdrawal of license, permit or any other right held by the body corporate under any law.”

The justification is to enhance the penalties for breaches by corporations under the Act so as to discourage breach and to prescribe the liable person in case offences are committed by bodies corporate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you are not going into the arena of the judiciary by determining what they can impose.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I am just wondering about the four per cent on gross. Do you know how much that is? Do you want somebody to go back with money that is equivalent to the resources or our natural resources? Why not one or two per cent? What measures did you use to reach at four per cent? 0.5 per cent was causing us problems in the country; what about four per cent? Therefore, I do not know but I do not agree with her assertions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know but you are now directing the court.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, with your permission, initially, I had an objection to this but since they said “the court may”, there are two things here. We did not want to make it punitive for anybody misusing anybody’s data. 

Let us not only look at corporations being the private corporation. Look at this being Parliament, which is also a data controller. Look at it as UBOS or Bank of Uganda. Therefore, while we need to provide for sanctions, it must also not be a hinder. Maybe, we could look at the penalty being one per cent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is one per cent of the Parliamentary Commission budget for the start? How much is that?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, in terms of economic sense, this may not work. We are going to create a scenario that is going to affect, first of all, the operation of somebody’s entities. Secondly, it is going to create a rift within the different agencies including this Parliament as you have rightly said. The four per cent of the budget of this House is something that is enormous. For us to agree with this, it is bound to cause a lot animosity at the end of the day. 

I also do not know under which authority we shall be directing court that, “You must operate along these lines.” That becomes a big problem. My view would be talking about something like zero point something or 0.5 per cent, I may agree but this is very big and I may not be comfortable. I may even suggest that we would change from this percentage to something else. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are these penalties under the Companies Act? How will you deal with the issue of damages or interest? Does it displace that?

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, it is not there but this is a new amendment, which we thought would help deter corporations from committing offences. It is subject to new proposals by Members and we see which figure is appropriate. However, we need to have something to deter these corporations. We are not looking at public bodies such as Parliament but look at other – Recently, there was debate about breaches by Facebook. We are looking at such corporations - that in case Ugandans’ data is breached and used for other purposes, there should be a penalty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the annual gross turnover of the population.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, the misuse of data or abuse will not be uniform. I suppose the penalty should depend upon the gravity of the offence. This can only be determined by courts of law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose a judge feels that the damage is so grave and it should even go beyond four per cent, we have tied their hands that they should not.

MR OKOTH: Madam Chairperson, the argument appears to be that four per cent is high but for a penalty to be effective, it must inflict pain; it must hurt. But if it does not, it does not amount to a penalty.

However, this is just the maximum. It does not mean that it should not exceed four per cent. We are talking about big corporations. Look at MTN, for instance. The judge may even say 0.1 per cent but if the offence is grave, let it be four per cent. 

Madam Chairperson, for you to create a penalty, you must cause pain so that when a person feels that when they commit the offence, they would be hurt financially; then, they take extra caution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In this law, where is the corporation defined? There is none. You cannot even say there is a big one and a small one.

MR LUBOGO: First of all, I would like to disagree with the chairperson on what she is defining to be a corporation. It is not in the interpretation clause but she is tagging it to like a trading or service corporation, which is in selling and turning over. This is not so unless you define it. We can have a corporation, which is not trading or selling as long as it is a legal person. 

Therefore, until you define that we are restricting to those ones - which are in business and making profit - you are narrowing it, yet we have corporations, which can commit offences and they are not in the business of turning over that you cannot tag the punishment to their turnover. It needs proper re-drafting.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, we had conceded to the committee. With your permission, I can bring up the amendment we had added to the committee’s proposal. Our argument was that it is too restrictive and excessive and may impair. 
Our proposal was that; 

“A court, which convicts a person under sub-section (1) may in addition to the punishment, order the company to pay a fine not exceeding 5,000 currency points.” 

We add that, 

“A court shall take into consideration the gravity of the offence under sub-section (1) and its impact in determining the fine to impose under sub-section (2)”. 

Those are some of the ideas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you insisting on your proposal? How much is a currency point?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Shs 20,000.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, based on the currency points, when we talk of 5,000 times Shs 20,000, it totals Shs 100,000,000. Look at the amount and the damage that has been created by the corporation. That becomes a bit of a problem. 

In my view, we should be talking about something higher than the 5,000 currency points. (Laughter) 


MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, under the European Union (EU) Data Protection and Regulations a penalty of four per cent of global gross revenue only arises in very exceptional cases if the breach is gross and that would be the maximum.

Secondly, penalty will not be the only thing that the regulator can apply. There are a number of options available. That includes issuing of warnings and reprimands. It also includes issuing some permanent stop to processing of data and suspending the data processor or controller from performing those activities. 

My view would be that we adopt such practices in our law to be in compliance with global practices. Thank you. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I withdraw the proposal of four per cent. The ministers here were guiding that we propose 250,000 currency points, which is equivalent to Shs 500 million.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that five billion? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, a currency point is Shs 20,000. So, 5,000 currency points would mean Shs 100 million. We need to make a decision as to whether this is too high or too little or sufficient to cater for the small companies. If it is a small company found in this, Shs 100 million can mean closing it.

Maybe, we could make it a minimum to cater for both the small and the big companies so that in case a judge finds out that they want to put it higher, then they can put it higher than Shs 100 million.  However, to make it 20,000 currency points would mean a lot of money. Small companies would collapse.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even if we used the term, “not exceeding 5,000”, wouldn’t that be okay?

MR BAHATI: “Not exceeding” would mean that they have capped it at Shs 100 million. Penalising a company like Facebook Shs 100 million is just peanuts. We can maybe make it a minimum of 5,000 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minimum?

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My problem is that we have not defined the corporation. So, you have the small ones of Bahati and the other ones of Zuckerberg. How do we define the corporation?

MR TUMURAMYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The currency points would work but the clarification I am seeking from the minister is how to differentiate between a small and big companies. It is important to know that companies are not the same but how do you determine a small or big company to be able to pay so many currency points? Thank you.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson had altered the word “corporation”. Madam vice chairperson, I would like the chairperson to listen to me – you had altered the word to be “body corporate” when you were amending. “Body corporate” includes all the bodies you have created; the authorities. Therefore, we have to differentiate first the “body corporate” she is talking about and corporations.

Secondly, we have said 5,000 currency points. I think that is what is being debated and then, we want to either term it as the minimum or the maximum. Therefore, once we say the minimum, that means other corporations may end up closing because of that Shs 100 million.

Therefore, why do not we leave it at 5000 currency points minimum and then the judge or whoever will be handling the issue will judge the corporations going upwards?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, they had proposed 250,000 currency points which comes to Shs 5 billion. If the House feels that we deal between Shs 500 million to Shs 2 billion, we could talk about 20,000 currency points and borrow your proposal and state that not exceeding 20,000 currency points which would mean not exceeding Shs 2 billion- (Interjections)- Not exceeding, meaning it can be below. If a court rules, it can be up to Shs 2 billion, which can cater for big companies and small companies.

If we talk about Shs 500 million, that would be 25,000 currency points. The 250,000 currency points, which the committee proposed would be Shs 5 billion. Therefore, if we want to cater for Facebook, we can still have their 250,000 currency points but using the words “not exceeding” and it would be discretionary to the judge to decide whether it is the Shs 5 billion or it is below Shs 5 billion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, you are making this law for Uganda. How will you fine Facebook from Kampala - the actual application of this law.  I thought this - it seems people are thinking about the other big companies but this is a Uganda law for companies in this country. 

Therefore, when you are talking about big, you might kill the small people. If you are going to sue Facebook, we may go to other courts elsewhere under other laws but this is for Uganda.

MR BAHATI: If that is the context, Madam Chairperson, then the proposal of the minister can be adopted - the one of 5,000 currency points which translates into Shs 100 million. If we say “not exceeding 5000 currency points” (not exceeding Shs 100 million), then I think it is fair enough. It can cater for small and big corporations.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, if you are using the word “body corporate”, it includes sub-counties - (Laughter) – and town councils. They are body corporate by law. If we are saying 5,000 currency points, it means we are going to close all sub-counties - (Interjections) - What is the budget of the sub-counties?

That is why I am saying we would actually look at the lowest. What is the lowest point downwards? Is it from zero? If I am meant to understand, I will agree with it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to ask the chairperson; are you talking about body corporate or corporations? There is a difference

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about corporations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we should not say “body corporate”.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we are looking at entities that make a lot of profit and they use people’s data to make money. That was the intention behind this proposal

THE CHAIRPERSON: Body corporate is wider.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, whether we are talking about corporation or body corporate, what I am sure of is that even a body corporate can be a corporation and that is why it becomes a problem because that is business administration.

We have to understand because we are likely going to make a mistake, which mistake is going to boomerang and it is going to affect so many people. In my view, we would be talking about the lowest amount of money. It does not matter whether you are a body corporate or a corporation; the law should apply to all of them across board. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I think we might have to define the corporation in the interpretation section because body corporate covers so many things - big, small, profit-making, non-profit-making. You can finish the corporations if we are not careful. Therefore, can we stand over it?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Chairperson, going to define “body corporate” will be deviating from the objects of the Bill. Whether “corporation” or “body corporate”, the intention here is to penalise anybody who is a data collector, processor or controller. It is really about that, whether you are a body corporate or a corporation. Maybe, the amendment of the committee brings some ambiguity by bringing body corporate but the spirit is for anybody who collects, processes and controls data. That is the spirit of the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, let us stand over this so that we identify what it is we are really targeting. We should identify which corporation - big or small. Let us stand over clause 33.

Clause 34

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 34 by inserting the words “after consultation with the Authority” immediately after the word “may”. 

The justification is to encourage the involvement of the Authority in coming up with regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

New Clause

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 35 to provide as follows - and that would be 36 - it is a transitional clause.

“All processing or collection of personal data must within one year after the commencement of this Act be made to conform to this Act.”
The justification is to cater for the transitional period after the commencement of the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you get clause 36? Honourable members, this is about a transition and it is setting a year.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, I really feel one year is too much. Why not six months or immediately after the law has been assented to? That is better because one year is too much.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I just want clarification: What was the essence of setting one year?
What was the spirit behind one year? One year seems to be long. That means that it will be next December and what could have happened along the way? I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what is the rationale for one year? 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we thought we would give the processors, collectors and data controllers ample time. However, I could withdraw this – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Give them ample time to do what? 

MS NYAKECHO: To reorganise themselves for this Bill because we thought it would create awareness. Nevertheless, if the House finds it unnecessary, I withdraw this new clause.
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.31
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” and stood over clauses 2, 15 and 33 and passed others with amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do reflect on those areas where we had difficulty and then we shall complete the Bill tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 231.7 MILLION ($ 335) MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP AS ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (USMIDP II)

5.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am presenting a report from the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 231.7 million, which is equivalent to $ 335 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group as additional financing for the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMIDP II).

Before I proceed, I would like to lay on Table the following documents; a copy of the signed report, signed minutes, programme completion report, Programme Operational Manual, Environmental Impact Assessment, confirmation of availability of counterpart funding, Land Acquisition and Compensation Framework, loan disbursement schedule, a letter from the National Planning Authority and the financing agreement. 

Introduction 

The committee considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 231.7 million ($ 335 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support additional financing for Phase II of USMID in accordance with Rule 175(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 8 August, 2018 and was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.

Madam Speaker, the committee considered and scrutinised the request and I now beg to report. 

Methodology 
We held meetings with the relevant ministries. We had a documentary review of a number of documents listed in paragraph 2.2 and we also made few references indicated in paragraph – 

THE SPEAKER: You can leave the methodology because the Members can read on their own. Go to the observations.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am proceeding right away to the observations and recommendations, starting with paragraph 15. 

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has got the mandate to oversee urban development in the country. However, we noted that their capacity needed some reinforcement. 

We, therefore, recommend that the expertise that will be provided to the programme support team in order to mitigate the risks posed by the capacity constraints by the ministry should be integrated within the ministry human resources plan in order to sustainably strengthen the executive, technical and professional personnel capabilities of the ministry in effectively overseeing the implementation of future programmes of a similar nature. 

The committee also noted that under institutional strengthening of the four additional new municipal councils, there was need to strengthen their capacity. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that the institutional capacities of the new additional beneficiary municipal local governments should be significantly financed to enable the smooth implementation of this programme in these additional municipal local governments.

On the performance of on-going projects under the ministry, the committee recommends the following;

That Government should strengthen the public investment management system to adequately prepare projects to finance when the requisite regulatory, institutional and operational mechanisms, including provision of counterpart financing in the MTEF are in place. 

The committee further recommends that the project steering committee and project technical committee of the Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project should in the short-run devise practical and deliberate strategies in liaison with the funding partners to accelerate the disbursement and absorption of the funds. This will ensure that the project objectives are met within reasonable time and set benchmarks of best practices in the project. 

Performance of Phase I of USMID Programme

The committee recommends that all beneficiary municipal councils should ensure that relevant by-laws are put in place to protect the rehabilitated municipal infrastructure and the enforcement of waste management measures because this has been a big abuse on the new facilities. Some people are drying cassava on the newly constructed roads and others are throwing garbage around.

Support to Refugee Hosting Districts

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should ensure that the coordination in the Programme Technical Committee is deliberately and adequately strengthened with especially Ministry of Local Government and the Local Government Finance Commission to ensure coordinated capacity-building support for the refugee hosting districts, which are not municipal local governments. 

We have received complaints that there is a lot of funding going to the urban centres, which are hosts to refugees whereas the rural areas hosting refugees are not being considered.

Increased supervision will be provided by the Programme Steering Team and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Government VAT Counterpart Funds

Madam Speaker, there has been a problem of paying VAT on infrastructure projects. The committee recommends that Government of Uganda should ensure that the envisaged VAT payments due to the infrastructure projects and the contracts for civil works under Phase II of the USMID programme be covered through additional disbursements to the four new beneficiary USMID Municipal Local Governments. 

The committee recommends that in consideration of the strategic alignment of the Phase II of the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme to the National Development Plan objectives as provided by the Second National Development Plan 2015/2016–2019/20. 

The request by Government to borrow SDR 231.7 million ($ 335 million) from the IDA of the World Bank Group to support additional financing for Phase II of the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID II) be approved, subject to the above recommendations.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and the Committee on National Economy. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. You can now debate.

5:54
MR APOLLO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent a municipality, which has been benefiting from this project. We need to support this loan. 

First of all, the money for the municipalities for the Road Fund was not increased. At the same time, the municipalities were not given the new sets of road equipment, which were given to districts. This loan will change the image of the municipalities. Municipalities being the engine of the growth in any district, we should support this loan.

This has changed the face of Tororo Municipality. We have a new park and the roads are superb with street lights on. I urge Members to support this. Thank you.

5:56
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the initiative to borrow for the USMID II programme. 

I have been a member of the Committee on Local Government Accounts and got opportunity to move in all the 14 municipalities that benefited from this project. We have proved that the funding has improved the face of the municipalities and the towns are shining. As we approve this loan, which in fact should not be delayed any further, we should be cautious that in the next implementation, the old aspects, which are in the design and contract specifications should be catered for. In some areas, we found that the greening was left out and in some places, there were cases of shoddy work.

Much as we approve this loan, it is our prayer that everything possible should be done to make sure that the works are properly done. When you look at Arua City now –(Laughter)– we are prayerful that in the shortest possible time, it is going to be granted city status. When you look at the USMID roads in Arua Municipality, in Gulu and all the municipalities that benefited, you find that there is development and it enhances revenue collection.

5:48
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister of Lands, Housing, Urban Development for bringing this motion as well as the committee for processing it.

I grew up in Kabale Municipality and I have seen Kabale Municipality change because of the USMID intervention. On a personal interest note, we have been pushing for a road to Rushoroza, our diocese in Kabale and there is a commitment in this loan that this road will be made. This will be a blessing to us. I am sure hon. Baryomunsi, hon. Bahati and others from Kabale District are very happy that this loan has eventually come to the Floor of Parliament. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we recently passed a loan on extension of electricity to all sub-counties in Uganda. I am made to understand that there are some processes, which are not yet complete.
I would like to beg the minister and those charged with it, to see that whenever we pass loans here, they should see them implemented at the earliest opportunity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This loan was passed in the Eighth Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: No, this is a new one.

MR KASULE: The first one was passed in the Eighth Parliament. There have been issues of delay. There are new municipalities; Kamuli Municipality, Nansana Municipality, among others. For how long shall we wait? We would like to urge the minister, now that you have learnt on the job, to do this loan and others are appreciating; you should first run this one and we bring in the new municipalities. 

Nansana is dying. In fact, I would like to apologise to all Members who go to the north and Hoima, they sit in my municipality for hours before they cross to go to their constituencies.

Madam Speaker, you were in Nakaseke yesterday. If it were not the lead cars, you would have spent two hours in Kawempe. We need this project to roll over to the new municipalities. I support the loan. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Are there objections?

5.52
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan because I have seen what it has done in Arua and Gulu Municipalities. I also do support that we get this loan to support district local governments and towns like Yumbe, Adjumani and Moyo. However, there are other towns that are en route to these refugee camps. I would like to suggest that as we borrow, there should be some spill-overs to benefit other roads through districts, which connect these roads like to Yumbe and Adjumani.

Furthermore, I would like to request that Pakwach District where most of these heavy trucks pass - through our bridges and roads - should also benefit from this loan. I beg to support the loan.

5.53
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report and honourable minister, for this project. 

From the report of the committee, there are two critical recommendations that captured my attention.
One is on the maintenance. They are proposing that the urban councils should put in place the by-laws to protect the new infrastructure. I totally agree with that. I think we also need to add that the project should have a maintenance component at least for three years. It is not enough to have a good road and after 12 months, it is again in bad condition and overgrown with bush.

The second recommendation was on the institutional capacity building. The institutional capacity building is good. We need not only to look at the hardware - the markets and roads among others - but we also need to look at the human resource and other software material. I would like to urgently request the minister to ensure that as phase one closes - and I would like to believe that it is in the end of this month - can you within the remaining period make sure that all the urban authorities are up-to-date in terms of the absorption of the funds.

It will be shame for the urban authority and municipality to be given money and at the close of phase one, the money has to be returned.

Finally, I agree with hon. Kasule. This project –(Member timed out.) 

5.55
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to support the loan. However, when the loan is given, I request that the responsible ministry takes caution of the contractors who do shoddy work. Let the money do the actual work. If a contractor has been cited and they know that he has been doing shoddy work, they should not be given another opportunity to continue doing shoddy work in an area.

Furthermore, as we do the work, can the responsible ministry also monitor? Sometimes, when you appear at the site, people really do the work properly. Let us not give the money to people who will mishandle it. I thank you.

5.56
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan. Fortunately, hon. Rukiya Chekamondo has hinted on what I wanted to say. However, I re-emphasise, that the minister should revise the framework for fast-tracking these projects. It is not enough for us to wait for the Auditor-General’s report to highlight the shoddy work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.56
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Local Governments Accounts of Parliament and we have traversed the whole country to see what has been going on in the municipalities. 

I would like to also say that the ministries or the Ministry of Works and Transport should guide the municipalities on how to use this money or grant. 

I would like to cite an example; the people of Moroto Municipality, instead of working on their roads, opted to construct a bus terminal yet Moroto District has only five buses according to our research. We need the ministries to guide how municipalities should use this money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first support the loan but we need to recognise what the Committee on Local Governments Accounts really brought on board.

The design of these roads should be uniform. People with disabilities have challenges. I have been lucky to move through these districts. In Kabale District, you will find very well made pedestrian streets that you do not get in other municipalities. I do not see it in Soroti or Tororo districts where I come from. The drainage system in other places is very good while in other places it is very poor.

As we promote this, these municipalities must know that this is a uniform figure and we would like to see all these roads having those passages. Our people have a problem of moving on the same road with everybody else, yet, they designed it to leave space for pedestrians and for people with disabilities with wheelchairs. 

Unfortunately, in some municipalities, things have been done haphazardly and some streets are still on stage one. I think we need to follow up with those municipalities, which have underperformed. We should not add them money until they clear the old stock. Thank you.

5.59
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose and support this motion passionately. Actually, in my maiden speech here, I pleaded that Kasese be included on the programme of USMID and we are there. Therefore, I plead with my fellow Members of the Opposition that –(Interjections)– Yes, I am declaring my interest. Kasese is a beneficiary and we are doing steady progress –(Laughter)– from 14 now we are having an addition so that those that are in the queue like Nansana can come on board in the next phase. 

I also wish to remind the House that this programme should have actually been affective on 1st October and, therefore, we have run out of time. Now that there are no people objecting to this loan and all presentations seem to point towards the operational issues, I would propose that we close the debate and pass this loan. For whoever wants to advise, the office of the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is open and they can go and advise because the guidelines, which I am privy to, are very clear.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have a conflict of interest. (Laughter)

MR CENTENARY: We are looking for value for money. Madam Speaker, I beg to support the loan.

6.01
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report and also support the motion. 

When we were implementing USMID I, some municipalities started while using solar power for street lights but later, they resorted to hydropower. However, those who have used hydropower have failed to pay for the street lights. As we implement USMID II, I suggest that we use solar power on street lights. Thank you.

6.02
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to legitimately support this report because Gulu Municipality, among many, has exhibited one of the highest levels of discipline in terms of the use of money. If you went to Gulu, you would agree that money was spent as it was supposed to be. That is why those who have not had very good experience in terms of how this money was spent should benchmark in Gulu Municipality before they start any further implementation of this second phase. 

I support this wholesomely but the key thing is that we have not seen something in terms of what we call “climate zero”. How do we bring on board the issues of planting trees along as we make the streets good? This should be embedded within the plan so that when you move on the streets, you see trees and flowers. Otherwise, street lights alone will not make the streets good. This is what I implore those doing the design to ensure that it is embedded. I have nothing else to add but only pray that this project should have money spent on what it is supposed to be spent on. Thank you.

6.03
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is one of the projects that has added value to most of our municipalities. I rise to support the approval of this loan on the basis that, one, I have seen the addition has also covered some regional balance and I think I am happy with that. 

However, we have challenges in some areas. I give the example of Soroti Municipality, where a contractor was paid almost 90 per cent before completion of the job and it almost created problems and we were about to miss the second phase. Therefore, I would like to implore the ministry to keep a tight mark on these project implementers because we need value for money. If you visited most of them – I live in Entebbe and it is now becoming a modern city. There is value for money. The municipality is changing day in, day out. This is the spirit we need to adopt. 

I support that we approve this loan.

6.05
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear that there are many people who are interested just because they represent the municipalities. However, they are ignoring the factors that may negate the process. Therefore, I wish the committee had addressed the factors that caused laxity in the first place. The committee talked about low absorption but how have you taken care of the low absorption in the second phase? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is very clear that Uganda has achieved special world record of being the fastest growing population in the whole of Africa. That, therefore, means urbanisation is a challenge. The committee has advised us that that urbanisation must be managed. How is urbanisation going to be managed if you have not told us how we are going to handle it? 

Let us take the example of the Albertine Sustainable Development Project, where you have come up with a project, which is going to be managed by three agencies. Out of those three agencies, you left out the Ministry of Health. How can you just talk about Land, Education and Roads and forget about Health? In urban settlement, health is part –(Member timed out.)

6.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I hope the implementers of the project take note of the findings and observations the Committee on Local Governments Accounts made. They are very key and if we do not take them seriously, we are shall have the same problems.

I do not know the level at which we are going to directly or indirectly involve the MPs in this project. I wish it could be handled the way we handled the District Road Fund Committee because we have seen where mayors and district chairpersons have used it to undermine the Members of Parliament when they try to raise these matters. 

I do not have a municipality in Kasilo or Serere District but I am raising this because I have lived in municipalities and I have seen this happen. I do not know how the ministry is going to handle this matter. I see my friend, hon. Baryomunsi nodding in approval because we have had this experience. Even as the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we saw at one time when we went for a retreat in Jinja how the mayors had ganged up against Parliament when pertinent issues were raised. I do not know how we are going to address this.

Finally, since most of this is about roads, where is the Ministry of Works and Transport in this matter? We have put the project under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the technical ministry is the one of Works and it is on the periphery. Can we give the professionals to handle professional work? Thank you.

6.09
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we approve this loan, it is very important for the minister to tell the august House something about the performance of those loans that we have borrowed.

It is not enough to say that the roads in Gulu, Lira and Arua are good. We need to know how much was spent to construct those roads. Otherwise, we may look at it with our naked eyes but I think it is not enough - we need a thorough performance report on those loans.

Secondly, we are engaged in improving the infrastructure within the municipalities forgetting that we are interfering with the development of town councils in a slow manner. People are migrating from the town councils   to municipalities. This means that in the near future, we shall hamper the development of all the town councils around the municipality.

Madam Speaker, next time when borrowing for municipalities, we should also borrow to uplift the faces of town councils. Other town councils are doing badly; there are no tarmac roads, dust is everywhere. In Amuru Town Council, where I come from, for example, there is a lot of dust because the road is not tarmacked. Therefore, as we borrow for municipalities, we should also look at the town councils - (Interruption)

MR WATENGA: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague and the House is that this Government has created many sub-counties yet most of them have no offices, toilet facilities and so on.

THE SPEAKER: How is that related to Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMIDP II)?

MR WATENGA: I am giving him information. Otherwise, as we plan for this, we should also plan for the sub-counties. Thank you.

6.11
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented and encourage Members to support the programme. It is one of the performing programmes that have ever been implemented. 

Madam Speaker, I have two brief issues to rise. One is that Members have talked about the delays. However, one of the causes   of delays is group contracting. You find a single contractor awarded three or four municipalities in the name of motivating them that the programmes are small. This is where there is a very big problem because a single ineffective contractor exports inefficiency to more than three municipalities. 

When the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government was reading the report here, you could see a litany of failure and when you scrutinise the contractor, it is the same contractor.  Therefore, can the ministry look at this group contracting and see its feasibility with the view of unlocking its incompetency?

On the issue of counter funding and disbursement schedules, Masaka is doing one of the last works on Phase I of USMIDP and the blame was on delayed disbursements. I believe this second phase should address the issue of disbursement to make sure that they meet the timelines.

Madam Speaker, if we do not meet the timelines, these loans are going to play into the issue that we were worn into the Public Debt Management Framework 2013 because delay compounds the challenges of borrowing. We get to implement them, they become a problem.

Finally, the ministry needs to follow up on the –(Member timed out.)

6.13
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the loan. 

Madam Speaker, I belong to the Local Government Accounts Committee. We traversed all the 14 municipalities and saw the positive progress in those municipalities. However, I would like to emphasise the streamlining of the procurement process. In the first phase, there were issues of undue influence in the procurement process and in some municipalities; the contracts of some contractors were canceled.

Madam Speaker, the issue of clustering needs to be done in a more rational way. In the first phase, we had Soroti, Tororo, Mbale, Fort portal and Hoima in the same cluster. These are two or three different regions and I think it was the most ineffective clusters we noted during evaluation. Therefore, if we can improve the clustering and streamline the procurement process, we are bound to have better results. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I support the loan.

The municipalities are shining; they are very beautiful but that is only one of the four components. This programme had four components - I would like to thank the Ministry of Lands, Hosuing and Urban Development for the hybrid design of these projects. This is because in the project, they had included a component of sustainability in the project; the component of institutional strengthening.

I must say that whereas the infrastructural component is doing well, the others are doing poorly. We were supposed to see an improvement in the revenue generation capacity of these municipalities. However, what is happening is that whereas the money has been spent, there is no transformation and no changes as far as revenue enhancement capacity of these municipalities is concerned.

Madam Speaker, we need to do a bit of an evaluation. We should not be blinded by the other component which is doing very well. Yes, it is fine; the lights are there and the roads are beautiful but what about the sustainability. The other component is not doing well. What are the problems? We need to find out. That element was supposed to ensure that at the end of the project, the municipality is able to raise revenue to maintain this good infrastructure we are talking about but as we speak, these components have done very poorly. Therefore, we need to find out from the Ministry of Local Government. Before we proceed - (Member timed out.)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In the first place – 

THE SPEAKER: Wait on; there is a procedural issue there.
	
MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee of National Economy that processed this loan request. I have listened to the debate but it appears like Members are concentrating on municipalities yet this loan is bringing on board eight refugee hosting districts.

Whereas Members are making recommendations to Government not to make mistakes like in Phase I, I thought that as Members debate they should try to give Government direction how to handle the refugee hosting districts. Thank you. 

6.18
MR GEORGE WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand here to support the loan. 

This USMIDP programme has been very successful in this country. It is one of the most successful programmes we have ever seen. As vice chairperson of the committee that went for an oversight on this programme, I can ably say that this is one of the projects that make us a bit happy.

When we moved to all those municipalities that have been worked upon, we saw a lot of hope. The local authorities and the communities are very impressed and happy. The accessibility and developments that are being done on these municipalities have made them lively. I support the motion that the loan be granted to this ministry to carry out the activities they have spelt out.

However, we also need to look out to some other peculiarities. For example, one honourable Member spotted road designs, which should be uniform and identical so that they can be identified as USMIDP roads on visiting any municipality. I request that the ministry gets a common design other than having different designs where one might not be having pedestrian walk way while another has. So, I request we adopt that method in executing this programme. Otherwise –(Member timed out.)

6.20
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support this motion. USMIDP I was $160 million and we are borrowing another $335 million - simple calculation means that we shall be borrowing Shs 1.8 trillion. 

My concern, Madam Speaker, as we grapple to pay all this money has Government put in place mechanism to ensure that the infrastructure that we are investing so much in can be maintained after some period?

Secondly, when are we supposed to have paid off this money? Isn’t there a possibility that we could complete paying this money when the infrastructure is already damaged?

The committee noted that there were aspects of mismanagement in the infrastructure under USMIDP I and you have called upon these local governments to pass bylaws. Is there a mechanism that Government has put in place to augment the effort by local governments to preserve and protect the infrastructure?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not hear any opposition to this proposal; they are proposals for improvement by the minister. I want us to end here except that I have one question for the honourable minister. How will the youth of this country and women benefit from this project? How do the youth who are the majority and women fit into this loan?

And the other thing is: this is a good programme. I go to many municipalities and the roads are good but I think, honourable minister, you have a limited number of kilometres. You find the main road looking good but outside the town you find potholes. Why can’t you get a better plan to have a good municipality with good roads not just 10 kilometres? 

6.23
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, as a former Chairperson of the Committee of National Economy and a Member of the Infrastructure committee, when we processed this loan, Madam Speaker, you had to set aside petitions from municipalities, which had not benefitted and I am happy with your guidance we made a condition that Kasese, Kamuli and others have to benefit but there are some which have not benefited.

As a mover of the motion for regional governments, I am happy that the regional headquarters have been considered but there are regional cities, which are bigger than the project component. Jinja, Mbarara, Gulu, Arua, Mbale and Lira are bigger than what they benefited - when we passed the first project, we wanted to look at the challenges in peculiar municipalities.

Now that the National Development Plan and in the physical plan, which the minister has not presented here in line with the national planning Act - those regional cities must be fast-tracked. We would like to know what both Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Finance intend to do to address the big point that the Madam Speaker has just raised.

Finally, when we processed this project, we got resistance from Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Local Government because each of them thought that the project should have been theirs. 

I request that Government places the project under the ministry of lands. UNRA, ministry of works and that of local government sent complaints and each of them thought they should be the ones implementing this project. What we need is an inter-agency coordination and an inter-ministerial approach to deliver this project. Thank you.

6.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues for those good observations, comments and advice given. Let me address the concerns raised by my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal on identifying the factors, which affected USMIDP I.

We scrutinised the Local Government Accounts Committee report and visited some of the municipalities. What we noticed as some of the causes is the low absorption due to slow disbursement. This is a characteristic of Government, which we are trying to cure. 

As a Committee on National Economy, we have come up with strict guidelines to expedite the disbursement and one of the reasons for slow absorption was lack of counterpart funding and lack of preparedness.

There was also decentralised decision making - you have been told about Karamoja where they needed roads but they decided to contract a bus park when they had less than five buses. The decision making was put in the hands of the locals without building their capacity.

The resettlement action plan has been slow and the contractors will not start work until it has been sorted out. That is why in my submission and among the documents I laid on the Table, we included the environmental impact assessment, which is normally done after the loan approval but which also causes delay - that has been done before the approval of the loan and confirmation of the availability of counterpart funds, ring-fenced in the budget. These days we insist that this money is in the budget and it is ring fenced. And we also insist on getting an irrevocable commitment from the finance ministry, which we go in this case.

The land acquisition and compensation framework, which is normally done much later, has also been done in advance. Also the letter from National Planning Authority confirming that this request is - (Interruption)

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a clarification on what the minister just said about Moroto Bus Park. When we got the contract for the road from Nakapiripirit to Moroto, the bonus kilometres that the contractor was supposed to give to Moroto Municipality, the roads and lighting was done.

Therefore, when this project came, we did not have to again put this money on the same project that we already received from the Chinese, having it at the back of our mind that we are going to have a hub transit centre in Moroto from the Turkana and people of Ethiopia entering into Ugandan trade. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I don’t understand. I have been to Moroto but I don’t know -

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, for that clarification. However, sometimes the financing agreements are done after the approval of the loan. However, this time we have insisted that we should have the financing agreements concluded before the loan is approved.

I would like to request Parliament to support us. Sometimes we are accused of taking long with these loans but we want to ensure that the problems, which were there in the past and have caused expensive delays to this Government, are addressed. That is why sometimes you see us taking a little bit longer. In some cases we even insist on visiting the sites and getting all sorts of commitments before. So, I think what my sister raised has been addressed. 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN PLANNING (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of my colleagues, to thank the honourable members for the unanimous support for this motion. We pledge that we will do all our best to integrate all the proposals that members have given for our consideration and improvement of the project.

Madam Speaker, you asked about how we are involving the youth, women and other vulnerable groups.  We have a forum called the Municipal Development Forum (MDF). These fora are constituted and are representative of the women, youth and persons with disability. 

They participate in identification of the project in the implementation and ensuring that they pick projects that benefit all the classes and groups. That is why in the project design, we have aspects of markets, industrial centres and other infrastructure that should support most of the women and the youth working in the municipal and urban areas.

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable minister, I am talking about how much money are we getting as women in that contract? Not just using the market. Can women and youth get a contract within that structure?

MS AMONGI: Okay. Now in the context of the contracts, in the next phase we will try to look at companies owned by women in municipalities and have applied especially in areas they can manage. 

We shall integrate that because in most of the previous contracts, most of the municipalities chose infrastructure which are roads. In most of the infrastructure, the companies unfortunately are owned by men. However, I pledge to you that we are going to look at other aspects within the contract to ensure that sub contracts are awarded in such a way that women and youth can benefit. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable minister. It is interesting that you mentioned that you will involve women and youth and make sure that there is infrastructure like markets and all that. I know that the cleanliness of these towns may be outside of your mandate. However, what is there in Government to ensure that the infrastructure put in place is taken care of? 

We get shocked when we pass through these municipalities with good roads full of rubbish in a month or two. What structure and mechanism is there to ensure that we keep these municipalities clean and the roads well maintained? Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister on the issue that in the next phase women and youth will be catered for. I would like to give a simple example. We were in Kenya benchmarking on the local content and they said that for contracts, there are areas that are earmarked for women and youth to handle.

In this contract, there must be areas earmarked for women and youth so that they feel that they are being catered for. We need to take care of them to enable them earn school fees. Thank you.

MR AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have made a commitment that Members observed correctly that we have been using clustering. The clusters have been too big for most of the Ugandan companies themselves. In most contracts, you will find Chinese and Indian companies doing the work; it is because of clustering. 

We take serious note of the proposal by the Members of Parliament to review clustering and also look at sub contracts to take care of women and youth; that I make the commitment. (Applause)

The other issue of clarification from honourable member was about waste management to care of dirtiness and all the rubbish. What we will do, will be to involve Members of Parliament more because I have realised that there are very many ideas coming from them that would support in the implementation of the project.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the leaders at the district don’t even inform the Members when they are discussing this. We just hear of it when it is done, so we should build it in.

MS AMONGI: We have taken note of that one. The other issue, which came from many members, was the question of coordination with the other line ministries like works and local government. We have coordinated and harmonised our position with the relevant ministries. I would like to inform you that there are different implementing committees. 

The Program Technical Committee (PTC) has people from works, local government and we have included in people from the road fund and water and all the relevant ministries. Therefore, there is now clear and well-coordinated structuring to cater for all the other concerns in the first phase.

MS OGWAL: Now that you have received all these inputs or the concern - (Interjections) - I am standing on procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Which rule?

MS OGWAL: She was still standing. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I am standing on a procedural matter because we have brought up critical issues; the issue of women being a factor in this second phase and that of the youth coming out. 

Now that we have approved this loan, how shall we know that our concerns have been structured in this? This is very important. I am raising it because the plight of these displaced children in Lira Town is one of the things causing us insecurity; even in Kampala where we are. So, we must have those issues addressed. 

Once the loan is approved, the minister must come to the Floor of Parliament and tell us thus: “Out of the loan you approved, this is how we have captured the issue of women, the youth and so on.” 

As a person who comes from Lango, I know that the corridor children are one of the issues that I am concerned about. That needs to be addressed in this programme if the city is to be for all of us. That is the procedural matter I would like you to clarify as you conclude. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how to rule. Anyhow, minister, take note and conclude.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. I would like to assure you of, first, the concern from the greater Kampala. There is another project for all the municipalities in the greater Kampala to cover Mukono, Kira, Nansana and all those. The fact that you have not seen them here should not raise an alarm because there is another project specifically for the greater Kampala Metropolitan areas.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to conclude.

MS AMONGI: Regarding the other remaining municipalities, we are handling it under our broader national physical planning development.

I would like to thank members and assure you that we shall be reporting through the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the progress report. The Auditor-General has audited this particular project and given it as one of the best performing projects, including the World Bank. 

Madam Speaker, very soon we are coming to request that you accord us time to visit Jinja and open at least two municipalities that are completed. I thank you for supporting the project. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do put the question that this House approves the proposal as presented.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for improving the face of our roads. Honourable members, I had planned to do another Bill, which is not very big but there are unhealthy activities around some of the work of this House. I do not want to be associated with them. Therefore, I would like to invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs to present the report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE STATUS OF THE RESETTLEMENT OF LANDSLIDE VICTIMS IN THE ELGON SUB REGION

6.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now present our report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the status of the resettlement of the landslide victims in the Elgon Sub-Region. I beg to leave the introduction and go to the background.

In March 2010, a landslide disaster in Bududa District claimed lives of over 350 people and displaced over 8,000 others. As a result, over 2,000 residents were displaced by landslides. They went to different villages in Bududa District to take refuge in the nearby schools, churches and trading centres. 

Two solutions were adopted and these were resettlement of the survivors on the part of the refugee settlement land in Kiryandongo and the long term solution of resettling people at risk of landslides on the low land that was to be identified.

In 2O11, a mudslide in Bulambuli District killed about 28 people. In March 2012, a mudslide killed six people in Sironko District and in June 2O12, another mudslide buried 18 people in Bududa District. This resulted into many other Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in and around the Elgon Sub Region.

Following the re-occurrence of landslides and subsequent displacement of people in the Elgon Sub-Region covering the districts of Bududa, Manafwa, Mbale, Sironko, Bulambuli, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo, Government took a decision after a risk assessment, to procure land for resettling the earmarked 20,000 households who are victims of landslides, floods or at risk of landslides in the Elgon Sub Region.

Consequently, Cabinet approved a strategy under Cabinet Minute No. 383 on 31 October 2O12 to continuously allocate Shs 8 billion to facilitate the resettlement activities of Bududa Landslide survivors and the resettlement of over 100,000 people at risk of landslides in the E1gon, Rwenzori and Kigezi sub-regions and many others living in higher risky areas within the medium term.

Therefore, Parliament appropriated Shs 8 billion in the financial year 20l3/2014 and same amounts in the 20l4/2015 and 20l5/2016 financial years. 

Madam Speaker, we have the resettlement plan and attachment to it. I would request that I leave this to members to read.

Justification for the Investigation

In the financial year 2016/2017, the Office of the Prime Minister updated the committee on the status of resettlement activities of Bududa landslide survivors and resettlement of over 100,000 people at risk of landslides in the Elgon, Rwenzori and Kigezi sub regions.

The committee observed that eight billion shillings appropriated by Parliament in the financial year 2013/2014 to cater for resettlement activities was diverted to address the famine problem in Karamoja sub region at that time. 

In the financial year 2014/2015, the Shs 8 billion appropriated was used to implement resettlement activities in Bulambuli District.

The committee further observed that of the Shs 8 billion appropriated in the financial year 2015/16, only Shs 4 billion was actually released and diverted to facilitate evacuation of the Ugandans trapped in South Sudan at the peak of the crisis then.

The stated achievements included the purchase of 2,868 acres of land, a resettlement physical plan drawn, 13 Kilometres of access roads opened, 1,800 plots demarcated, a police post established and 1,619 beneficiaries registered out of 11,200 verified displaced persons.

Resettlement of landslide victims in the Elgon Sub Region became a matter of public concern several times on the Floor of Parliament and the Committee on Presidential Affairs was tasked to interest itself in the concern of the Members. 

In its oversight role, the committee observed that the said achievements in as far as resettlement activities of Bududa landslide survivors and resettlement of over 100,000 people at risk of landslides in the Elgon Sub Region are concerned, have not been realised. 

The decision by Government to resettle Bududa landslide survivors, the 100,000 people at risk of landslides in the Elgon, Rwenzori and Kigezi sub regions still face numerous challenges.

It is important for Members to note that the committee was at first denied access to the said 2,876 acres of land purchased but was later allowed after a lengthy engagement with the hostile residents. On spot inspection of the said land revealed that the stated achievements could not be ascertained.

The resettlement activities had stalled because of the encumbrances created by the third party claimants on the said purchased land and lack of funding yet the Shs 8 billion allocation was envisaged to be continuous in the medium term. 

It was the finding of the committee that Office of the Prime Minister required Shs 10.6 million to resettle each household, which translates to Shs 17.2 billion to resettle 11,200 households on the 2,876 acres.

The committee therefore interested itself to investigate the numerous challenges constraining the resettlement activities and now wishes to report its findings.

We have terms of reference but I beg to move to specific recommendations. The Members can read the methodology. The brief history of the said land in Bulambuli District can be read by Members.

Findings, observations and recommendations - investigating whether land was sold to Office of the Prime Minister; Government of Uganda, represented by Office of the Prime Minister, purchased 2,868 acres of land located at Bunambutye Sub-County in Bulambuli District as follows:

Plot 198 of 1,688 acres, Block 4, Volume 4,591, Folio 6, curved out of Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4,459, Folio 9, at Shs 2,500,000 per acre, totaling to Shs 4,220,000,000 from Simu Oil Company Ltd represented by Ms Gimono Beatrice on the 26 August 2014.

Plot 157 of 918 acres, Block 4, Volume 4,591, Folio 5, curved out of Block 4, Plot 93, Volume 4,462, Folio 15, at Shs 3,000,000 per acre totaling to Shs 2,754,000,000 from Fr Godfrey Manana, Fr Andrew Mutubusi and Fr Patrick Watikha, represented by Hon. Wamakuyu Ignatius Mudimi on 26 August 2014.

Plot 94 of 270 acres on Block 4, Volume 4,455, Folio 7, at Shs 3,800,0007 per acre totaling to a contract amount of Shs 1,026,000,000 from Mr Ochwo George Wilson and Mrs Christine Ochwo, represented by Mr George Wilson Ochwo on the 29th day of August 2014.

It was envisaged by Office of the Prime Minister that each household would receive one acre of land per homestead on either Plot 94 or plot 157 and two acres of land in Plot 198 for agriculture.

It is the committee's finding that Government of Uganda, represented by Office of the Prime Minister, purchased 21876 acres of land located at Bunambutye Sub-County in Bulambuli District, based on agreements presented - we have put it as Appendix 3.

Terms of reference 2: investigating whether procurement process was followed: 

I think Members can read the details – let us go to the findings but first I request that I read the information on page 9, the last paragraph.

The committee was informed that the due diligence was done as follows - Madam Speaker, I beg to leave that as well. 

THE SPEAKER: Just read that part.

MS ABABIKU: The committee was informed that the due diligence was done as follows:

    a) Appraising the offers received to evaluate the consistency of the technical offers, financial proposals and the comparative market value.
    b) Following up on the authenticity of the lease issued in 2013 by Sironko District Land Board and consultations with Bulambuli and Sironko District Local Governments as well as Sironko District Land Board were done.
    c) Land Search from land registry to provide assurance as to whether the land being offered was registered land and had no encumbrances.
    d) Inspection and verification was done to ascertain whether land being offered met the technical requirements as expressed in a call for expression of interest including the requirement for land to be within the designated acquisition area, valid titled land and more than 200 acres in one piece among others; and
    e) Consulted a number of documents including the BLVC (Bulambuli Land Verification Committee) (Odwe) Report.

The committee was also informed that before the procurement could be concluded, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugee Management who had halted the procurement process due to numerous complaints that had been lodged in court by a group of people protesting the procurement, chaired a meeting in which it was resolved that the procurement proceeds.

The committee was further informed that the said procurement attracted a lot of interests and challenges emanating from numerous objections from unsuccessful bidders and land ownership complaints, which led to protracted administrative reviews. As a result, the said procurement eventually performed a year after in financial year 2014/2015.

Investigating the availability of transaction documents

The committee was provided with the contract agreements for Plot 198 measuring 1,688 acres curved out of Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4,459, Folio 9, Plot 157 measuring 918 acres curved out of Block 4, Plot 93, Volume 4,462, Folio 15, and plot 94, measuring 270 acres. We have evidence attached as appendix 3.

Land titles

The committee was provided with the titles for Block 4, Plot 157, Volume 4591, Folio 5, measuring 918 acres with a lease of 44 years from 1 March 2009. Block 4, Plot 198, Volume 4591, Folio 6, measuring 1,688 acres with a lease of 94 years, from 1 August 1976 and Block 4, Plot 94, Volume 4455, Folio 7 measuring 270 acres with a lease of 44 years from 1 March 2009. We have evidence attached as appendix 4.

It is the committee's finding that the transaction documents for the 21876 acre of land purchased are available and in the custody of Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee noted that the title deed for Block 4, Plot 198, Volume 4591, Folio 6, which was curved out of Plot 10 changed ownership from Masaba Cooperative Union to Simu Oil Company Ltd and eventually to Uganda Land Commission.

It is the committee's finding that Masaba Cooperative Union (MCU) granted powers of attorney to Wimu Enterprises Ltd and not Simu Oil Company Ltd. Therefore, for Simu Oil Company Ltd to claim ownership of this plot is irregular. However, even if Simu Oil Company Ltd was to be a holder of powers of attorney, this does not mean ownership of the land. We have evidence as attached in appendix 5.

The committee observes that there was negligence on the part of the land registry in the said transaction. The committee recommends that Parliament interests itself in the operations of the land registry at the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

Terms of reference 4 – investigating whether there is quiet possession of the land purchased by the Office of the Prime Minister

The committee undertook an on spot assessment and noted the presence of ownership claimants on the land in question and therefore, a pointer to encumbrances on the said land.

The committee observed that quiet possession of the land purchased by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) is not realised despite the availability of transaction documents and title deeds for the said land. Consequently, the envisaged objective to resettle Bududa landslide survivors and over 100,000 people at risk of landslides in the Elgon Sub Region has not been realised. 

The committee held meetings with several stakeholders, reviewed several documents in addition to the field visit undertaken, in which it noted that the resettlement exercise was characterised by numerous challenges including but not limited to ignoring rightful owners and dealing with wrong elements, failure or refusal to carry out full and proper due diligence, misleading information, conflict of ownership and doubtful documentation and now wishes to report on the findings based on the specific plots. 

Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4459, Folio 9

Government of Uganda, represented by Mrs Christine Guwatudde Kintu, the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister and Ms Rose Nakabugo, Ag. Commissioner, Disaster Preparedness and Management, purchased Block 4, Plot 198 Volume 4,591, Folio 6 measuring 1,688 acres, curved out of Block 4, Plot 10, Vo1ume 4459, Folio 9, at Shs 2,500,000 per acre, equivalent to Shs 4,220,000,000 from Simu Oil Company Ltd represented, by Ms Beatrice Gimono as Executive Director and witnessed by Ms Jacinta Nafuna as Director, on 26 August, 2014.

It is the committee's finding that whereas Ms Beatrice Gimono (wife to hon. Mudimi Ignatius Wamakuyu) signed the contract on behalf of Simu Oil Company Ltd, it is actually Hon. Mudimi Ignatius Wamakuyu, the Managing Director of Simu Oil Company Ltd who physically participated in the sale and so spearheaded all negotiations as far as Plot 10 is concerned. This included his commitment to compensate the third party claimants who were settled on the said piece of land and who submitted that they had no reason not to believe in their area Member of Parliament then. 

He also represented Ms Beatrice Gimono, the Executive Director of Simu Oil Company Ltd when they were summoned to appear before the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

Block 4, Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4,459, Folio 9 was leased to Masaba Cooperative Union in 1971 by Uganda Land Commission for five years running from 1 August 971 vide LRV 897, Land at Bunambutye. The said lease expired in 1976 and control of this land reverted to the District Land Board but Masaba Cooperative Union successfully applied for an extension of their lease for the period of 94 years. 

On the 11 September, 2013, Masaba Cooperative Union, represented by Mr Eddy Bwayo Wakholowa, Mr Joseph Wasikye and Mr Charles Wakholowa, appointed Wimu Enterprises Ltd, represented by Ms Beatrice M. Gimono as their attorney to sell to any person or organisation or institution all that land comprised in Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4459, Folio 9 in Bunambutye Subcounty, Bulambuli District by virtue of the Registration of Titles Act.

It is the committee's finding that whereas MCU gave powers of attorney to Wimu Enterprises Ltd, it is Simu Oil Company Ltd that sold land comprised in Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4459, Folio 9 in Bunambutye Subcounty, Bulambuli District, to Government of Uganda represented by the OPM. The evidence is attached in appendix 5. 

While interfacing with the committee during consideration of this matter, MCU was not aware of and could not explain this abnormality – 

THE SPEAKER: Chair, you could probably go to your findings because the members can read the others. 

MS ABABIKU: Okay, thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the committee's finding that land comprised in Block 4, Plot 10, Volume 4,459, Folio 9 is a matter before a competent High Court of Uganda, holden at Mbale under Civil Suit No. 0027 of 2014 which Charles Khauka, Francis Bukuwa, Wangolo Kutosi, John Mabonga, Abraham Rotich, Iddi Kipkoech, Francic Kiboi, Asadi Sabila, Bosco Khisa, Cheptai Kassim and Musawu Sadik as Plaintiffs v. Masaba Cooperative Union, Simu Oil Company Limited, Sironko District Local Government and the Commissioner Land Registry as defendants in which case, the plaintiffs contend that they are joint customary owners of land in question through inheritance from their fore fathers. It is not the committee's intention to deliberate on the substance of this suit but to emphasise that presence of this suit is a pointer that the land in question had issues even before procurement.

The committee also reviewed the Bulambuli Land Verification Committee (BLVC) Report popularly known as the Odwe Report and interested itself in finding number 9, which identified land titles for further review as Plots 10, 11, 86, 87, 93 and 94. In this, Plots 10 and 11 belong to MCU and BCU respectively.

Madam Speaker, it is therefore, important for the Members to note that all the three plots; that is Plot 10, 93 and 941 from which OPM purchased the land in question, were all subject to further review. 
According to finding nine of the Odwe Report, Uganda Land Commission was at fault to grant lease on land, which had bonafide customary ownership.

It was rather disturbing for the committee to find that the same Government, which was under obligation to either compensate MCU to enable original owners to regain possession of their land or resettle the original owners to enjoy rightful possession, is the same Government that purchased the land in question.
It is the committee’s finding that Mr Martin Owor, Commissioner for Disaster had made an attempt to amicably find a solution to the stand-off between hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu and the third claimant, Mr Martin Owor, whose efforts were frustrated by hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu who refused to sign the MoU intended to address the issues raised by the claimants. We have evidence as attached in appendix 7.
The committee now observes that officials from the OPM and Simu Oil Company Ltd caused a financial loss to Government of Uganda amounting to Shs 4,220,000,000 due to negligence.

The committee recommends that the transaction involving Contract No. OPM/SPLS/13-14/00100 be cancelled. The Permanent Secretary for OPM Ms Gertrude Guwatudde be held responsible for causing financial loss to the Government of Uganda and causing suffering to the landslide victims and many still at risk. The Ag. Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness at the time of this transaction, Mr Rose Nakabugo, be held liable for causing financial loss to the Government and untold suffering to the landslide victims and many still at risk.

Ms Gimono Beatrice M, the Executive Director of Sim Oil Company Ltd and Ms Jacinta Nafuna be jointly prosecuted for fraud since they acted on behalf of the company without powers of attorney. 
Members of the contracts committee be held accountable for their incompetency in evaluation and failure to detect that they were dealing with Simu Oil Company Ltd without required instruments that resulted into financial loss to the Government. Charges of fraud be preferred against hon. Wamakuyu for the unfulfilled commitment with third party claimant on a piece of land where he had no instrument mandating him to transact resulting into financial loss to Government of Uganda.

Block 4, Plot 93, Vol. 4,462, Folio 15

Under this plot, the committee finds it irregular for OPM to have proceeded with transaction on Plot 93 where the Odwe report had identified for further review and had recommended that Government authorizes further investigation to verify claims being put on it.

Members of the contracts committee by then also be held individually accountable for poor evaluation that resulted into financial loss to the Government. 

The committee observes that a transaction where there is no quiet possession of the land purchased, is null and void and this largely explains why the resettlement could not be effected.

The committee therefore recommends that the transaction involving Contract No. OPM/SPLS/13-14 00100 be cancelled.

Hon. Wamakuyu lgnatius Mudimi, Fr Godfrey Manana, Fr Andrew Mutubusi and Fr Patrick Watikha be jointly prosecuted for criminal charges and have Shs 2.754 billion recovered and refunded to Government of Uganda. Hon. Wamakuyu Ignatius Mudimi be prosecuted for abuse of office.

Block 4, Plot 94, Volume 4455, Folio 7

Government of Uganda, represented by Office of the Prime Minister purchased Block 4, Plot 94, Volume 4,455, Folio 7 measuring 270 acres.

It is the committee's finding that a one John Wanambuko (Principal third party claimant) is a son to Peter Wanambuko and a nephew to Lt Col Lawrence Kitts.

It is the committee’s interpretation that a statement of search is only a necessity but not sufficient condition for any land in question to be free of encumbrances. Therefore, Office of the Prime Minister should have explored other forms of due diligence to collaborate the statement of search.

It is also the committee's observation that whereas this is a standard framing by the lands registry to always put a disclaimer on land search reports, this kind of disclaimer is ambiguous and has a loophole that is subject to abuse. It creates uncertainties on actual status of land under search and does not hold ministry of lands accountable yet their position influences transactions.

The committee therefore, recommends that ministry of lands should desist from making blanket disclaimers, which may not be reflective of the actual status of land under search, to avoid misleading stakeholders. It is the committee's considered opinion that for purposes of accountability and authenticity of information on search reports, the ministry clearly states actual facts since they are mandated to provide factual information in the course of making search reports.

The committee is also in receipt of a caveat by a one Moses Wanambuko forbidding registration or any changes in proprietorship or dealing with the estate or interest on LRV 3596, Folio 9, Plot 94, Block 4, land at Bunambutye dated 29th day of April 2014. It is attached as Appendix 10.

It is the committee’s finding that the numerous complaints to different offices; Office of the Prime Minister inclusive, merits or demerits notwithstanding, provided overwhelming evidence that the land in question had ownership issues even before the procurement could be completed.

The committee now observes that officials from the Office of the Prime Minister caused a financial loss to the Government of Uganda amounting to Shs 1.26 billion due to negligence.

The committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary for OPM, Ms Gertrude Guwatude Kintu be held liable for causing financial loss to the Government. The Acting Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness at the time of this transaction, Ms Rose Nakabugo also be held liable.

The committee observes that a transaction where there is no quiet possession of the land purchased is null and void.

The committee therefore recommends that the transaction involving Contract No. OPM/SPLS/13-14/00100, be cancelled. Mr George Wilson Ochwo be prosecuted on criminal charges and have Shs 1.26 billion recovered and refunded to Government of Uganda.

Investigating the circumstances that led to the halt in funding resettlement activities

The committee observes that said reallocation was considered without – Madam Speaker, allow me read a background to this. In the various submissions to the committee, Office of the Prime Minister contends that stopping the appropriation of the Shs 8 billion, in the medium term to resettlement activities, tantamounts to condemning over 90,000 people in areas prone to landslides and other disasters.

The committee observes that the said re-allocation was considered without the involvement of the sessional committee under whose jurisdiction the Office of the Prime Minister falls. The committee has since financial year 2017/18 made recommendations to this august House that the Shs 8 billion be re-instated to cater for resettlement activities.

The committee recommends that Shs 8 billion to cater for the resettlement activities under OPM is re-instated through a supplementary request and have this allocation ring-fenced in the medium term.

Assessing the interventions by OPM in restoring the plight of those affected by the 11 October 2018 landslide in Bukalasi sub-county, Bududa District.

Whereas the district leadership contends that interventions by the Government and Non-Government actors is adequate, the residents of Sume Parish, Bukalasi Sub-County which experienced the biggest effect of the landslide raised concerns over the mode of distribution and insufficient relief items.

The committee observed that it is the distribution mode related to the bureaucratic procedures of Government interventions that are a bottleneck to restoring the plight of the affected persons. The landslide survivors actually applauded the interventions of non-state actors led by the Catholic Relief Services.

The committee recommends that Office of the Prime Minister in conjunction with the local government shifts the distribution centers to the affected sub counties including Bukalasi, Buwali and Bubita.

The concerned authorities should explore using other means of identification such as involving the local leaders especially the LC 1 chairpersons in identifying locals so as to streamline distribution of food and other relief items other than the national ID, especially where such identification documents are lost in the process of the disaster.

Any other matters incidental thereto.

Transaction adviser

It is the opinion of the committee that, based on the qualifications of the transaction adviser as highlighted above, his competence to execute a task that was before him could not be in doubt. Some other factors relating to professional etiquette could have come into play to explain his role in the botched procurement. It is the finding of the committee that in the absence of quiet possession of the purchased land, the services of the transaction adviser cannot be appreciated.

The committee therefore, recommends that the transaction adviser, Mr Richard Masereje, be held accountable for submitting transaction advice that caused financial loss to Government of Uganda and untold suffering to the intended beneficiaries.

Misinformation by officials holding public offices

The committee is in possession of letters addressed to Office of the Prime Minister (See Appendices 16A and 16E) imploring Government to purchase the resettlement land on Plot 10, 93 and 94 on account that before and during the procurement process, they were not aware of any third party claimants on the land in question. On the contrary, the same officer informed the Office of the Prime Minister in a memorandum of understanding attached as Appendix 7 to the effect that there are rightful claimants.

The committee therefore, recommends that the following public officials be held liable for misinforming Government in the capacities:

    1. Mr Geoffrey Wambi Khaukha, the LC III Chairperson, Bunambutye Sub County
    2. Mr Vicent Nalanya, the Chairman, Land Verification Committee
    3. Mr Tom Mayeku, the Secretary District Land Board/District Land Officer
    4. Mr Calvin Mukholi, the LC I, Chairperson, Bubuya Village and
    5. Mr Edward Wabudi, the RDC of Bulambuli District.

Role of political leadership in OPM

The committee is in possession of numerous correspondences to the political leadership of the Office of the Prime Minister contesting purchase of the said land in question by Office of the Prime Minister (Appendix 17). The committee was also informed that before the procurement could be concluded, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees – who had halted the procurement process due to numerous complaints that had been lodged in court by a group of people protesting the procurement – chaired a meeting in which it was resolved that the procurement proceeds.

The committee was not availed any justification for the decision by the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to grant a go-ahead after rightly halting the procurement process. The committee observes that the political leadership in Office of the Prime Minister did not help Government to get a good deal out of this procurement and have value for taxpayers’ money.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the political leadership, including the Minister of State and the Cabinet Minister in Office of Prime Minister related to the subject matter take responsibility for causing a financial loss of Shs 8 billion. The ministers are hon. Hillary Onek and hon. Musa Ecweru.

Role of other institutions in the procurement process

Information received by the committee reveals that the third party claimants sought redress from relevant Government institutions to the effect that the ongoing procurement process then involved fraudulent disposal of land by agents who were not legitimate owners but this attracted no attention. (See Appendix 18). 

The committee is also in receipt of a report and recommendations by office of the Resident District Commissioner for Bulambuli in response to the matter of Peter Wanambuko on customary ownership of land. This report was received by State House Legal Department on 20 August 2013 in which it was found out that speculators and criminals took advantage of the absence of the genuine land owners who had fled to distant places as a result of cattle rustling by the Karimojong to survey other people's land, titled the same and sold it to a chain of buyers. One such criminal identified by the Resident District Commissioner was Lt Col Lawrence Kitts. (See Appendix 19).

It is the committee’s finding that the presence of the numerous accountability institutions and other stakeholders in Government did not play the role envisaged in their establishment and this casts doubt on their level of performance. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that investigations be carried out on Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Directorate of Land Matters in State House and the Inspector General of Government, for failure to intervene in the botched procurement.

Effectiveness of the market survey by Office of the Prime Minister

The Office of the Prime Minister procured Plot 198 of 1,688 acres, Block 4, Volume 4,591, Folio 6, at Shs 2,500,000 per acre; Plot 157 of 918 acres, Block 4, Volume 4,591, Folio 5 at Shs 3,000,000 per acre and Plot 94 of 270 acres on Block 4, Volume 4,455, Folio 7 at Shs 3,800,000 per acre.

The committee received submissions that the market price of land within Bunambutye Sub County is in the range of Shs 800,000 to Shs 1,500,000 per acre to date. The committee interested itself in Plot 94 where Office of the Prime Minister paid Shs 3,800,000 per acre. It is the finding of the committee that Mr George Wilson Ochwo and Ms. Christine Ochwo purchased Plot 94 measuring 270 acres from M/S Uganda Organic Plantation Ltd at Shs 100,000,000, which is equivalent to Shs 370,370 per acre, on the 3rd day of November 2006, reflecting 9.7 per cent increment in value. This means that the value of the said land appreciated by more than 10 times within less than eight years.

The committee observes that the market survey did not yield efficiency in the said procurement and so, no value for money even if there was to be quiet possession of the said land.

Recommendations on how to conclusively address resettlement of internally displaced persons 

The committee strongly recommends that Shs 8 billion be provided to the Office of the Prime Minister in a supplementary request and have their MTEF ceiling re-instated to enable them undertake activities relating to resettlement of the internally displaced persons and restore the plight of these suffering Ugandans.

Dissemination of information

The committee recommends that going forward, the Office of the Prime Minister should explore all media avenues available like local FM radio stations and use of lower local governments to convey messages.

Due diligence for future procurements

The committee recommends that in future, Office of the Prime Minister should never rely on search statement in isolation but rather should do the due diligence in the actual location and involve all the stakeholders in the opening up of boundaries.

Massive tree planting 

We have recommended that the local governments should take it seriously with the support of the central government.

Land identified for resettlement of persons at risk of landslides by the Odwe Report

The committee interested itself in finding No.7 of the Odwe Report and noted that Plot l01 measuring 17.9sq miles did not have real dispute and free for owners to put to their use. The Odwe Report observes that Plot 101 is also the land that was initially identified by the Office of the Prime Minister for the resettlement of the victims.

The committee therefore, recommends that Government interests itself in Plot 101 and other suitable pieces of land in the country and applies for the necessary waivers in the procurement process in order to speed up the processes.

Availability of Government land in the country

The committee recommends that Government should interest itself in its existing vacant land in the country and prioritise using it for resettlement of IDPs.

Improving the infrastructure and livelihood in Kiryadongo

The committee was informed that lack of necessary infrastructure like secondary schools, adequate water sources and health facilities are some of the factors that inhibit the welfare of the internally displaced persons relocated to Panyandoli in Kiryandongo District. The committee was further informed that Government did not honour its pledge of distributing heifers to the affected victims taken to Kiryandongo.

The committee recommends that Government steps up interventions in developing the necessary infrastructure in Kiryandongo. The committee also recommends that Government should ensure that programmes intended by the Office of the Prime Minister for the resettled victims in Kiryandongo be mainstreamed in the local government structures of Kiryandongo District.

Expediting interventions to resettle the landslide victims and persons living in risky areas

The committee finds it not prudent to spend Government funds on infrastructure that is sitting on a land characterised by ownership challenges.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee conducted a comprehensive investigation on the status of the resettlement of landslide victims and people at risk in the Elgon Sub Region and reviewed several documents submitted, including the Odwe Report. It is the committee’s finding that there is no quiet possession and enjoyment on all the three plots of land (Plots 198, 157 and 94) meant for resettlement that were purchased by Office of the Prime Minister due to massive deliberate errors in the procurement process on the part of the Office of the Prime Minister. This was evidenced in their deliberate refusal to consider objection to notice of the best evaluated bidders. (See Appendix 21).

The committee is also of a strong considered opinion that the conduct of hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu Mudimi put the image of the institution of Parliament in disrepute. For lack of a better word, the committee is persuaded by the submission of the third party claimants that 2,606 acres equivalent to Shs 6.974 billion – (at 91 per cent ) of the said envisaged land transaction, which was meant for resettlement in the botched procurement – is hidden in the wallet of hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu Mudimi. Parliament should therefore, begin with its own in an effort to fight corruption.

The committee is cognizant of the fact that hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu Mudimi is a Member of Parliament and a Member of the Budget Committee, which influences the budget and was also representing the people of Bulambuli at the time of the transaction. Therefore, it is right to say that he was a jack of all trades. (Laughter) We strongly recommend that the veil be lifted and have hon. Ignatius Wamakuyu Mudimi prosecuted in order to recover Shs 6.974 billion.

The committee also calls on all stakeholders to continue with the need for urgent relocation but also consider the plight of those whose land is under threat of fraudulent acquisition by Office of the Prime Minister. The committee strongly submits that Parliament should stand up and be counted as far as holding public officials accountable for their decision while holding public funds. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I beg to lay at the Table the copy of the report and minutes of the committee’s meetings. 

We would like to extend our special appreciation to you and your office for having supported out committee to go to the ground and do this verification. Without your support, we would not have been able to report on the current status in relation to the recent landslide that occurred in Bududa on 11 October. Thank you very much. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. This is a lengthy report and it has got a lot of appendices. Therefore, a date for debate will be appointed. Members can go and read; we shall decide when to debate it so that everybody who is affected has an opportunity to say something. The copies are on the iPads. I will appoint the date tomorrow.

Honourable members, thank you for the work done. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 December at 2.00 p.m.) 

