
Tuesday, 2 December, 2014

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to begin by informing members of Parliament that the Backbench Commissioners would like to meet the members of Parliament tomorrow in the Conference Hall at 10.00a.m. So, please get time to meet the people you elected - pardon, okay but you endorsed them here. I brought their names here and they were endorsed. So, please meet them tomorrow at 10.00a.m.

Secondly, I want to inform the House that I have granted hon. Kizza Rwebembera indefinite sick leave because he is ill. I will be able to report to you at the commencement of the Third Sitting in February 2015 about his condition. Please pray for him and see whether you can visit him too.

Third, I bring you greetings from the Karamoja Region. I was there yesterday to celebrate the Cultural Day of the Tepeth and to continue the campaign against female genital mutilation. Some progress is being made but I want to appeal to all of us to join that campaign so that we can eradicate female genital mutilation from this country.

I also want to appeal to the government to support the Karamoja Region in terms of roads. The situation is so bad. I nearly did not come back because once it rains, you cannot move. So, I appeal to Government to work on those roads and the roads in the Sebei Sub Region where the situation is exceedingly bad.  If the requests come here, let us support them overwhelmingly and very quickly. You know, some of you have got a bit of tarmac but for them there is nothing at all. 

Thank you very much, honourable members.  


LAYING OF PAPERS


    A. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE SPEAKER: Can someone volunteer to do the commission work? 

2.58
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the following institutions:

    i. The Uganda High Commission, ANKARA
    ii. Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    iii. Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology.

    B. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

    i. Bank of Uganda - Credit Reference Bureau Disposition (CRB) BMZ – Id.2007 65305
    ii. Uganda Bureau of Statistics - Support to the Uganda Panel Survey Project, Grant no. TF094919
    iii. Makerere University - Economic Policy Research Centre
    iv. National Social Security Fund (NSSF)
    v. Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT II) – Private Sector Foundation Component – IDA Credit Agreement CR.4554-UG
    vi. Kampala Capital City Authority - Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP) – IDA CR 4367 – UG and the financial statement for the 10 months period ended 30 April, 2014
    vii. Strengthening Evidence Based Decision Making II Project - UBOS Component
    viii. European Investment Bank/Republic of Uganda Apex Private Enterprise Loan Scheme
    ix. New Vision Printing and Publishing Company Limited
    x. Bank of Uganda
    xi. Capital Markets Authority (CMA).

    C. REPORTS

    i. The Environment Audit Report Regulation and Monitoring of Drilling Waste Management in the Albertine Region 2014 by the National Environment Management Authority.
    ii. Report of the Auditor-General on Gender Mainstreaming in the Water Sub-Sector by the Ministry of Water and Environment.

    D. VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS

    i. The Implementation of the Market Infrastructure Component to the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme
    ii. The Revenue Forecasting by the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    iii. The Production of Price Indices by Uganda Bureau of Statistics
    iv. The Implementation of the Fuel Marking Programme by the Ministry of Energy And Mineral Development
    v. The Implementation of the Agricultural Credit Facility by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    vi. The Implementation of Vegetable Oil Development Project by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    vii. The Management of Water for Production Facilities by Ministry of Water and Environment
    viii. The Management of Loan Portfolio by the Microfinance Support Centre
    ix. The Management and Handling of Child Adoption Process in Uganda. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. All those reports are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, before we go to the next item, join me in welcoming, in the Public Gallery, councillors from Budongo Sub-county in Masindi, led by their LC III chairman. They are represented by hon. Kabakumba Masiko and hon. Jalia Bintu. You are welcome.

MR MOSES KASIBANTE: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR KASIBANTE: I am going to state it, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Next item.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012 WHICH WAS RETURNED TO PARLIAMENT BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER RULE 132 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, we are aware that this Bill was returned and recommitted to Parliament by His Excellency, the President, and we have always been ready to present it. 

I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to inform the House that all Cabinet members are attending a retreat in Munyonyo with all the technical people. We are, therefore, constrained to proceed with this motion. I beg your indulgence that we postpone it to tomorrow when we will be able to adequately handle it. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The re-committal of the Bill is not a simple matter to be put on the Order Paper only to reach here and someone just backs off. There are sufficient numbers of Cabinet ministers here; unless the minister has some other reasons. There are many times when this Parliament has been lacking ministers in attendance; but they are all here now. We would have wanted to know within the 21 days, what the contentious issues are? Let us go to the substance of the matter instead of playing the ping-pong. This is a serious House.If you want the matter recommitted, there must be serious reasons. And, for that matter, you cannot take this House for granted. 

We are not here to have our own Bill that we already passed overturned or to say there are reservations on certain provisions, without coming clear on the matter, unless the minister is trying to ambush the House or something else. 

If the minister has clean hands, Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence that the matter be tabled here; we listen to him on why the House is being challenged on the passing of this Bill. We need to know the reasons. Short of that, we shall always keep on ping-pong. Some members would have been doing other matters.But since this is a serious matter regarding the Public Private Partnership we have to be here prepared to listen to the concerns of the responsible minister and Government. 

Therefore, it is not proper, Madam Speaker, that we allow the minister to have his way and hold this until tomorrow, unless he tells this House what exact mischief is behind the re-committal. Short of that, we shall not allow it. Let him withdraw the re-committal and we take the Bill as it was. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I recall when we were debating and passing this Bill, it was hon. Kajara who was at the centre of the debate representing the Executive. I know that there is a clear system, which hon. Kajara is actually privy to, to the extent that your office should have been informed before the Order Paper was sent to us. 

Third, Madam Speaker, I do not imagine a situation that the meeting just came out of the blue; he knew very well that today there was such kind of arrangement and, therefore, if they were not able to proceed­ -(Interruptions)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to hon. Nzoghu is that the Executive agreed that some ministers will go to Munyonyo and others will be in office while the rest would come to attend to the business of Parliament. 

In fact, when I spoke to one of the ministers he told me it is a new rule under the new Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, that at any one moment, each ministry must be represented in Parliament. Even when Prof. Apollo Nsibambi was the Prime Minister, that is what used to happen. That is the reason hon. Kajara is here. That is the information I wanted to give you, hon. Nzoghu.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you for the information, hon. Ssemujju. As we all know, our Rules of Procedure provide for the chairperson and the vice chairperson of the committee, together with the members. I can see the vice chairperson here - hon. Anthony Okello is in the House. 

Our Rules of Procedure also provide for quorum and I can see we have the quorum. So, in the circumstances, Madam Speaker, I do not see any reasons why we should not proceed with this matter. The minister should withdraw his request for us to proceed with business. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I tend to believe that the minister’s request is premature. Consideration of this matter is guided by our Rule 132, particularly sub-rules (2) and (3) thereon.
 
But, Madam Speaker, since you referred the Bill to the relevant committee and the chairperson or his representative has come to report to the House, the minister should have waited for the chairperson to first make that report to the House. Thereafter, the minister responsible for the Bill would stand up to request for an adjournment or otherwise. 

So, as much as it stands now, I believe his request is premature. It is not based on any legal provisions. It is brought in bad faith and I believe you should use your inherent powers to allow the chairperson of the committee to report to the House on what the committee has come up with so that we can proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at the Order Papers for the last two weeks, you realise that this matter has been appearing. Indeed, after we finished the Public Finance Bill, we had planned to complete it but the minister said they were not ready. 

They then requested us to move it to this week and here we are. So I think let us listen to the report of the chairperson and then we shall decide after. Maybe he is not bringing anything different from what we did or doing what he wants. 

But before the vice chairperson speaks, I want to also inform you about the sickness of hon. Betty Nambooze. She has been admitted at Lisa Medical Centre in Mengo since Saturday. 

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING 
AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON RECONSIDERATION OF 
THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

3.17
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present the Report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Reconsideration of the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012. This report was uploaded on the iPads last week.


As you may recall, this Bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Tuesday, 30 September 2014 after H.E the President returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in the letter dated 29 September 2014, addressed to the Speaker in accordance with Article 91 sub-section (3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which reads thus: “The President shall, within 30 days after a Bill is presented to him or her, return the Bill to Parliament with a request that the Bill or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, the methodology is at page 11 and I think honourable members can read through. I will not go through it.

Clause 26(1)(7)(8) - Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012

Madam Speaker, Clause 26(1) (7) and (8) of the Public Private Partnership Bill 2012, of the returned Bill, provides for the public/private partnership agreement. Clause 26(1) provides that an accounting officer shall not sign a public/private partnership agreement without the approval of Parliament; Clause 26(7) provides that the agreement shall only be amended or varied with the approval of Parliament; and Clause 26(8) provides that Parliament shall not approve an amendment or variation to a project agreement under sub-section (7) unless the agreement is so amended or varied on the basis that:

    a) the project continues to provide value for money;
    b) the project continues to be affordable where such amendment, variation or waiver has a financial implication;
    c) the continued transfer of appropriate risks to the private party;
    d) the continued provision of efficient and effective services to the public; and
    e) continued protection and preservation of environment.

Concerns of the President

Clause 3(1) - Approval of agreement as provided for in the Constitution

Madam Speaker, Section (5) of Article 119 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that, “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the government is a party or in respect of which the government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such condition as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

The President, in his letter, noted that Clause 26 (1)(7) and (8) of the returned Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012, will usurp the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General to approve agreements in which Government is a party. 
His second concern was that the parallel approval mechanism for PPP agreement will add another bureaucracy, which will cause inordinate delay in implementation of infrastructural projects.

Disincentive to investment 

On this one, the President further noted that the provision in this clause and the other sub-clauses as passed by Parliament, hinder investors who may consider not investing in infrastructure projects in Uganda as their business decisions will be subject to parliamentary approval.

Committee’s observations

The original Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012, Clause 18 (1) and (2), provided for the public/private partnership agreement as follows: “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet by Statutory Instrument, prescribe the values of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer; where an agreement is of a value for which the approval of Cabinet is required before it is signed by the accounting officer, the accounting officer shall not sign the agreement without the approval of Cabinet.”

On this, the committee observed that this provision will safeguard public/private partnerships since the principle of collective responsibility shall prevail.

It is also provided thus: “Public/private partnership agreement as defined by the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012, is a written contract recording the term of the public/private partnership concluded between a contracting authority and a private party.” It is therefore an agreement or concession between Government and the private entities and hence an executive function.

It further states that Parliament is empowered, under Clause 13 (2), to appropriate money for Public Private Partnerships. The clause provides as follows: “13 (2) An accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in any way binds the contracting authority to a future financial commitment or which results in a contingent liability except where the future financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament by budget of the contracting authority.”

The committee observes that the clause empowers Parliament to approve future financial commitments and contingent liability and that arises as a result of the Public Private Partnership agreement. 

The recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that for avoidance of doubt and to ensure transparency – 

    1) the relevant minister lays before Parliament any Public Private Partnership agreements or an agreement within one month after it has been signed;
    2) all Public Private Partnership agreements, amendments or variations therein should as well be laid before Parliament within one month after the amendment of variation;
    3) ministries, government departments and agencies should indicate in their budget frame work papers to Parliament, the respective Public Private Partnership projects to formalise the appropriation of funds for those projects;
    4) government should specify which public private partnerships are co-founded by Government and the public private partnerships that are wholly funded by investors; and
    5) clause 26 of the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 as passed by Parliament should be reconsidered and passed as proposed by H.E the President.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Clause 26 of the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 should be reconsidered and passed as proposed by H.E, the President and at an appropriate time I will be moving the proposed amendment to Clause 26.

Madam Speaker, this report is also accompanied by a minority report by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Issiah Ssasaga, Jack Sabiiti and hon. Odoo Tayebwa. I beg that at an appropriate time, you give them the opportunity to present it. 

Madam Speaker, before I sit down allow me to present the minutes of the committee meeting that was held on the 19 November 2014 in South Committee Room to consider this position.

Allow me to also lay on Table the letter written by His Excellency, the President, addressed to hon. Rebecca Kadaga Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, dated 29 September 2014 with a reference: “Proposal to recommit to Parliament, the Excise Duty Bill, 2013, The Finance Bill, 2014 and the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012.”

I also want to lay on Table the original copy of the committee report that I am presenting at the moment.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Are the honourable members here? Can someone present the minority report? 

3.29
MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to read the said minority report on behalf of hon. Ekanya, hon. Odoo Tayebwa and hon. Ssasaga. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, do you have a copy of the minority report with you? It is supposed to be attached to your report.

MR OKELLO: Madam Speaker, a copy of that minority report is hereby attached.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MUWANGA: Introduction

On 22 September 2014, the President returned a Bill to the House in accordance to Article 91 subsection (3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. On the 30 September the Speaker referred the matter to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

A Public Private Partnership (PPP) may broadly be defined as a long term contract between a private party and a government agency for providing a public asset or service in which the private party bears significant risk and management responsibility.

Do PPPs pose any challenge or limitations? Public Private Partnerships pose limitations which include, private financing would be viewed as a new form of backdoor borrowing, which is a financial commitment that does not directly involve the state but grows on the same resource base or otherwise pulls potential implication to the state finances and other interests.

It is important to recognise that private financing does not constitute a new source of funding ultimately. The cost will be borne by the public. The other challenge is that of the increased financing costs, private companies typically pay higher interest rates than government entities to borrow money.
There is also the greater possibility for unseen challenges. There is a greater possibility for unseen issues to arise. Such issues could include disputes regarding certain items in the contract as well as private partners being acquired by another company or going out of business and effectively resulting in project schedule delays and additional costs to the government.

Certain Government funding priority based on operational needs are determined at the time the contract was negotiated. This can make it difficult to change funding allocation to reflect changes in government priorities. Poorly drafted agreements can be costly and difficult to correct. The legal and administrative costs associated with collection or re-negotiation can easily eat up all the benefits that were supposed to accrue from a Private Public Partnership contract.

Has Uganda had any PPPS? Uganda has had examples of PPPS undertaken which include: the Bujagali Energy Limited constructed and is to operate Bujagali Dam; the UMEME that is involved in electricity distribution but regulated by the Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority; the Rift Valley Railways that involved in a concession on operation of railway trucks and ferries in Lake Victoria; the Serena Hotel that is operated under a consortium composed of tourism promotion services, a decision of Aga Khan Fund for economic development, National Social Security Fund and PROTEA, I think it is a French property investment company; the Oil Palm Uganda Limited, a consortium comprised of M/s Wizman; managers of the plantation and Bidco, responsible for producing and processing oil palm products; street parking in Kampala, which is operated by a private firm, Multiplex, on behalf of Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA); and the collapsed Pioneer Easy Bus Company, which provided transport in Kampala and was regulated by the KCCA.

The others are:  the Uganda Tax Operators and Drivers Association, which managed the old and new park in Kampala; the local governments all over Uganda, also have contracts with several contractors of public markets, abattoirs and other similar entities operated by private investors. Jinja and Nakasongola fuel storage tanks were also refurbished, stocked and operated by private investors plus the Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS), a private company that provides consumer services at Entebbe International Airport but regulated by Civil Aviation Authority.

Honourable members, what has been of such PPS in service provided to citizens we represent here in this august House? 

On the basis of the above information, as opposition, we dissent from the position of the majority of the members of the committee. 2.1, dissent from the committee position; under rule No.94 (1), it states thus: “A member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state in writing the reason for his or her dissent, and statement for the reason shall be appendage to the report of the committee.”

Under Rule 12, it is provided that the member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time - I want to cut that short and go to the point of defense. 

Public private partnership is a back door borrowing. The PPP projects indebt the present and the future generations - consider an example of a road constructed and citizens have to pay a toll fee to use it for 20 years but in agreeing on PPP, the cost of the project was inflated. Then the flow of traffic reduces, yet the investor must recover - what happens if the investor fails to recover?

We have fresh lessons from Bujagali Power Project, whose PPP cost has increased gradually resulting into high cost of electricity. Imagine what we are building for the future generations in terms of long term cost and effect on the quality of service delivery. In the best practice of good governance, Parliament is mandated to safeguard the interests of the present and the future generations. Hence Parliament must review terms on which backdoor borrowing is based and that does not mount to sighing the contract. Why should PPP project details not to be reviewed by Parliament yet we review all borrowing before the Attorney-General organizes the final signing agreement? What is it to be hidden in those agreements that we should not know, but therein a financial commitment to be repaid by the present and future generations?

How Government borrows or lends – 

Under Article 159(1)(2) it is stated that, “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Government may borrow from any source and that Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person, except as authorized by or under an Act of Parliament.”

It further states that an Act of Parliament made under sub-section (2) of this article shall provide: 
“
    a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament; and
    b) that any monies received in respect of that loan, shall be paid into the consolidated fund and form part of that fund or into some of the public fund which is existing, or is created for the purpose of the loan.” 

Further, it is stated that,  (4): “The President shall, at such times as Parliament may determine, cause to be presented to Parliament such information concerning any loan as is necessary to show -
a) the extent of total indebtedness by way of principal and accumulated interest;
b) the provision made for servicing or repayment of the loan;
 c) the utilization and performance of the loan.”
In (5), the Article states that “Parliament may, by resolution, authorize Government to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or grant out of any public fund, or public account.”

And in (6) it says that an agreement entered into Clause (5) of this Article shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless it has been approved by Parliament by a resolution.

But in (7), it is said that for purposes of this Article, the expression “loan” includes any money lent or given to or by Government on condition of return or repayment and any other form of borrowing or lending in respect of which –

    a) monies from consolidated fund or any other public fund may be used for payment or repayment; and
    b) monies from any fund by whatever name called, established for purposes of payment or repayment whether in all or in part or whether direct or indirectly, may be used for payment or repayment.

Lastly, in (8) is said that Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans on provisions of points (2) and (3) of the Article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe. 

Three, I want to say that rescinding of Clause 2, 26 and 27 as passed by the House contravenes Clause 62 which states thus: “An accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that will in any way bind the contracting authority to future financial commitment, or which results into a contingent liability except where the future finance commitment or contingency liability is authorised by Parliament, in the budget of the contracting authority.”

We should be the last to relegate Parliament from the duties it takes as safeguard to avoid indebting the present and future citizens.

Parliament cannot rescind on the position that empowers it to appropriate, which appropriation include PPP projects. Currently appropriation is being done annually, yet many PPP projects cover over five years and beyond. 
Parliament must at all times understand the project that has financial commitments that indebt taxpayers, hence the role of Parliament in reviewing the PPP project, before the Attorney-General or the accounting officer to sign any agreement.

Recommendations

    1) As an institution charged with main function as provided by Article 79 of the Constitution, we should make laws for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 

    2) We should uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and all provision therein especially in relation to borrowing or loan, an open door or backdoor borrowing in retention of the PPP project.

    3) That Clause 26 of the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 as passed by Parliament be maintained and sent back to the President for assent without any changes. Rescinding clause 26 violent the spirit captured in Clause 62 and violent Article 152(5) (6) and (7).

    4) That the President should assent to the Public Private Partnership Bill 2012, including Clause 26 as passed by Parliament in observance and respect of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which we swore to uphold and defend.

In conclusion, it is our humble appeal that the House adopts the recommendations laid down in this minority report for the good governance of this country. For God and my Country.

The minority report was prepared by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, hon. Issiah SSasaga and hon Jack Sabiiti. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Before we proceed, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kavule Parents School of the Deaf from Iki-Iki. I think they must be these ones. Hon. Jeremiah Twa-twa and hon. Sarah Kataike are their representatives. You are welcome! (Applause)
 
Honourable members, you have heard both the main report and the minority reports. Debate takes off.

3.45
The MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, much as we had thought to stay debate of this report, I want to support the committee’s report -(Laughter)- on the motion. This is premised on many issues. 

First of all, the key concern of the President in this clause was that PPP agreements can only be signed and amended with the approval of Parliament. I am happy and we are glad to note that the committee has recognised this concern and embedded it in its report. 

To reiterate what the committee has stated, Article 119(5) gives authority to approve all Government agreements to the Attorney-General.

It is the Executive function of Government to therefore approve all agreements including Public Private Partnerships. 

Madam Speaker, by Parliament approving PPP agreements would be contrary to this provision of the Constitution and I am aware that the people who made the Constitution must have put so much emphasis on who should approve agreements. So, honourable members, considering this issue should read the view of the constitutional makers. They intended that the Attorney-General, on behalf of Government and all of us do, approves these agreements. If Parliament got involved in this, and we said it here, there will be conflict of law of the legislation and oversight role of Parliament with the Executive function of Government, if that clause is upheld as was amended by this House.

Madam Speaker, it also creates parallel mechanisms with attendant confusion which approval takes precedence. Is it the Attorney-General? Is it Parliament? The one conferred by the Constitution being the Attorney-General with the approval by Parliament as enacted in the Public Private Partnership Act.

Our view, Madam Speaker, is that we maintain what is being provided for in the Constitution. It was well intended and also embedded in the Bill that we did present to this Parliament. If this clause was upheld as was amended by this Parliament, our view would implicitly amend the Constitution, which is contrary to Article 259(2) of the Constitution that provides for ways of amending the Constitution.

What is the impact, Madam Speaker, on infrastructure development if we maintain the status quo? First, we have said that Parliament’s approval would add another approval layer in the PPP process. This will have the effect of delaying the PPP process and increasing the political risk that PPP project sponsors and financiers will face in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, investors will rate investing in Uganda at a higher cost, which will make Uganda less attractive. And remember why we introduced Public Private Partnerships was to enable investors be attracted so that they could close the gaps that exist in our funding by bringing more funds into this country. 

This clause, Madam Speaker, is not investor friendly as it places public private partnerships into the realm of politics –(Interruptions)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the minister to clarify to me the intention of Government to award contracts for PPP. I am asking this because my sense was that Government does PPP with investors with the aim that Ugandans get the services that Government cannot do. And Members of Parliament are representatives of the people. But now if Government does work in the interests of the people to receive the services given and representatives of the people do not have a hand in taking that decision, what are you really trying to tell us? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. I will further wish to seek clarification from you, having indicated that in the previous debate we concluded, when Parliament enacted this Bill, which of course has been rejected by His Excellency, the President, it neared to swapping the powers of the Attorney-General. I engage you to look at Article 119(5) which says thus: “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document whatever name called to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General except in such cases and is subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law have prescribed.”

The involvement of the request that we had put by way of our reasons for having passed this Bill, was to my understanding, not to usurp the powers of the Attorney-General. But to say that as representatives of the people, we need to be part and parcel of that team that looked and studied this agreement in which case we will still rely on your technical expertise as the legal advisor to Government.

What will be fundamentally wrong if an agreement in PPP arrangement is brought to Parliament for it to give its views, which will also be considered by the Attorney-General? What will be fundamentally wrong with that? 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, can I also ask the Chair of the Committee - can you explain to us why you want the PPP signed and then laid here. Is it for us to admire, or just to file it? (Applause) What do you want us to do with it? It has already been signed - let him answer first.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, in the wisdom of the committee, when we were reconsidering this provision that was sent back by His Excellency, the President, the committee thought it would be prudent for the agreement to be laid  here for knowledge of Parliament - (Laughter)- but Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. He is still holding the Floor.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the committee considered the principle of separation of powers and in our consideration, we wanted a distinctive role between the Executive and Parliament and in our wisdom -(Laughter)– we considered the processes -

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is indeed disheartening that today we are sitting in this House with a senior member of this House trying to revoke the powers of Parliament to which he belongs, knowing the role of Parliament as provided for in the Constitution and saying that Parliament should just have knowledge of each instead of actual participation.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable Chair in order to tell it to our faces that we are no longer a serious Parliament but a rubberstamp? Is the honourable Chair in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No. He is not in order. (Applause) Honourable Chair, I want to know, once you lay that agreements here, where do they go and for what? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: To the library.

THE SPEAKER:  For what? You lay it and then what?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: We send it to the committee to make comments.

THE SPEAKER: What comments? Okay,I think let us hear from the members. Otherwise, I am worried about what to do, but let us hear from the members.

3.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened carefully to the minister when he said that it is the role of the Attorney-General to approve all Government contracts. It sounded as if we are saying that we are going to undermine this role, which is not correct. But he also made reference to Article 119. 

Madam Speaker, I have been looking at the functions of the Attorney-General, under Article 119 and especially with respect to agreements/contracts and it reads thus: “(4) To give legal advice and legal services to the Government” and then (b) which is important, “To draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties and documents by whatever name.”

To draw and peruse, honourable minister, does that amount to approval? Can we be helped, under Article 119, where you are drawing or concluding from that the Attorney-General is to approve all the contracts of Government? I need that clarification. Where are you drawing that kind of conclusion?

4.00
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I am a bit disappointed by the response of the honourable minister -(Applause)- because the minority report raised serious issues and some of which touched the Constitution, but he did not mention anything about them. The same Constitution he is quoting gives Parliament the powers to approve all loans and all monies that come from the Consolidated Fund. 

I do not know whether it is in the thinking of the minister that under the PPP, there will be no money that will come from the Consolidated Fund. And if it is a kind of borrowing, can we be clarified about the point when Parliament should come in because Parliament must approve all those loans?

Madam Speaker, the way this clause is being drafted, is kind of committing Ugandans without their knowledge -(Applause)- even the representatives of the people like I, will not have any knowledge and approval of this PPP. 

Can I be helped to understand this because in the previous PPPs we have had - Madam Speaker, you remember the UMEME saga where a report was brought here, we gave the recommendations but up to now Ugandans are paying yet this is a PPP? Even the recommendations by Parliament were completely ignored up to date when we all know, including the minister, that all is not well. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore honourable members sitting in this Parliament to always pass laws that are constitutional. This will leave the mandate of Parliament -(Applause)- with Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, I think you listen to members first. (Laughter) Listen to the members first.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I rose on a point of procedure. The procedural point I was raising is that I had not finished my submission on this -(Laughter)- so you could hear the hon. Kabakumba asking that I had not responded to this or that. That is why I was saying if I was allowed to complete my submission then you can have a good ground to make all your arguments. That is really what I wanted. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether he is concluding the debate because members have not contributed. Is he going to come back after their arguments? Why doesn’t he wait until we have had a debate then he come in last, after hearing the views of the members because now he has only heard from the report. Please minister, we will give you an opportunity. After we concluded the debate, you will come back with your position. You are not comfortable? Ok, let him tell us his side then we can debate. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that the members will be able to debate this motion. My prayer was, I first explain so that issues that will have been explained in my submission need not be repeated by members. That is why I rose to explain as to why the President recommitted this motion to this House and so that from there, the members would say no, we agree or we do not agree with this recommital. That is the spirit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, explain your rationale for re-submitting it.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did say that this clause is not investor friendly as it presses public private partnerships and subjects decisions to political considerations instead of investor -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural point of concern that I am raising is that the minister is re-echoing what the chairperson has been presenting. In the first instance, we did not have this report on our iPads but listening properly to what the chairperson presented, it is what the minister is presenting here. Is he really procedurally right to continue repeating what the chairperson - Is he not wasting our time instead of reacting to the report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there anything different from what the chairman said? Then go to what he did not say because the others are already on the Hansard.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, it is true the committee considered this report and they have come out with positions. As Government, we wanted to re-emphasise and explain further so that when the members are debating, this information is available to them. 

I have said, Madam Speaker, that Public Private Partnerships attract companies and these companies are listed on the stock exchange -(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have been listening attentively, patiently and painfully. From the onset, the honourable minister indicated to this House that he was not ready. In your wisdom and ruling, you rightly agreed that the chairperson should proceed. The chairperson proceeded and a report was presented. 

In a turn of events he appears to present his unpreparedness again to the House because he is not prepared. (Laughter) Is he in order, when he had actually said he was not prepared, to come and give the House the highest level of unpreparedness?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I cannot read his notes; he is too far from me so I do not know his level of preparedness. But is there something different from what the chairman said? Please go to that.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, you decided that we proceed with this motion so I am appearing very well prepared - (Laughter) - and I am moving on very well if I had the peace of members. Please listen. I would like to inform members that public private partnerships attract companies that are listed on the stock exchange across the world and if we subject these agreements to parliamentary process, it means -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am trying to follow the honourable minister and it is becoming very clear that he has a paper to present. He did not circulate it and the rules of this House require that if he has such a paper, he circulates it so that I am able to discuss what he is presenting. It is not on the iPads and it is not circulated in hard copy. Is it okay for him to proceed to entertain us and read a document of over 15 pages? I can see heaps of paper but he has not formerly circulated that document. Is it okay?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should listen to the members and then respond because I also do not have what you are reading.

4.11
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have attentively listened to the chairperson and the minister and this is what I have understood. I am seeing a scenario where a minister will go to America and get a company. They will sit down and sort out things, share and then come here and confuse the President and a partnership is going to be signed. He is going to create a kickback because these things have happened in this country and we know it. 

The President is going to sign it because the minister is going to tell him all sorts of things; sweet nothings and eventually Ugandan money is going to follow the other thing of Kananathan. 

Hon. Aston Kajara is a Ugandan, he is not even coming from Congo at all. I do not understand why he does not want Parliament to know how this money, which is going to come from the Consolidated Fund, is going to be spent. Why are you violating the Constitution? Why don’t you tell the President the truth? Why do you tell him lies? When will you have time to tell the President that there is a problem here? Do you fear being sacked? Tell him the truth. (Laughter)

4.13
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my understanding of the PPP agreement, I look at it as a loan and there has been a common practice/procedure in this country we normally go through to acquire these loans and normally, the Committee of National Economy has been doing a very good job by studying the whole process of how we acquire these loans, including interests and the rest. They have been reporting here and we comfortably pass or reject it. 

I thought that was the normal process of doing things. The understanding I have in regard to this is more or less the same because we will be agreeing with investors to come and do this, pay within this period and that is a loan. So there is no way you can dodge Parliament.

The other thing I need the minister to clarify on is this impression created that this is not investor friendly. Where is the insinuation mentioned by the Executive coming from that Parliament does not attract investors and that they are not investor friendly? I believe every member of Parliament here including myself – Actually, Madam Speaker, I am looking for and promoting investors in Bunyoro. 

So, I have every reason to believe that every Member of Parliament here is interested in having this country grow through attraction of investors. What is wrong with this House getting knowledge that we have this arrangement with this investor, we would like your blessing and we move in tandem as a group and as a country? I do not see any problem with that. 

In addition, I do not think that my own President, who I know was briefed on this matter very well, could have another thought if this matter was referred back to him. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.14
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a tendency in the Executive to undermine Parliament. When you look at the Public Finance Bill, which we passed, the spirit of the Bill was actually to decapitate Parliament in terms of its functions as far as budgeting and management of finances are concerned.

I am also sure that usually it is the Ministry of Finance that advises the President on such provisions. So, we want you to go and tell the President that he is wrong, that the advice you gave him is wrong. There is a reason why there is Parliament. 

Hon. Kajara is a Member of Parliament for Mwenge County South in Kyenjojo and for you to insinuate that if this Parliament is involved, we shall chase away investors - I think we take very strong exception. Parliament must be involved because the PPP involves financing and these are monies so we must approve these PPP arrangements. 

So I do not think any Member of Parliament will agree with you that we should legislate ourselves out of that function. We really want to agree with the minority report and ask hon. Kajara to advise the President appropriately, do not mislead him. Thank you very much.

4.17
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start by completely agreeing with hon. Baryomunsi. I get so surprised that a minister in our Government today can say that the provisions of the clause are not investor friendly. This means that as long as the investor is happy and the Ugandan is not happy, for him it is okay. It is a shame to such a person in that position.  

Madam Speaker, this is a type of advice our President is being fed on and these are the people who are a liability to this country. I hope that after this, he will improve his perception of what Uganda is vis-à-vis investment because investments that touch on our resources must be looked at for the benefit of Ugandans. Therefore, when you come here to speak before people who represent each and every part of Uganda, you must be cautious of what you say and be sure that it is in the best interest of Ugandans and not in the best interest of individuals.

Finally, Uganda is not short of very many interesting stories. We have the Katosi road. The minister sanctioned the signing of the agreement. The other one is the Kananathan issue that hon. Bitekyerezo is referring to. As Parliament, I would beg that we do not set the foundation for people to play around with Uganda’s resources. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity - (Interruption)

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, hon. Opolot, for giving me this time to give information. The minister is worried that Parliament will delay or chase away investors but I would like to ask the minister something by way of giving information.

What was Parliament’s role in the delayed Karuma project, in the now delayed Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo road? And you know it is behind schedule. What was Parliament’s role in the Katosi saga? What was Parliament’s role in the attempted sale of Entebbe Airport? That is the information I wanted to give you. (Laughter)   

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, hon. Kabakumba. Madam Speaker, I have nothing more to add but maybe to allow others to contribute as the minister prepares to answer the questions that have been raised in the information given. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Kwagala comes, for the record I want to say the following: this House has enacted investor friendly legislation many times. This morning I heard that the government was implementing the Free Zones Act passed by this House and it is investor friendly. Other investor friendly legislation includes the Companies Act, the Mortgage Act, the Partnership Act and the Statutory Securities Act. Everything done by this House is investor friendly. So I do not want that word anymore.

4.21
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four observations to make:

Madam Speaker, regarding PPPs, when we handle big business or contracts, it means that is a loan for years. So if we say that a few people will go and tell the investors that we are the only friendly people, let us complete this arrangement or deal and we will just inform Parliament after a month, that is very unfair for the Parliament. This is because Parliament has been handling the national budget efficiently and we have never had a problem with it. 

So, honourable minister, it is also unfriendly of you to come and say that if members of Parliament look at the PPP project, that is unfriendly. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the minister has been informed about Article 119 and where the Attorney-General undertakes advisory roles and manages whatever takes place. I do not know why he wants to isolate Parliament.

Lastly, when we look at the previous incidents where ministers have been involved in scandals like the UMEME incident and also why the railway line is delaying - One person got money and another one got money from another company. Now they are embroiled in controversy. So it will be on that basis –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I know very well that whatever we talk here is privileged and you cannot challenge it. However, we should also look to be honourable enough. Really, is hon. Kabaale right to say that in the railway saga some ministers got money from one company while others got money from another company? Is she in order to question the integrity of the ministers who are handling this issue?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she said ‘people’. I do not know whether they are ministers or technical officers.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. In fact, I do not know why the honourable minister Byabagambi is afraid because at least on his side, he was moving on a clear trail. I do not know why you are worried of the people who are mishandling the Standard Gauge Railway process. If you get up to put me on order, it might imply that you are hiding behind that.

Madam Speaker, my last submission is that since PPPs involve business with Government, we would seek – we are not begging because that is already a role of Parliament - that the minister concedes on this and we move on a transparent path. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. There are two things that this honourable House must understand. From the onset when we were discussing this Bill, two ministries were fighting over this Bill: Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Trade. So in the event that we do not know what happens in Cabinet, it could have also been that this law was taken to Cabinet and whoever could have more political muscle influenced the person of the President to send back this Bill. 

Now in the wisdom of this House, I want us to send a very strong statement to the President that this honourable House is made up of honourable members with a lot of wisdom and knowledge, that we did this in a broad daylight with a lot of knowledge and that it was done as a result of serious consultation. 

I am not only disappointed with the minister, but also disappointed with our own committee, which involved itself in this Bill from the very beginning but let us down in their wisdom or whatever the case may be. I want to say, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Kyamadidi. I am a member of the Finance Committee. We benchmarked on this matter and that is why the committee initially brought, in this Bill, the proposals that this Parliament passed. They were good recommendations and I do not know what happened to my chairman and the other members. That is why, hon. Kyamadidi, there is a minority report.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Honourable members, the sovereignty of this House is put to question. The role of legislation is the role of this House and no other person, except where this House has delegated. So the responsibility to do the law is ours and we did our part. If the President feels, in his wisdom, that he can introduce other investor-friendly laws, he can do that through other laws through his ministers. 

Madam Speaker, I am very convinced that this same House should not now legislate itself out of this clause where the Parliament will play an oversight role, which clause Parliament legislated in broad daylight in its wisdom.

4.28
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of the members that are disappointed with the minister’s statement claiming that if the PPP agreements are brought to this House, we shall not be investor-friendly. 

I want to remind my honourable minister that you belong to this House and before you were appointed a minister, you were also a Member of Parliament and your voters are watching you. Unfortunately it seems my minister does not care.

Madam Speaker, investors come to invest in Uganda and if the investments are good for Ugandans, I do not see any reason as to why this House would not approve any agreement that is going to benefit Ugandans. What we want is the good investors to come and if my children and I are paying back that loan, I should pay the loan basing on the good investment that has been carried out in this country.

Madam Speaker, we have seen attorney-generals defending people against Parliament. We have seen attorney -generals advising Government and the President wrongly and this Government has ended up paying fines because of this wrong advice. My brother the Deputy Attorney-General is always here acting because some of them have either been asked to step aside for giving wrong –(Member timed out.)

3.30
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want the minister to come here and answer this question. Is Uganda for Ugandans or for investors? Uganda is for Ugandans and investors are partners in development. He should differentiate between the two. Who of us here has ever taken any kickback from investors? How many times do they mention ministers taking kickbacks? 

Madam Speaker, I even have a video coverage of a minister I saw taking a kickback from an investor at Fairway Hotel. I have information that, that minister together with his/her other friends are planning to sell Lake Victoria and those are the investors they are telling us. 

Members, we are about to mortgage this country. Every day we are borrowing money. When are we paying back? Is it your grandchild who is going to pay or it is you who is going to pay what you are borrowing today?

So I would want to know why this minister, who has run away, wants to withhold from Parliament knowledge concerning all these transactions that will commit this country and my great grandchildren. Why are they hiding? If Parliament allows, we should write –(Member timed out.)

3.33
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will ask for your indulgence in case I exceed the minutes purely because I want to give Parliament the framework in which we participated in the last Parliament. 

I participated, together with the Ministry of Finance and members of Parliament, in a study about PPPs in South Africa. The delegation consisted of the Inspector General of Police, the Commissioner General of Prisons and other members of Parliament with whom we went to understudy what exactly was happening when everybody was rushing into PPPs.

What makes PPPs extremely different from other agreements is basically because of the heavy capital investment and the long life commitment. The third big component is the expertise in the field because those are the three things, which are combined in order to fleece participating countries because of the poor capacity of the people participating in the negotiations.

Why do people behave the way they do? Why did Parliament choose to behave the way they did when they chose to pass the law that way? Madam Speaker, this is happening because of the questions that hon. Kabakumba Masiko asked. We are all people’s representatives and I was actually very disappointed when the honourable minister said, “If members of Parliament participate –“although I had sympathy for some of the issues he raised, that specific statement, which he made, was very unfortunate! To disallow members of Parliament whose responsibility it is to safeguard the Constitution and also make laws for the good governance and development of this country -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

MR DOMBO: The minister raised a fundamental question and some of these issues must be addressed. Because of the heavy nature of money involved, these agreements can themselves be compromising. They can compromise anybody: members of Parliament, ministers or even very heavy individuals -(Interruption) 

In the circumstances, the minister asked a question, which must be addressed. Already Parliament does not have faith in the Executive. The way we passed this legislation was to say that if we left you alone like we have done in the past when you did not provide what we expected of you, can we have a fallback position? 

I would have expected the Minister for Finance to ask for an adjournment -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this is my view. This is a debate and I am entitled to my view. I would have expected that the minister, in his wisdom, should have asked -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Complete your statement.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the minority report raised fundamental legal issues, which the Attorney-General must respond to in order for us to make an informed decision. I would have expected the minister either to seek an adjournment or to ask the Attorney-General to come up and make a submission. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.37
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to contribute in this way. Colossal amounts of funds that will be involved under PPP is public money. Although it is to benefit Ugandans, it is still Ugandans to pay. Therefore, it must pass through Parliament and we guide accordingly and pass that loan because it is still a loan although it is under PPP. Government should be convinced that Parliament should do its role. 

During privatisation when we left things under the Privatisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance, they sold valuable things calling them invaluable, to the extent that even today, you will find the Privatisation Unit selling off prime land, for example, the Uganda Railways land, which we are going to use.  When we begin using Uganda Railways, they want us to rent from investors instead of owning our own quarters like in Gulu and elsewhere. 

So, we cannot leave it to the Executive to deal with this money that will be involved in PPPs. Therefore, let the Minister of Finance concede and we request them not to misadvise our beloved President. Let them tell the President what is right and good for Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am wondering why we can be trusted with the budget, we are trusted handling loans but this one, no. (Laughter)

4.40
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minority report and I want to thank honourable colleagues tonight for that patriotism you have shown this country. 

My question is, if we are talking of PPPs and the report of the committee says that the decision is supposed to be made by the Executive, how many people attend meetings of the Executive? Because even among themselves, they are sorted out. There are those who wait for the outcome from the inner circle. What about us? Who will represent Ugandans in that inner meeting? 

Madam Speaker, I think it is only logical that as the people’s representatives - the people of Kitgum sent me here to be their voice and ears. We are committing those people and the future generation to a decision of the inner circle. We cannot trust a few people to make a sealed decision that is not open for scrutiny and which decision is not even checked for any mistakes. You can make mistakes. Even when you are writing, somebody needs to edit your work and say where you went wrong. But here the Executive is sealing off - 
 
My prayer to my honourable colleagues is that tonight we remain the ears and mouths of those we left behind. Above all, we are committing Ugandans. Mind you, the amount of money we are talking about is not a little money. It is a lifetime for this country. Therefore, I am sending this message through the Leader of Government Business to the President. If he was given this information through the selected few, the mouths and ears of Ugandans seated here tonight are sending a clear message - (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, close your statement.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  We are sending a clear message to the beloved President as he was described earlier, that the voice of the people of Uganda is loud and clear. We are sending back this same piece of legislation in the interest of Uganda. Let him not send it back here. Let him assent to it and we protect this country. For God and my Country. I thank you.

4.43
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to dismiss the notion that by Parliament legislating as it did in the Bill that has been returned, it invaded the realm of the Executive.

Madam Speaker, in considering PPPs, regard must be given to Article 119(5) and Article 159(2) of the Constitution. There are two parties to an agreement and for purposes of PPPs, we were legislating to the party called Government in whatever agreement it engages in with an investor. 

Madam Speaker, any party to an agreement has rights and obligations. In this particular case, a government may have the obligation of either counter funding or providing equity or otherwise but in any event, Government has a particular obligation to play in the PPP.

Madam Speaker, when you peruse Article 119(5), the Attorney-General’s role is limited to advice on an agreement. This particular advice is also subject to conditions as Parliament may, by law, prescribe. We have prescribed in the PPPA that Parliament must approve any agreement that Government engages in for purposes of a PPP so what we are doing is legal and constitutional. It is actually unconstitutional to deprive us from undertaking our role.

Madam Speaker, I also want to invite members of Parliament to look at Article 159(2). Government by engaging with another party in PPP and providing money in the future instance or in the present, is in effect following - So Parliament must have a say in whatever -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR NIWAGABA: Parliament must have a say in whatever obligation Government is giving, either as counter funding or equity or otherwise. So I beg you, honourable colleagues, do not legislate yourselves out of your powers. This is the time to shine. Those who are propagating the government position are those who want to carry out deals behind the curtains. Now is the time to seal those particular loopholes where they have been carrying out deals without Parliament knowledge. I rest my case. 
4.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find no contradiction even with the Constitution. The minister chose to read Article 119 only and yet Article 159(2) is clear. It states: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under the Act of Parliament.”

This is in tandem with Article 119. I would urge and request the minister that whenever he is giving information to the House, he should also be honest to say that you cannot read one provision without the other. It is proper that you read the entire provision so that as members of Parliament, we can be able to decipher the point you are trying to make. So there is no contradiction. There is no way you can have Government borrowing on behalf of the people without the people’s representatives knowing.

A notion has been raised in the majority report that a minister, with the approval of Cabinet, shall enter into a PPP. What is the difference between a minister and Cabinet? A minister is the same as Cabinet. Actually, you do not need to invite us members of Parliament to know whether one minister sat with another and they agreed. For us we just see what they bring on table. 

We are saying that there is no difference between a minister and Cabinet so for you to say that a minister, with approval of Cabinet - That is one and the same -(Member timed out.) 

4.49
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in opposing the chairperson together with his minister and also to support the minority report.

Madam Speaker, when Government wants a loan, it is debated in Cabinet and the relevant minister brings the request here on the floor. This request is normally designated to the Committee of National Economy, which handles most of the loans and borrowing. 

I want to believe that the PPP law is going to do the same in that when investors come to this country, they will be vetted by Cabinet, which will then make a request or make a presentation on the floor of this House. Either the Committee of National Economy or whatever committee in which it will fall will scrutinise that PPP arrangement and bring the report for debate. That is where the whole of Uganda participates in vetting whether the investor or the investment is for this country.

So, Madam Speaker, I want to implore the rest of the honourable members and our President that the Executive, together with Parliament, are working for the good of this country and not anybody outside. The PPP arrangement is a business not charity work. The investors are businessmen and we as a country are consumers. Therefore, whatever the investor wants to bring for us – Yes, we should provide an enabling environment for him to do the business but at the end of it all, he should be able to satisfy us the consumers of his services. That is what I think this law is all about. 

So, Mr Minister, can you kindly concede to this law? The way it was passed earlier is so far the best for this country. You have even benchmarked and I think for us to be in tandem with the rest of the countries that have this law in place, we should do the correct thing for this country. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

4.51
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also seek your indulgence that when my minutes get finished, you add me half a minute. 

Whenever we are going to pass a loan in this Parliament, there are some technical officers who sit behind there who clap very fast and smile. The reason is that they know that more money has come into their pockets.

Recently, Government decided to go and borrow money without the approval of Parliament. They came here, apologised and we kept quiet. I think we made a big mistake. We should have disciplined those who went to borrow money without our approval. 

Madam Speaker, PPP means Public Private Partnership. The private is the investor; the public are the people of Uganda. So where are the people of Uganda in the partnership? That is the reason why, in the wisdom of Parliament, they decided that Parliament should participate in this process. The 375 MPs said we should all participate. It was just one Minister of Finance who went and convinced the President that he should not sign and that he should be the only person to sign while other MPs are not involved. That demonstrates that in this country there are people who want to sell our country while we are watching. 

I want to thank members for having risen up like this. In fact, in the future, any re-committal should not go to a committee because they are saying that Parliament passed a wrong law. It is not the committee so the Parliament should discuss that re-committal here. 

I am so sorry for the Chairman of the Finance Committee whom I had trust - My chairman, because by then you were not my chairman. I was not there but now you are my chairman. To go and amend the passing of a law singlehandedly with your Minister of Finance is criminal. It is very criminal and from now onwards, we are going to watch very carefully whatever you will be doing in the committee. This is because it has signified that during our absence, you do wrong things for us. That is the reason why I am raising that. 

In conclusion, it is time that Ugandans woke up and Parliament should stand its ground. We must think about our country first, not individuals first. Investors are good but –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good that I am taking up from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Hon. Dombo had started very well but ended badly. I respect him a lot but really on this one, watch this space. There are five areas in this PPP, which are problem areas: 

One, this is the second round of the privatisation of Uganda. Remember the privatisation exercise? What did Uganda gain from it? Number two, find out whether hon. Kajara, with due respect, was there or not. 

Number three, amount of money –(Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the privatisation process of this country started earlier than 1993. I was not in Government or anywhere near politics. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to impute that I am the one who privatised all things on this earth whereas I was not? Is he in order? Was he yet born? Otherwise, he would have known that I was not there. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the responsibility should go to the government in general but not to individuals and I do not think hon. Kajara was there when it started.

MR FUNGAROO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, the amount of money involved, the interest rate, the rate of costing labour, materials and machines – I will give this example of the standard gauge railway. The problem, which has been raised of recent is, comparing it with others in the region or even in the country, the cost of our work is so high. 

So if we give the PPP in the hands of the Cabinet or the minister alone, we risk receiving things at a very high cost as compared to the regional rate. There is also the issue of time period and time value of money. Shillings 1 million today can buy something and maybe in future, Shs 1 million shillings may not buy the same thing it was able to buy today. So the time value of money matters. 

This can only be safeguarded if you and I who represent the people of Obongi have the interest of the Obongians of today and tomorrow in the discussions of today. Never make the mistake of allowing yourself to be out of such a discussion, which affects generations.

Finally, Ugandans have this habit of calling for members of Parliament to come in when things have gone wrong. You were not there when a project started but when things go wrong, they tell you to go and undertake oversight. How do you oversee things that you were not involved in from the initial stage? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to also support the minority report and I also stand to see these ministers trying to bully Parliament thinking that Parliament will stand up and be looked at as a rubber stamp. I pity you. We are watching you and marking all you do. We always hear everything that you are saying.

Mr Chairman, you better go back to where you belong. You belong to this Parliament. If you think you are going to be taken to Cabinet by doing these wrong things, sorry, forget it. We have seen a lot of foul play in this Government. We have seen what is going on in Katosi, in Umeme and in the standard gauge railway. 

In such a scenario, there is no way Parliament can come and sit and these people come up and bully us and we pass everything they want. I think they are also envisaging a situation of dissolving Parliament at one time because the way they are doing these things, they want to make sure that Ugandans see that Parliament is of no use and that, therefore, it should be dissolved. Shame on you! We have eyes to see you. You will not do anything -(Interruption)  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is very clear that whenever we are here, we have to use parliamentary language. We have to behave – I do not think that this one is a Mukiga, he must be another character, I do not know from where. I think somebody can put his point forward in a civilised manner and it is heard and taken. 

First and foremost, all of us are members of Parliament. Do not think that we were not elected. We did not come here from the back door. Some of you may have won by only one vote but some of us won by 75 per cent. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, make the point but desist from using harsh language. Please conclude.

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your good ruling. I also believe no one came here to steal public funds and, therefore, we will always tell those who try to touch these funds off. I did not say you are the one, I was just envisaging the situation that is going on right now in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, these people are now used to signing loans without the approval of Parliament. I have already heard of a situation where they are wondering whether they should sign the Isimba loan without the approval of Parliament. That is the meeting that was going on recently. Watch the space, they may have signed it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we are unfortunate, perhaps as a group, to have been here and we watched the botched privatisation process that took away everything ordinary Ugandans had invested in; to date nobody can account for the proceeds of that process.

We were here as a generation and we have been part of those who burnt our hands. When it came to Umeme, RVR concession and AGOA, I was in this Parliament; the same passionate pleas from the Executive, and we burnt our fingers. And that cost the public a lot of money. I am extremely disappointed that the committee can attempt to come to this House to slight the intelligence of this honourable member. No wonder we cannot even see the report because we needed to see who signed and who did not sign. This is an attempt to slight our intelligence, Madam Speaker.

Today, the debt burden of this country borders on not being sustainable anymore; the only pain is that we are part of it together; we have been here together. But how can the committee come here and say that the provision we passed said that the Attorney-General should not scrutinise the agreement. Where is that in the Bill that we passed? It is not there. When we seek to approve as a Parliament, we have not stopped the Attorney-General from doing his part.

And therefore, Madam Speaker, I think the challenge that confronts us today is not even investors, no, it is between the motives of the fragile, the shrewd, and the thieves that are abusing power, the sharks that are in government, that is the choice we have to make versus the people of Uganda who will pay every coin whether in form of guarantee, by direct borrowing or by public private –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR IBRAHIM SEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East Wakiso): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. We receive various reports from government every year including reports on our total indebtedness as a country. 

The report that came from the Ministry of Finance this year informs us that this Parliament has approved loans now up to $6 billion but the $2 billion on which we pay interest has never been utilised by government. In their own report, they speak about low absorption capacity, lack of skill etcetera. I sat on the Committee of National Economy, every loan they bring, you are on pressure.

And, Madam Speaker, I do not know how many times they come to your office pleading that that loan request be put on the Order Paper; $6 billion has been approved, and $2 billion is still on the account yet we pay interest as a country. I do not know where they got the feeling that this Parliament is frustrating investment? We approve money for you to go and invest, you do not use it, but every year - even now as I was walking in, there was a request on the table wanting to borrow. I do not know; maybe it is enjoyable for you to borrow and black mail everybody.

Let us speak about the investors, when Government was sourcing and identifying the Prince to come and invest in Shimoni for a hotel, Parliament was not involved. Do not ever imagine that investors are stupid people who do not do research -(Interjections) – that you can go and cut deals; and that is what is going to bring them. I will tell you for example the person who was supposed to invest in Shimoni simply deployed people at Entebbe Airport to look at the traffic coming into this country. 

I have met investors interested in coming into this country, they speak about political stability. What will happen if the current leadership has gone? Will not the decisions taken now be reversed? And I can assure you every single decision you make, if it is not in the interest of this country, it will be reversed by the coming leaders. That is what the investors do. So do not black mail Parliament and the public; you do not want investors and even the money you have cannot be invested?

Madam Speaker, finally, I am really shocked by the committee and the chairperson; I think I will not sleep comfortably tonight. To come here and tell Parliament that it should give away its constitutional power? The commissioner has even recruited a committee and we even have legal officers on our committee, but you do not utilise them and you come here to do politics on a matter that is technical, may God –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A lot has already been said and I just want to emphasis on one issue. For a person who was elected and voted to come to Parliament, to stand here and suggest that Parliament should be voted out of Bills that are committing Ugandans is very absurd! 

Madam Speaker, by the Executive suggesting that when Parliament holds powers to approve these agreements, it is a disincentive to investors, the Executive is making a vote of no confidence in Parliament which is again very absurd.

Madam Speaker, even expecting Members of Parliament here to vote in favour of abdicating their own powers is undermining the intelligence of some of us. It could not even be a suggestion by any Member of Parliament; it could not even come out of a serious Government which talks of democracy.

Madam Speaker, there is a very serious animal that is eating us; that is why you listen to people suggesting sole this, sole that, including sole candidature -(Laughter)- we cannot commit Ugandans in what they are not involved in; it is Ugandans that give you the powers, and we do not have angels in Uganda. We do not have anybody coming from heaven.

Madam speaker, as I conclude, I just want the Government to clarify, what is going to be so special in these agreements that cannot come to Parliament for justification?

5.11
MS ANGELINA OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is indeed amazing that when you look at the original report of the committee, it was a very telling report, where in 2.4, they pointed out that in the past, the Bill was silent about the role of Parliament. And a few days after, a whole chairman comes back and ignores the same statement. I do not know whether in the recent past the roles of Parliament have been amended? Probably the chair should educate us on this.

Madam Speaker, according to what is said to have been rejected by His Excellency the President of Uganda, article 6(2) is not one of them, even Clause 6(2) is not one of them. When you look at it, it is much related to Clause 26. Now you cannot rescind clause 26 and ignore Clause 6(2). It is indeed showing a high level of unpreparedness by the minister and probably the committee chair for really failing to digest his original report and coming to defend the position that has no value at this point in time.

Madam speaker, I would also like to inform the House that the recently Public Finance Bill passed in this House is going to be adversely affected if we are going to alter or rescind any article in this PPP Bill. I want us to stand warned that this will be a beginning to a reversal of the roles of Parliament. If we cannot stand today, then we cannot stand again ever as a 9th Parliament.

I want to beg my colleagues that we do not succumb to whatever pressure that is being subjected to us. I would like to implore my colleagues to stand on the side of conscience; as those who will be judged by posterity; we are not legislating for today, we are legislating for ages to come and God will bless all of us. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, 20 members have contributed to this debate. Does the minister still think he should move that motion to recommit? 

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, when one listens to the debate on the floor today, one wonders whether I will say anything contrary. (Applause)

But, Madam Speaker, I have stood up simply because I have the faith that the Holy Spirit will guide me on what I have to say. (Laughter) I think the feelings of Members are informed by the experience we have had and particularly, well-articulated by hon. Kabakumba Masiko. It is against that background that everyone feels concerned. 

Madam Speaker, when you visited me recently in Nakawa, you and I were equally perplexed at the pace of the progress if any, on the Nakawa/Naguru estates. We feel concerned, not simply because we are in the Executive or because you are in the Legislature on the other side, no –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, listen to the Attorney-General.

MR Ruhindi: We all feel concerned; I think the question would be, what is it? What value are you putting in this PPP Bill which will ensure that every arm of Government does its job and does it well? (Applause) That is the question; it is not a question of what is my mandate and what is your mandate, no. Because ideally, the debate was actually informed- even when this matter was being debated the other time, I am the one who stood up and said, “But, look, the question is, who watches the watchmen?”

Assuming Parliament gets involved in negotiating contracts –(Interjections)- you listen to me; in participating in the approval and the rest of it, who will come in to do the oversight function? That was the question. 

However, you could see the feelings of members, every time you talk – (Interjection)- as you can see, the media is awash with comments; my name is always there. Questions on Katosi, questions on whatever, everybody gets concerned. 

The question is, Madam Speaker, I request that you give the Executive one more time - [Honourable members: “No, no”] - let us come prepared to address you, say on the legal issues raised, on what value Government would wish to add in this whole process, so that every arm of Government can be seen to be executing its responsibilities – (Interjection)- as required by the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you know you have said that you want to see clear roles for everybody because of oversight and accountability. But when we pass the loans here, don’t we still carry-out the oversight? (Applause) We debate the loans here, pass them, give you the money and we carryout oversight - we do.  (Applause)

Are you still pushing your motion, honourable minister?

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, we do appreciate the concerns of the members and as the learned Attorney-General has just informed us, we are not in conflict with what we want for this country, but how we want it achieved. 

Members have raised issues to do with investors, yes. You know these investors, when we put their business plans and their technical proposals into the arena of discussion and they are discussed in broad daylight, in public, somehow their businesses are affected out there. 

And, Madam Speaker, what is the role of Parliament in this? Because, members are talking of, taking away our power, no, we are keeping it. (Laughter)

First of all, this Parliament debates, passes laws and most important, holds Government accountable and in promoting democratic governance, it scrutinises and approves all Government expenditures through annual budgeting and audit cycle –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising is that a few minutes ago, you said that the House passes loans and we give the Executive and easily the loan will read, “The loan to construct a road from Soroti to Lira, the amount is $100 million, and the terms are these.” That is in public knowledge; those who bid have known, the whole world has known, it is transparent.

Now the procedural issue I am raising is, is it procedurally right for the minister to say that for these small PPPs where somebody will come and partner with us and where we are also going to borrow money, is it right for him not to want Parliament and the public to know. Is he procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Well, let him explain why he does not want Parliament involved in this, minister.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Why I am saying this, world over, international best practices in the legal regime of public/private transactions, there is need to provide enabling environment for investors and financiers so that their matters - our closest neighbours for example in Kenya -(Interjection)- in Tanzania –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure

MR KAJARA: He is not standing up –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened very well to the honourable minister and I think somewhere somehow he is misleading this House, because he is talking of creating an enabling environment for investors and yet he knows very well that actually Parliament is one of the areas you can talk about in creating the an enabling environment that he is really speaking about. I do not know whether the minister is actually understanding what he is saying by using jargons in economics in a wrong perspective. As far as I understand, an enabling environment for an investment includes the legal framework which is transparent. 

Is the minister therefore in order to really imagine that Parliament must be excluded in a way and therefore it will be creating an enabling environment for investment in this country. Is he procedurally right to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is just following on the letter which the President wrote. Please conclude.

MR KAJARA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have heard the concerns of the members; we have on Floor a minority report which raises very fundamental issues which we need to digest very carefully and for which we need answers. My prayer is that we stay decision on this matter, we give time to Government to digest all your views in order that we may come to a good conclusion. I pray –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJU: Madam Speaker, at the beginning of the debate, the minister said he was not ready, when he stood up to make a submission he said he was more than ready. Now the same person says that actually he was not ready. Is the honourable minister in order to waste the time of Parliament that at the time of taking a decision he must become disruptive and then tells this Parliament that actually when he said that he was more than ready he was not ready? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he has changed his mind -(Laughter)- but honourable minister, I do not know really whether with the grave yard which has been - all the dying institutions, the said PPPs, what do you want to discuss? What are you going to say about this? You know, you are in a very weak position on this issue. I do not know how to help you because our record with Government is not good on these things and that is what the public knows. So I do not know if you can convince us to continue entrusting in those circumstances.

5.28
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I move a motion under Rule 72 Sub Rule (1) of our Rules of Procedure that having substantially debated this matter, the debate be closed and the question be put as to whether the motion on the Floor by the Chairperson of the Committee of Finance that the report be adopted be put. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Chair of the Committee of Finance be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

I put the question that the minority report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Next item.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES 
AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON AUDITOR GENERAL’S AUDIT FINDINGS ON 
UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIFERY COUNCIL, THE UGANDA MEDICAL 
AND DENTAL PRACTITIONERS COUNCIL AND THE ALLIED 
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS COUNCIL FOR THE YEARS 2002 – 2012

5.30
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the Auditor-General’s audit findings on Uganda Nurses and Midwifery Council, the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council and the Allied Health Professionals Council for the years 2002 – 2012. I skip the first two pages and then go straight away on the introduction.

Madam Speaker, in 1996, this Parliament enacted laws establishing various councils to regulate the health sector in Uganda. The Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163 of the Constitution audited these institutions and reported to Parliament. 

The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises has examined the Reports of the Auditor-General in accordance with Rule 169 of our Rules of Procedure and I hereby present this report. 

This report covers three entities: Uganda Nurses and Midwife Council, which is mandated to regulate training and education of nurses and midwives and maintenance and promotion of professional standards.

The second entity is the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioner Council established to supervise training of medical officers and dental surgeons, license them, foster professionalism and regulate their practice. The council is also mandated to licence clinics.

The third entity is the Allied Health Professionals’ Council which was established to regulate the training and enforce standards of practice of professionals who include clinical orthopaedics and other technicians, laboratory technologies, theatre assistants and health inspectors.

Madam Speaker, the committee examined the findings contained in 10 Auditor-General’s report covering the periods 2002 - 2012. This report is the work we found in progress and we commend the efforts of the previous leadership of the committee. The current leadership has devised additional means to continue clearing this backlog. 

The committee held meetings with the accounting officers, top management and council members of the three entities and also received written responses from the Minister of Health.

Madam Speaker, let me start with our findings. It would appear that Government established these entities and abandoned them before they were fully constituted and made them functional. Their 18 years of existence has seen gross mismanagement with one or all of them operating at times without councils (boards) and yet professional and dedicated board of directors is the principal tool of corporate governance. 

Where the board existed, it merged its roles with those of the technical staff with some chair persons engaging in day to day operations. The Auditor-General reported lack of internal audit department, capitalisation policy, low levels of staffing and lack of fraud control mechanisms.

These entities mandated with critical tasks of regulating practice of nurses, doctors and health workers are without capacity to register, monitor and supervise their activities. The patients therefore survive on the Mercy of the Almighty.

In this confusion, Madam Speaker, Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council told COSASE that Uganda loses between 90 and 100 doctors every year and in total we have lost over 1,500 doctors. The total number of doctors Uganda has trained as a country is 4,490; only 2,482 have remained in the country.

The then Minister of Health Dr Ruhakana Rugunda –(Interjections)- I am not sure if he is still the minister. On 12 May 2014, written submission to the committee said, “In order to address the long term sustainability and financing of the councils, the Ministry of Health is in the process of forming a National Health Professional Authority which will be autonomous and with a vote status”.

Madam Speaker, we summarised the findings and recommendations of the committee starting with Uganda Nurses and Midwifery Council. As noted in the introduction, the Auditor-General reported on the gazetting of the registered persons section 22 of the Uganda Nurses and Midwifery Act, 1996 requires the registrar who is the top manager in this entity to publish in the gazette between 1st January and 31st the names of all registered nurses and midwives in the country. 

The Auditor-General noted that the council does not publish the names of the registered persons in the gazette. The number of the registered nurses in Uganda, at least those that they have ever registered is now at 28,613 and midwives are 9,609 bringing the total of the registered membership of this profession to 38,222.

The committee notes that failure to gazette licensed persons denies the public access to right information and also undermines the council’s regulation function. The accounting officer explains that at the time of auditing data was manually generated and the process of cleaning up the register took time. 

He further reported that data has now been updated and posted on the council’s website. The central registry was also computerised and incorporated in the human resource system of the Ministry of Health; he submitted copies of the updated data.

He further explained that the council had not yet gazetted nurses and midwives as required by the law because of funding constraints. The committee observed that council exhibited inefficiency by failing to gazette nurses and midwives as required by the law. 

The committee further observed that the council’s excuse of lack of funding is inadequate as each member paid Shs 100,000 registration and Shs 20,000 subscription annually.

The amount paid by the professionals is far more than required for the gazette. The committee further noted that non-gazettement affects the practitioners since they cannot be recognised by the society. It also gives room for quack practitioners to cooperate freely.

Our recommendation, Madam Speaker, is that the accounting officer should ensure that names of nurses and midwives who qualify to practice be gazetted within six months of this report. Subsequently, the statutory timeline of 31 January should be adhered to.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, maybe you read the subject and recommendations, the other things members can read.

MR SSEMUJJU: On governance issues, Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General reported that members of the council were involved in the day-to-day running of the entities yet their duty is to supervise. 

Our recommendation is that investigations should be carried out to ascertain if losses were occasioned by the action of Mrs Jerusa Wakholi and appropriate action be taken against her because she is the chairperson of the council. 

Weakness in the internal control system: The accounting officer explained that the audit function was carried out by the parent Ministry of Health; they do not have an audit. Our recommendation as a committee is that the council should recruit an internal auditor within six months from the time this report is adopted by this House.

Madam Speaker, the councils were not holding meetings as the law prescribes and our recommendation is that councils must hold meetings as prescribed by the law. 

There was lack of fixed asset register and our recommendation is that action be taken against the officer responsible. 

There is title of property, the Auditor-General reported that the council purchased a building for Shs 207 million but did not avail the title for verification. 

Non-disclosure of property, plant and equipment: The Auditor-General’s inspection revealed that council did not disclose its financial statement varies for its assets and our recommendation is that council - the registrar who is the top manager should ensure that the assets are re-valued within three months.

Financial Statement Balances: The Auditor General reported that the council did not keep proper books of accounts. Our recommendation is that the accounting officer should be held accountable for this. Now there is new accountant who should ensure timely preparation of the financial statement. 

Cash and cash equivalents: the Auditor-General reported that cash and cash equivalent amount reflected in the balance sheet was Shs 419,667,041 while the corresponding notes to the accounts had a figure of Shs 282 million.

This matter should be investigated and the then accounting officer, Ms Florence Rita Matte, should be held personally responsible for any possible loss and subjected to disciplinary process. 

Non-deduction and remittance of statutory deduction amounting to Shs 9.6 million. Our recommendation is that the current management remits PAYE and NSSF to avoid accumulation of penalties.

Procurement process: There was procurement that was not done according to the PPDA Act. Our recommendation is that action should be taken against the accounting officer for flouting the PPDA regulations.

Staff and personnel

A view of the personnel by the Auditor-General revealed there were no jobs description, no evidence of existence of a salary structure, and the posts of registrar and assistant registrar and an accountant were not filled. 

Our recommendation is that council should recruit staff in accordance with the approved manual and as per the human resource requirement.

Non-compliance with statutory requirements

Our recommendation is that the accounting officer then, Ms Florence Rita, should be held responsible and action taken against her. 

Lack of strategic plan

The committee recommends that strategic plans should be reviewed in a timely manner.

Books of accounts for the years 2009 - 2010 There are anomalies that were reported by the Auditor-General and listed in the report. 

Revenue performance

The council budgeted to collect Shs 859 million, but failed to collect that money. 

The recommendation of the committee is that they should endeavour to collect all the fees from eligible practitioners and government should consider increasing its support to fill the gaps.

Unutilised cash balances

Our recommendation is that council should expeditiously utilise the funds according to the intended plans.

Operationalisation of the Act

While the committee notes the low levels of funding from Government, it still feels the council can finance most of its activities, including paying staff by vigorously collecting fees from members.

Direct procurement
Our recommendation is that the accounting officer should be held responsible for flouting the regulations.

Committee Recommendations on Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council (UNMC)

There are general regulations we made. I do not know whether I need to go through all of them.

THE SPEAKER: You can if they are recommendations.

MR SSEMUJJU:

    i. The accounting officer should ensure that names of nurses and midwives who qualify to practice are gazetted within six months.
    ii. Investigations should be carried out on Ms Wakholi who was chairperson of the council and at the same time a signatory to the council account to ascertain if losses were occasioned by her action.
    iii. To strengthen internal control systems, the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council should recruit an internal auditor.
    iv. Procedures for cancellation of payments should be put in place and fixed assets register maintained.
    v. The council should hold meetings as stipulated by law to achieve its mandate.
    vi. Mr Musenze Kassim should be punished for not keeping up-to-date assets registry.
    vii. On non-disclosure of property, plant and equipment, the Council Registrar should ensure that assets are valued within three months of this resolution and the actual values presented in the next financial statement. 
    viii. For financial statement imbalances, the accounting officer, MS Rita, who was the Chairperson of the Council, should be held accountable for failure to recruit an accountant for nine years, thus operating without one for such a long period, causing financial statement imbalances. 
    ix. For material uncertainty over the existence, accuracy and completeness of the council’s cash balances, state agencies should carry out investigations and accounting officer, Florence Matte, should be held personally responsible for any possible loss and subjected to disciplinary process. 
    x. For non-deduction and remittance of statutory deductions amounting to Shs 9.6 million, the current management should remit the PAYE and NSSF to avoid accumulation of penalties. 
    xi. For failure to file procurement returns with PPDA, our recommendation is that action should be taken against the accounting officer.
    xii. With respect to personnel, the council should recruit staff in accordance with approved manual.
    xiii. For non-compliance with statutory requirements, the then accounting officer should be held personally responsible.
    xiv. For failure to maintain proper books of accounts, the then accounting officer should be held responsible, investigated and action taken for any loss caused as a result of this. 
    xv. For improved revenue performance, council should put in place measures to collect all the fees from eligible practitioners.
    xvi. On unutilised cash balance, the council should expeditiously use the funds according to the intended plans.
    xvii. The accounting officer should be held responsible for engaging in direct procurement, contrary to established procedures.

Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners

I will just give a summary and then go to recommendations. In the Auditor-General’s reports about late submission of draft financial statements, low levels of staffing, I will leave these recommendations because there are recommendations at the end of the report on this entity. The problems reported are the following:

    i. Lack of an Audit Committee
    ii. Lack of an internal auditor
    iii. Stores not taken charge
    iv. Remittance of six per cent Withholding Tax
    v. Non-renewal of operating licences
    vi. Signatory to the Council bank accounts
    vii. Segregation of duties
    viii. Budget performance
    ix. Irregular payment of kilometrage allowance
    x. Delayed banking of revenue
    xi. Procurement plans
    xii. Consultancy for database management
    xiii. Unexplained direct debits
    xiv. Unaccounted for funds
    xv. Unretired imprest
    xvi. Booking aspect
    xvii. Use of manual accounting systems
    xviii. Ungazetted names of medical and dental practitioners

The Committee recommends as follows:

    i. On staffing, council should aggressively collect revenue from its members to fill the staffing gaps and motivate them to perform their duties.
    ii. The council should establish an audit committee within three months of the adoption of this report and recruit an internal auditor within six months from the date of the adoption of this report.

    iii. The council should with immediate effect make efforts to issue practising licences to all operators and should endeavour to renew expired licences in a timely manner and the accounting officer implementing the obligations of the statute and all the funds not collected in non-renewal should be recovered within six months of the adoption this report.


    iv. Investigations should be carried out on the expenditures of the council during the time Prof. Meddie Kawuma was Council Board Chairperson, who should be held responsible for any breaches found.

    v. For segregation of duties in the accounts department, accounts assistants and internal auditors should be recruited to perform these unique functions and supplement the work of the accountants.

    vi. For better budget performance, the council should improve its revenue collection methods by ensuring that all licence fees are collected before seeking for supplementary from Government.

    vii. To avoid irregular payment of kilometrage allowance in the future, the council should regularise the kilometrage rates and produce a guiding document on this matter within three months of the adoption of this report.

    viii. To rectify delayed banking of revenue, the council should ensure that all payments are made directly to the council’s bank accounts and proper books of accounts are kept.

    ix. To ensure proper procurement procedures are adhered to, council should put in place a procurement plan every financial year and present it together with the council budget as per the PPDA regulations.

    x. On unexplained direct debit and the Police case on the matter, the council should co-operate with police for prosecution with regards to embezzlement case no. CR1780/2012 to ensure that the money is recovered.

    xi. For late accounting of advances contrary to the provisions of Public Finance and Accountability Regulations and the Treasury Accounting Instructions, the accounting officer should be cautioned and in future, all advances should be accounted for within 90 days.

    xii. With respect to missing cash amounting to Shs 13 million unbanked, contrary to financial regulations, the council should expeditiously pursue a case with the police and ensure that funds are recovered. A report on this matter should be availed to parliament within six months of this report.
    xiii. For unretired imprest totaling to Shs 4.7 million and the criminal case no. CR1780/2012, the current council should expeditiously pursue the case with the police and reprimand the accounting officer for negligence.

    xiv. Regarding the bookkeeping aspect, the accounting officer is cautioned and asked to enter transactions on its books of accounts in a timely manner.


    xv. On use of manual accounting system, management should expedite acquisition of automated software to ensure accurate accounting.

    xvi. For ungazetted names of medical and dental practitioners contrary to Section 19(2) and (3) of the Medical and Dental Practitioners Act 1996, the council should make necessary budgetary provision to gazette names of medical and dental practitioners within three months of this report as required by the law to avoid unscrupulous people masquerading as medical and dental professionals.

The Allied Health Professionals Council

The problems reported by the Auditor-General in this entity are the following:

    i. Absence of the deputy registrar
    ii. Inadequate funds to finance operations of the council
    iii. Absence of the finance and accounting manual
    iv. Lack of adequate office space for employees
    v. Non-renewal of licence by registered professionals
    vi. Unascertained funds from Ministry of Health Programme to the council
    vii. Absence of financial statements
    viii. Top-up allowances not signed
    ix. On inspection/Safaris without reports.
    x. Lack of security to receipt books.
    xi. Submission of financial statement.
    xii. Operational manuals that are not in place.
    xiii. Lack of procurement plans.
    xiv. Lack of a fixed asset register.
    xv. Lack of internal audit department and audit committee.
    xvi. Council members and board members being signatories of the accounts of the entity.
    xvii. Lack of a strategic plan.
    xviii. Irregular deployment of volunteers.
    xix. Failure to gazette the Allied Health Professionals. 
    xx. Delays in banking of cash received.
    xxi. Unaccounted for funds: Shs 5.1 million.
    xxii. Non cancellation of paid vouchers with paid sum.
    xxiii. Non preparation of bank reconciliation statements.
    xxiv. The Auditor-General reported expenditure not accounted for worth Shs 46.3 million.
    xxv. Unapproved budget, the council was working on a budget that was not approved.
    xxvi. They had problem with budget performance. They budgeted for Shs 1.3 billion but ended up collecting only Shs 831 million. 
    xxvii. Unspent balance. While the council complain of lack of funds, they maintained on their account Shs 279 million.
    xxviii. Absence of a registrar for accountable stationery.
    xxix. Lack of a training manual.
    xxx. The cash book, contrary to paragraph 314, Chapter 8 of the Treasurer Accounting Instructions which require that any amendment to the cash book be made in ink without an eraser and signed and dated by the officer making it - it was noted that the accounting officer did not do so. 

We made the following recommendations and I will go through them very quickly:

    i. Government should make financial provisions for the recruitment of a deputy registrar and other critical employees this financial year, 2014.

    ii. On inadequate funds to finance the operation of the council, government should build the capacity of the council which should in turn be able to collect revenues from all its eligible members before Government provides any additional subvention to bridge the financial gap of the council.

    iii. On the lack of office space for employees, Government should build a home for all health councils; that is, Allied Health Professional Council, Uganda Dental and Medical Practitioners Council, and the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council for easy access by the public.
    iv. The council should ensure all requirements for one to practice as stipulated in the Act. Persons who do not comply should be subjected to disciplinary procedure as by law established.

    v. Regarding unascertained funds from Ministry of Health, under programme 9, the accounting officer should be held responsible.

    vi. For not keeping financial statements, the then accounting officer should be held accountable/responsible, and appropriate action taken.

    vii. For payment of top-up allowance not approved by the council to a tune of Shs 900,000, the money should be recovered by the accounting officer from the beneficiaries.

    viii. On inspections without report, the accounting officer should recover the funds from the responsible staff.

    ix. The council is held responsible for operating without a financial manual, an asset register and procurement plan. The council should be cautioned against this irregularity and strictly adhere to the newly approved manual.

    x. The council should work with Ministry of Health to have an internal auditor recruited to man the internal audit functions.

    xi. The council should discipline the accounting officer for irregularly deploying volunteers to perform important and confidential duties that required specialised skills in accounting.

    xii. The accounting officer should publish names of the Allied Health Professionals within three months of adoption of this report.

    xiii. The council should ensure that all payments are made into the banks and receipt issued basing on the bank statement as opposed to cash.
    xiv. The council should be cautioned for not keeping an updated register for a period under review. The established register should be updated timely.

    xv. For late submission of accountability documents regarding unaccounted for funds contrary to accounting instructions, the accounting officer should be cautioned.

    xvi. Unapproved budget; the accounting officer should be subjected to disciplinary procedure by council for violation of section 17 of the Allied Health Professional Act, 1996, by executing expenditure without an approved budget.

    xvii. And finally, account assistants should be investigated by responsible state agencies and subjected to disciplinary action for failure to account for a variance of Shs 7.2 million in the cash book.

We have made four general recommendations, Madam Speaker, and I will read them:

    i. The Ministry of Health should within six months table before Parliament a Bill that seeks to merge these health regulatory councils into one authority with a vote status. 

    ii. Government should reform and rationalise the composition, appointment, performance and remuneration of council/ boards of council. At the moment, the Allied Health Board is composed of 15 members; the Nurses and Midwives Council has 19 members; and the Medical and Dental Practitioners has eight members. There is no clear reason for this discrepancy.

    iii. Government should also take into account gender when appointing boards. For example, the Allied Health Council of 15 members has only two females, Nurses and Midwives has four in a council of 13, which is just a 21 percent. It is only the Dental Council that is divided into halves: 50 percent males and 50 percent females.

    iv. The committee notes that the Ministry of Health has proposed to allocate a land in Butabika for the construction of a home for the new regulatory authority and yet at the moment, each of the council is saving money to build herself a home. The process of integrating the councils should be fast tracked to avoid duplication of resources. The minister should report to the House on progress on this matter within six months.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and I direct the Clerk to reflect the entire text of the report in the Hansard for our record. 

6.01
DR MEDARD BITEKYREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank honourable chairperson, Ssemujju Nganda, for this wonderful report.

As a medical practitioner, I have received this report with pain. It is a very painful report for some of us who spent a lot of time without sleeping, studying medicine, and you end up competing with somebody who has not read.

Madam Speaker, when you call me Dr Biteks, I should be able to save your life from a heart attack; it is not just about talking. My presence here should be able to save lives in case of a problem. However, to my surprise, when you go round this country, you will find people who claim to be doctors but honestly, they know nothing. And these fellows are going unpunished and unregulated. 

You have heard about the three councils: the one for the midwives and nurses, the one for doctors and dental practitioners plus the one for allied professionals. All of them do not have auditors, and there is a reason. Once you have got a weak council, and you are a wonderful money eater, you can swindle the money. I can assure you people have swindled money out of these councils and they are so rich. Meanwhile, the councils are not functioning at all.

Madam Speaker, it is painful to see that the nurses who are mainly women have been cheated because the females are not adequately represented in the councils as was reported. They are being run by men. When you give men jobs and there are no women to check them, they will buy houses. But women do not think about money too much. Men steal more money than women - (Laughter) - so that is why these councils are dying because the females are not many in them.

The Ministry of Health has had very many challenges. When Dr Kiyonga was the Minister of Health, he was the one who formulated the issue of having Health Centre IV functional at every sub-county. Immediately he finished, he was removed. Ministry of Health is a very rich ministry in that every minister seated here wants to become a Minister of Health because the money in the ministry is too much though it is not there ironically. 
That is why you are seeing all these things. People are not regulated, Madam Speaker, and all of your lives are at stake! You are being treated by masqueraders and these fellows are putting on white coats. When you see them you quake and when you see me you do not quake yet I am highly qualified.

Madam Speaker, I want to support the committee and I feel these things should be done and the only unfortunate part of it is that there is no Minister of Health but good enough there is -(Member timed out._)

6.04
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a good report bringing out so many issues. 

They are not really new because we know that the problems in the health sector are exactly caused by these issues that have been brought out by the report. These are the issues that we have been crying about in this Parliament, most especially as members of UWOPA and other fora. 

It is disheartening to note that the nurses’ body does not publish in the gazette the names of the registered nurses. So, is it any wonder that we do not have sufficient numbers of nurses and midwives? And so our women die in child birth?

I would like to support the observation by the committee that lack of gazetting denies Ugandans vital information because you have people who are masquerading as nurses, giving out services when they are not qualified. There is no way that you can confront them because you do not have any information about them. 

I hope that the Ministry of Health will take full charge of this and ensure that the nurses’ council takes up this responsibility of publishing the names of the nurses in the gazette.

Madam Speaker, we are all concerned about the brain drain that we should lose so many nurses and doctors. This is so when we actually have not trained sufficient numbers and yet we are losing so many because we do not remunerate them adequately.

I think it is high time that we as Parliament took up again, faced up with Government and ensured that our nurses and that lower category of staff in the health sector are remunerated adequately. 

We did increase the pay of the doctors and I think it is reasonable. But, I regret to say that because of lack of efficiency in the monitoring and supervision, the money did not realise so much effect because we still lose many of the doctors -(Member timed out._)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude and then hon. Oketayot.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is imperative that we do have super records. It is even stated that the data is just merely being collected and that it is not updated. Surely, the computerisation is good but we all know that it is garbage in, garbage out. So, it is important that the Ministry of Health takes up the collection of data, updating of data and publication in the gazette. I thank you.

6.07
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that many lives have been lost as a result of the weaknesses and the gaps that have been pointed out in this report; especially upcountry like in my district Pader where we do not have qualified medical practitioners. 

This council as it has been pointed out by the reports is mandated to monitor nurses’ clinics. This report has also indicated clearly that these councils have not been holding meetings. It has further stated that there are inspections without reports. 

I want to say, Madam Speaker, no inspections take place by these officers who are supposed to do the inspection in Pader and I believe in other places also up country -(Interruption)- but it is only three minutes. 

MR MICHAEL MAWANDA: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. I would like to give information to the right honourable member concerning the issue of inspection. These councils do delegate the responsibility to whoever can do their job at the district. So, even the inspections they carry out were not accurate. I thank you.

MS LOWILA OKETAYOT: Yes they delegate. But districts like Pader where there are no qualified people to do the inspection whom do they delegate to? I am talking of a district like Pader where we do not have even a single qualified medical doctor so we really have problems. 

I want to say there are also nurses and clinical officers who are employed at the health facility run by Government. You find that they spend very little time there. They have their private clinics that they run, they are being paid by Government and because there are no inspections, you find that some of these habits are not being handled.

Then we have the issue of the clinics as I was saying. The clinics in Pader are being run by people who are not qualified. We have lost lives. Recently, there was a girl that was taken to one of the clinics with intestinal obstruction. Instead of referring this girl to a hospital because of greed for money, exploiting people, this girl ended up dying in that clinic.

Because there is information that these people just exploit people, carry out investigations and give false results there are two girls who went to one of the clinics, got clean water and mixed it with tea leaves to disguise it as urine. They went purporting that they were suffering from abdominal pain and when they carried out the test on this clean water, the result of the test was that this girl had syphilis and they ended up giving her medicine. People take medicine when they do not have any problems so, we really appeal to the Ministry of Health -(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee of COSASE for their report which is detailed and thorough. I have three issues committee chairperson - I can see Dr Lulume is diverting attention. The first issue is the proposed National Health Professions Authority. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification. What is the current state? Where do these councils get their finances? Is it not under the budget for the Ministry of Health? 

Now, if we have a Ministry of Health in charge of policing, standards and they are the ones supposed to provide the budget. Why do we need an additional authority in addition to the ministry? I think you need to justify your recommendation for a National Health Professionals’ Authority.

The second one is on the issue of accountability and transparency. There are a number of findings: embezzlement of public funds, unexplained expenditures, failure to pay NSSF, pay as you earn and others. In my view, these should be categorised separately and you make a recommendation so that they are investigated and are prosecuted.  This is because if we lump all this together, we can easily find out who exactly is responsible for these technical mishaps.

Finally, the third issue is the policy gap. Committee chairperson listening to the report, the question in my mind was, who is responsible for this council? Who is at the top? Who monitors them? Who inspects them? Who is supposed to establish these boards?  How come in your report you are very silent about the policy gap. You talk about the accounting officer, the staff among others, but it appears that in the 18 years, there has been a policy challenge. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I wanted to inform you that the appointment of boards of these councils is the mandate of the Minister of Health, who sits here every day.

MR MAGYEZI: So in that case then, much as we have the Leader of Government Business, I think one would want to see a written response by the Minister of Health on this issue. Surely, Madam Speaker, we cannot just leave this report and we pass and it goes without getting a statement. Eighteen years down the road councils are established, they are in the law, they are rotting away and somebody at the top is sitting very comfortably. I wish the committee chairperson this had come out, I think is not too late; we should   recommend a statement formally by the Minster of Health on this report. 

6.15
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My contribution and concern arises from the observation on governance under the Uganda nurses and midwives scam. I get concerned that for four years, the Auditor-General reported the problem of governance where council members double as day today staff of the council, thereby compromising the principles of checks and balances, and separation of duties.

Interesting enough, I am very sure that the Leader of Government Business is here and I do not doubt his capacity. It would have been very prudent and more convincing if we heard the Minister from the respective Ministry, listening and appreciating the discussions and the concerns expressed by members. And more so, if you take an audit of the front bench, if this matter is to be discussed in Cabinet, I want to tell you that many of them - I do not know how many they are today, but many of them will not understand the gravity of this matter because as speak here, we have three members.

MR MAWANDA: In one of the councils, the chairman of the board was actually the principal signatory to the account of the board. And he was keeping the cheque book at his home. So they would sit down and see how much they want to requisition, and unless you put something for him, he will not sign the cheque. So, there is that problem in the management of those councils and boards.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you my colleague for that information. My concern here is, how do we make sure that all that we are doing here, the words, the energy we are spending here, are not in vain? Some people were enjoying themselves elsewhere, and here we are debating this. From here, we are told that for four years, from 2005-2009, the Auditor-General was observing this but even today in 2014, we are still debating the same issue, and the front bench is inadequately represented. Madam Speaker, how do we ensure that the minister concerned adequately responds to these issues?

6.18
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from the note where my colleague ended by the disappointment that we have, particularly when we do not have the ministers to pay attention to the issues raised by Parliament. This builds to what we had earlier discussed before the House, that even when we are discussing important matters, ministers decide to go out and then they turn around to feed the President with wrong information that Parliament is anti- development. I really wonder what these ministers feed our President on. I wish he was somewhere to see what we are deliberating. Because we cannot have these councils which are not operating and then the ministry just continues giving them the budget. 

I am disappointed by the council for nurses and midwives. They are supposed to regulate training and education. No wonder that is why we have half-baked nurses and midwives. Even these allied health professionals who are supposed to monitor the lab technology; - recently we were shocked to hear that when you go for check-ups in our health clinics, they will tell you that you have malaria. Then you begin treatment for malaria when you actually do not have malaria. 

When you go for antenatal, these midwives that we have who are supposed to be monitored and trained, they tell you something different. They take away our women. I think there is something wrong, particularly, it goes back to our mother ministry. What is its responsibility in terms of monitoring these councils?

When we were debating the Finance Bill, people were trying to pushing in councils. We were wondering what would be the role of these different councils at different levels, if the ministries cannot even manage to undertake the work they are supposed to be doing and they keep pushing in councils, which they cannot monitor? What are we doing as a government? What are we doing to the people of Uganda? 

I think the report has unearthed everything, which I think Parliament should strongly support, and this is after four years by the way. 

Madam Speaker, I remember when we had just come, we had requested for an implementation committee of Parliament. People refused it and now down the road four years, things have gone wrong; no titles, nothing and wait for COSASE and PAC to come and tell us what has gone wrong. I think we need to amend our rules so that we bring in an implementation committee that is going to continue following whatever we pass as Parliament, so that we do not wait for something that has gone wrong at the end of the day. I beg to submit.

6.22
MR ACHIA TERENCE (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we look at the way this country has been operating, it is really very pathetic. We in Parliament should really be in position to give the correct recommendation which will cure the situation. And if we as Parliament discuss now, then leave it at that, it will remain like that with no changes.

Now for four years consecutively, these weaknesses of the internal control systems like fixed assets registers not being maintained - no internal audit functions going on for four years! Now when the accounting officer was asked by the committee about this internal audit, he reported to the committee that it is done by the parent ministry, which is strange.     Was that the policy that it is the parent ministry that does the internal audit function? 

Now, the committee’s recommendation that in six months the council should be able to recruit an internal auditor is good news. But supposing that is not done? I want now to ask the committee. What measures and mechanisms have you put to ensure that in case this is not done, something is done? These are the things that will help us to follow up because there are many things that we discuss and leave them at that, and they will repeat continuously. Thank you.

6.29
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is an organ actually which directly and indirectly supposed to superintend over our lives in this country. And it is unfortunate that the body which is supposed to really extend maximum ethical requirements to their subjects is the one doing the reverse.

You can see in a report that they failed to recruit a professional accountant, failed to keep proper records, failed to remit deductions to URA and they managed to keep a photocopy of the title without having the original title. Now when the audit is taking place, any institution is allowed to get its relevant documents from wherever they are for purposes of audit.

And therefore, Madam Speaker, I think we have a challenge in this country; it is not only this body that has failed to do it. I belong to the committee of physical infrastructure; since 2011 we have been tasking as a committee the ministry of works, ministry of lands to secure titles for those properties that belong to Government. But I can assure you that up to today no single title has been processed. 

So I believe that when we the superintendents of particular programmes fail to do our work, we set a very wrong precedent to even those other bodies supposed to learn from us. I feel that for example in this circumstance we are having a ministry already without a political head because the Rt Hon. Rugunda is now a Prime Minister. But you can imagine the laxity at which we are really not concerned that actually we should have a head of the ministry in terms of the political arena.

And you know what it means that within this period that we are having that kind of arrangement that is not clear, you will find that the technocrats will also exploit this period to do all the evil that they can do. And I thought that any Government which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister superintends over should take health as a priority, and I do not know what your problem is and where your problem comes from? Why do you think you should take other ministries as a priority and you cannot take life as a priority in your arrangements? What do you do? Hon. Moses Ali, what do you do as Government, as Prime Minister when you cannot prioritise life? 

Madam Speaker, you recall when we were debating the 2012/2013 budget, we did put our feet firm on the ground and said we are not passing this budget until we see that there is some minimum standard that we are going to have in the health sector. And I can see that really our efforts are being betrayed by Government because for us as Parliament, I have not seen anywhere where Government brings a request that is going to handle health issues and challenges and that this Parliament have frustrated that.

So, all the strategies that Government can propose, I think this Parliament -(Member timed out.)

6.29
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Nzoghu for asking Gen. Moses Ali what they are doing in their Government.

Madam Speaker, this report touches a period between 2002 and 2012; that is a 10 years’ time. And for me on matters of health, I think this is a very long period of which consideration should have been made on an annual basis in order to appraise Parliament of what exactly is going on in those sectors especially health to ensure that adjustments are done. But 10 years’ time is certainly a very long period of time.

I also want to associate myself with those who suggested that the minister for health who happens to be the Prime Minister currently should have been around when this matter is being discussed. 

Madam Speaker, it is not because I cannot handle that matter effectively –(Laughter)- but because I cannot take decision because we are not yet in Government. As a person who regularly attends Parliament, I am so disappointed that the minister is perennially absent even if the deputy prime minister is around.

Therefore, I would like to associate myself with a recommendation that the minister should make a study of this report and come out with a statement in that respect to which I would want to respond comprehensively and have a debate with members of Parliament.

Certainly, Madam Speaker, when these bodies were established by Government, they were abandoned, so they were orphans on day one until now. So they have to collect money from the practitioners; actually the money collected from practitioners is a lot. Health workers are the lowest repaid professional. But when they put these fees they are too expensive to be afforded by many of them which make it bring the possibility that because they cannot pay they continue practicing without even paying council. Therefore, council cannot have enough funds to go hunting for this money wherever it is. So there is that kind of state of circumstances that occurs.

And because they cannot collect the money, they cannot monitor these health workers. That is what you have one billion as a budget of course they will fail to collect all the money from the practitioners, they will certainly fail because they do not have the funding to do that; It is very expensive to go and look for that money.

And I therefore think that we need to finance this body because it is quite important and because they should superintend on all health workers all over the country. If at all they are not funded they will not move. And if at all you give them the responsibility to collect from the practitioners, certainly they will use that money as they also want to get some better salaries and emoluments. So I think we need to understand the circumstances under which these bodies work - negligence of duty and taking things for granted notwithstanding, certainly there is complacency on the part of the managers of these bodies simply because they were orphaned so they must carry-on the way they want; and because the leadership within the ministry in itself has always been problematic and this is an example of a mismanaged ministry, it shows you to what extent, whether this ministry has got internal meetings in order to get reports from each of the departments or not. 

Certainly, those who were not part of this process, it is common sense when people meet, they discuss certain other things but not things that concern various departments and we have echoed these all over and I think Dr Biteks has been part of this. The leadership within the Ministry of Health needed to be streamlined yesterday, to ensure that there is strength within and to see that there is alignment of all officers to ensure that work is done within that ministry. The Prime Minister is not here who happens to be the Minister of Health; we want to take him on these so that when he leaves and maybe Dr Biteks takes over, then he knows where to start from .(Laughter) I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we have heard the response, but honourable Chair, you talked about the poor level of representation of women in these bodies, but stopped short of making a recommendation; you just said they are not enough. I thought you were going to say, they should comply with the constitution; you left it. (Laughter) Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you want to come up now because there are many things that the Government needs to respond to.

6.35
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for their contribution and their concerns. But also sympathise with them that they are aware right now, they are not in Government where they could make things change. Until that time comes, they will have to point out -(Interjection)- But I am just repeating what they said actually. They said -(Interruption) 

DR LULUME: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Prime Minister is asserting as if he is referring to those who are not in government and on the Opposition. But we very well know that various submitters on his side, right behind him now, have submitted like we have. Is he in order to insinuate that we were the only people who were concerned by this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not heard anyone who has rejected this report; all the members are speaking in support of the report - the House has merged on this one, General. 

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: Yes, but I think, Madam Speaker, I have not said anything different. I have just quoted what my colleagues have said, the other side behind me, I am aware, but for them tomorrow they will become ministers any way. So they have more chance than you are, to come and change those things, yes. Tomorrow if there is a reshuffle, one of them becomes a Minister of Health. This is it! So you will ask them. 

However, until yours comes, I will suggest that let us not just lament; let us take action. I heard somebody say the chairman of the board is keeping the cheque book -(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. It is very painful for an elder like the Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is currently the Leader of Government Business and who has been serving in all the governments since I was born in this country to disregard the issues that Parliament is raising and attempt to trivialise these issues, like trying to intimidate the opposition and yet we are debating in unison, it is about this country. No wonder he has been around all these governments and nothing has changed! Is the Honourable Prime Minister in order to ridicule Parliament and not take us seriously?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to appeal to the Prime Minister, this report concerns people’s lives; it has identified gaps, members have spoken to those, please address those. What is the government going to do, that is what we want to know. 

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really sympathise with my colleagues but I also sympathise with them that they do not want to understand what I am saying. That is my worry. If they do not understand what I am going to say, then how will they understand me? What I want to do –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I rise according to Rule 70 of our Rules of Procedure entitled, “Motion that a member be no longer heard.” I am constrained to rise up on this rule of procedure because the Prime Minister does not seem to understand the gist of the matter that this House is discussing. I therefore would like to move that in spite of his position, this rule be invoked that the Prime Minister no longer be heard, as far as this subject is concerned, I beg to move. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me make the final appeal to the Prime Minister. Can you address the matters raised in this report? Do not talk about the members not being in government - (Laughter) -concentrate on what members have raised and the loopholes please. I do not want to rule you out of order, you know, you are a Prime Minister. I do not want to rule you out of order or stop you from talking. 

GEN. (Rtd.) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, I want to appreciate your ruling otherwise these Opposition members want to hang me -(Laughter)- before they even hear me. But it is not my problem that they are in the Opposition. So, if they are in the Opposition, then they should allow me to speak and I am the Second Deputy Prime Minister and I am advising, why can’t we take action by taking these people keeping the cheque books, for example, in somebody’s house to IGG, to CID. Take action, you are there, you are also part of the country -(Laughter)- what are you doing there? When are you going to come in government? God knows and God forbid. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems the Government has no response to this report. I want to direct that the Minister of Health comes here next week and responds to all the recommendations. So, Prime Minister, that is our directive; the Minister of Health, whoever he or she, should come and answer to this report because it is a report covering 10 years of fraud, 10 years of problems.

6.44
DR MICHEAL LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I am raising a matter of urgent national concern; the Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga Road is still having a lot of problems as the country knows. Two thirds of this road goes through my constituency. It is now impassable and many accidents along the road have occurred especially in this rainy season with very big gullies which are crossing the road. I have contacted engineers from UNRA and they have reservations that since this road had been contracted for upgrading they are unable to do routine maintenance on the road. But in the circumstances obtaining where the construction of the road has been halted, it is on the Mercy of the Almighty that people can pass on any segment of this road later on to survive accidents that are occurring on a weekly basis.

Madam Speaker, when I saw the Minister in charge of Works coming in and then he went out having seen me -(Laughter )- I am worried that he has just gone out even without asking the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business for permission to go out before this matter is raised. 

I am seeking Government’s intervention because the engineers from UNRA are afraid to tamper with the road that had been contracted out yet there are obtaining problems, which are preventing the road from being constructed or upgraded to betterment as it should be. Now we are in a dilemma, some members within my constituency have taken upon themselves to plant bananas within the road and I have not supported them as yet which does not rule out my future support if Government does not come in. Madam Speaker, I am reporting this one to you to cause Government to intervene in this situation before I act adversely –(Interruption)

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and member for giving way. While it may be true that the minister ran out on sighting the member who is affected, it cannot also be true that UNRA is failing to maintain that road because of the controversy surrounding it. There is a report I demanded from UNRA, of which I think you have a copy because in transmission I copied to you, which shows that 80 per cent of the roads under the jurisdiction of UNRA are in very poor state according to their submission. So while the minister could have run out because of the Katosi saga and what is surrounding it, UNRA is also failing and I did not want to say that it is that Katosi Road alone, many roads are failing and maybe we need to take UNRA and the ministry to task to answer for all the roads that are in bad state. Not only the Nyanga-Katosi Road, but all the roads; eighty percent of the roads under UNRA are in a very poor state! That is the information I want to give to the member. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how you want us to move now on this one.

6.48
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd.) Moses Ali): I just want to appeal to the honourable that he should stop those planting bananas on the road because it may take people backwards. Because he said already people have started planting bananas which is very unfortunate. It makes even the situation worse. 

I am also sorry that the Minister of Works has gone. I have sent somebody to check so next time the Minister of Works comes in I will advise so that the minister does not leave the House because of him. So I do not know, what is the situation now? If my minister can leave because of him then I do not see how I am going to retain the ministers. 

But this issue of Katosi road is famous I do not think it is going to be solved quickly as you want it solved. But I am glad that you have also contacted the UNRA people. I think, Madam Speaker, let us give chance for them to consult further about these issues before we can do anything more.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Attorney-General can advise us

GEN. (Rtd.) MOSES ALI: I will talk to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and the Minister of Works and Transport to get a report and come with it here.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe can we also ask the Attorney-General - you are not in the middle of it but can you give us an idea when you think this matter will be resolved because there is an on-going controversy, work has stopped, there are problems, what do we do? How quickly do you think this matter will fan out?

6.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I will agree with the Deputy Leader of Government Business. I think this matter has got cross cutting issues and agencies, and I think the best thing will be the responsible and sector ministry to come here with a statement and brief the House. That is the only way we can actually proceed and maybe of course the Leader of Government Business may wish first of all before we come here to ensure that the Executive itself through Cabinet looks at the issues involved and guides us appropriately so that when we come here we come with a concrete position on the way forward.

6.51
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): You know, Madam Speaker, I come from a culture where you say it and you do it tomorrow or tomorrow but one. Now my problem is, the people of Nyenga – Katosi do not have where to pass, it is an emergency. It is like a ruptured uterus you must go in and repair it if you do not somebody will bleed to death. People must pass. Now what we wanted from the Leader of Government Business, are you giving it to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness or the Minister of Works comes here not with a report, your reports are killing us, we have been listening to reports. Let him come and tell us what he will have done for the people of Nyenga-Katosi. Let him tell us that he has put there stones in the meantime as people pass. But this issue of coming here with reports and you spend Government money and ink and good cars and fuel to give us reports, it does not make any sense to me! So for me I want them to come and tell us, “In the meantime people are passing here, we have put stones or banana leaves” but something must be done.

THE SPEAKER: But I am also wondering, is UNRA barred from doing any remedial work. Can’t they do remedial work while pending the resolution of this problem?

6.52
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are about two or three issue in this scenario: One, the IGG has directed that the contractor who is there stops work. Two, the President has also swung into action to the effect that the matter should be investigated.

Now in such a circumstance, I know that the Minister of Works, works and reports for and on behalf of Government and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who is here should in my view be telling us what needs to be done for the people of Mukono-Katosi to continue with their operations without necessarily hampering their activities in the event that the contractor has been stopped.

Secondly, what are you doing in the event that the IGG has said stop the contractor and His Excellency is saying investigation should continue. So, you should be telling us have the investigations started, what are you going to do? But also, Madam Speaker, last month I recall Uganda Road Fund released monies to the district and I also think that Government can step in to direct the district to work on that stretch so that people do not necessarily be hampered in their operations. 

Besides, Madam Speaker -(Member timed out.)

6.54   
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I like the way you are proceeding but that road is not a district road, it is a national road we cannot say that the district should come in and do something. For me the member raised it as a matter of national concern.

Madam Speaker, the urgency of the matter requires that you use your position to direct the relevant Government department to provide some remedial measure to solve that problem as the investigations the colleague is talking about are going on. People cannot travel, they have an emergency – yes, there may be investigations but I think hon. Lulume has come to this Parliament as a Member of Parliament of that area where people are facing an emergency. So, for me you do not then divert to the district; there is the government department supposed to handle and that is why maybe hon. Bitekyerezo was saying, if it is the Disaster Ministry because this is now an emergency, someone should come in.

Madam Speaker, my request would be that you direct the relevant Government department, of course through the Leader of Government Business, to take remedial measure on the emergency as the investigations and the other actions continue. 

THE SPEAKER: You want to speak without proposal?

6.56
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not right that when work has stopped a round Katosi road UNRA cannot work upon it. Therefore, I support hon. Raphael that the Leader of Government Business is here, he should direct the minister to instruct UNRA to go and do remedial work on that road as investigations and re-advertisement is going on.

6.57
MR MICHEAL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have normally what we call “foster account” and I believe UNRA actually has that account for intervention in such cases. And therefore, I would request that the Leader of Government Business prevails over the minister so that UNRA uses part of the money on the foster account to actually address this concern. It is a national issue; it is a central Government road not a district road.

6.58
MR DAVID OCHWA (NRM, Agule County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I just want to add my voice to the colleague that UNRA has foster account and it can work on that road as an emergency. Recently, when we had recent rains which destroyed Katakwi-Moroto Road and then Amuria road, UNRA, the regional office in Soroti had to work on those roads using foster account. 

What should be done is - I am happy that the Prime Minister is here, he should only direct the Minister of Works and UNRA can mobilise the equipment from the region. They can mobilise from even outside their region for that work to be done such that we do not inconvenience Ugandans who have paid taxes. And it is not their mistake; it is our mistake, the mistake of the government. So, the government which has made a mistake on that road should not again make the people there to suffer but just go and work on that road and UNRA can do that. And I think it should not really take long because this is the time farmers are selling their produce they will be losing a lot of money; Christmas period is coming they need to sell their commodities and now they cannot access market and it is not good for our citizen.

6.59
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those of the colleagues by urging Government to take urgent measures to ensure that the road is passable. Given a situation where the spot of the road is impassable and we have facilities on the other side of the road, let us say health problems somebody has to be rushed to hospital to save life and the road is impassable, what happens? Because I believe each minute counts when it comes to saving life.

The colleague has mentioned about the marketing of produce. We need to move from one side to the other. The controversy surrounding the road is known; it does not entail that the road must be the way it is but they can see what to do so that people can be able to move to get service for their people. There could be losses, controversy but people must move from one side to the other so that they can be able to access whatever they want. Thank you colleague for bringing that up to our attention.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it seems the consensus is that the UNRA has capacity to do some remedial work to facilitate movement, so we would want to ask you to direct them. These fellows will die there if they cannot move and really if there is a foster account they should use it. Make it possible, we are going for Christmas what will these fellows eat?

GEN. (RTD.) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I will tell the minister to take remedial measures to resolve that.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Members. I think we have done a bit of work. House adjourns to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 December 2014 at 2.00. p.m.)
