


Tuesday, 19 December 2017

Parliament met at 11.15 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like to alter the Order Paper for the afternoon to allow administration of oaths to a new Member of Parliament for a constituency which has been without a Member of Parliament for about two months. Therefore, I will ask the Clerk to administer the oaths in the afternoon.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we commenced debate and a few Members had contributed. However, there is a matter I thought we should first address before we proceed with the debate. 

In the chairperson’s report, there were two matters that were not originally part of the Bill; one is the issue of the term limits. We would like to know under whose instructions that part was addressed. There was also the issue of adjusting the tenure of the President. We would like to know how it was canvassed. There was also the issue of adjusting the term of Parliament. 

Honourable members, when we give responsibility to a committee like this with a Bill, we expect them to address the Bill and not to go into extraneous matters. Therefore, I would like to know from the chairperson to whom the recommendations you made were addressed to and how did they come to be part of your report. We should address this before we debate because we might spend time on them. 

11.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill referred to us, as you correctly observed, was about, among other things, the electoral processes in this country. As we stated in the beginning, we had consultations through open conversations - we invited people to the meetings - and also some people wrote memoranda to our committee. 

Madam Speaker, for the record of this Parliament, you have asked where we got what we reported on. There is nothing in that report that we did not get through a process of consultation and consideration of this Bill. Specifically, we analysed page by page of every submission, whether from the Leader of the Opposition, the Prime Minister, civil society and those who came to us, and we came up with recommendations. 

When the committee sat - at least on those proposals the minority report is either is deliberately silent or they –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, if I could be accorded opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: Order! 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the impression being created is that we got it from somewhere else. Prof. Frederick Ssempebwa, who is quoted both by the majority and minority reports, made a persuasive submission. When he appeared before us, he said that the issue of the age limit in most democracies would not be an issue at all. However, term limits would guarantee Ugandans or any country protection against tyranny. (Applause) While writing this report, we debated Prof. Ssempebwa’s proposal and the members of the committee were convinced. That is why it appears in the report. 

These are general observations for this House to make a decision on them. As a committee, we are not forcing any of the recommendations on the House. As our rules state, this House can disagree with us entirely and whatever this House agrees on is what the House has agreed on. 

Secondly, on matters of the presidential tenure, one of the best and passionate presentations was by Prof. Venansius Baryamureeba and this record is part of Parliament now. He proposed that there should be reinstatement of term limits and it should be eight years. When debating the report, like all able members of this committee we analysed that proposal and also looked at some of the regions and the best practices that we have referred to. In East Africa right now, probably one country, Rwanda, already has the seven-year term. 

Madam Speaker, aware of the likelihood that we wanted to enrich this debate, the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs agreed to adopt that proposal and reduce it by one year and bring it to the Floor. With many other submissions made, in order not to make the work of the legal committee look ugly, we were dedicated to the cause and in our recommendations, we did not say that those were specifics; these were general observations and recommendations that we made for this House. If they are saleable, the House will be at liberty to adopt them.

The parliamentary tenure is not captured in our report. However, it would be a consequential process –(Laughter) Now, for those who are laughing, we all know that the presidential term we had proposed here was also not in the Bill. Madam Speaker, we tried to scrutinise the Bill. We did not agree with the Bill entirely as a committee, and I had no problem introducing my friend until a few minutes ago, who headed a subcommittee scrutinising something that is not in the terms of reference but a method of work that I adopted as a chairperson. 

Therefore, we looked at various aspects –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, just in case there is need to lay on the Table more of the evidence that is required, we will do that. However, an attempt to say we got these things somewhere else - We got these recommendations during the process of consultation and we thought we would not ignore the views of the people that we met, including President Museveni. 

When we met with President Museveni, we put to him those proposals. We asked, “People are saying you have taken long as President in Uganda, what is the hope of having an end to your continued stay in power? When you remove the age limit, what is left?” It is in the minutes of our meeting with the President; it is not confidential. These Members need to know the truth and nothing but the truth. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I am not saying it is not the truth. What I am asking is, what do you expect this House to do? Don’t you think those would be the subject of separate Bills in their own right in this House? That is my issue.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I am persuaded that you are clothed not only with wisdom but with the ability and knowledge to steer the proceedings of the amendments. Actually, I was just giving a few of examples. In our report, you will find hon. Tayebwa –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the chairperson and this House that in the 2005 Constitution amendment, an issue like what you posed to the chairperson of the committee arose in the House. The Speaker then, who happens to be the Vice-President now, ruled and I will implore you to request the Clerk to furnish this House with that Hansard because that is also a precedent of this House. He ruled that we could not have 295 private Members’ Bills to amend the Constitution because that would mean that we would be transacting business of constitutional amendments for all the five years.

I pray the Hansard is brought. I disagree with the ruling but it is part of this House’s record. He ruled that the moment the process of a Constitution amendment is started, it is right that any Member at a certain stage can bring in amendments. (Applause) I implore this House to check through the records of this House so that we furnish ourselves with it and in case we do not agree with that aspect, we expunge it. 

THE SPEAKER: It was information to the chairperson.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto. Madam Speaker, I was not in Parliament then but that is institutional memory. We are faced with more proposals and that is why we really want this -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please take your seat. We asked the chairperson to explain the proposals.

MR OBOTH: Well, hon. Mugoya is a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, I just want to say that the object of the Bill was very instructive. The memorandum and objective of this Bill: “1. The object of the Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution…” and then they list (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) says, “for related matters”.

If it is in the wisdom of this Parliament that term limits are not related to the presidential term and elections, so be it; if it is not - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, chairperson. Madam Speaker, I recall I was in the Parliament which hon. Odonga Otto has talked about. We had 103 amendments, not Bills. The Speaker then, who is the Vice-President now, said we should shelve some of those Articles and that they would be brought in the next Parliament. I can say that up to now, none of them have been brought. We dealt with only 11 that time. I am also waiting to see the Bill because the Speaker then said any Member can bring a Bill at any time. 

Madam Speaker, one of the things which has been emphasised and which I know, Madam Speaker, you have done and which the past Speaker also did, concerns Article 93 of our Constitution, which says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government-
    (a) Proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following-
    (i) the imposition of tax or the alteration of taxation otherwise by reduction.
    (ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund…” –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no Bill. We are dealing with the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason I am raising –

THE SPEAKER: No, there is no Bill at the moment. We are dealing with the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving is that a referendum is a charge -

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for the information, which I find very useful. 

Madam Speaker, if you will allow me conclude this matter. The institutional memory of this Parliament - Parliament is Parliament. However, the scope of the Bill, if it is anything that we could determine, would get into –(Interjection)– You are a member of the committee; you cannot seek clarification from your chairperson.  

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2005 when the Constitution was amended for the first time, I was the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs and indeed, I am the one who moved the motion to amend the Constitution then. 

I would, therefore, like to inform the House that although we had few amendments, when the Bill was brought to Parliament for consideration, some Members of Parliament introduced other amendments outside the scope of the Bill. Objections were raised and the Speaker then, hon. Ssekandi, ruled that once you open the Constitution for any amendment, any Member of Parliament has liberty to move an amendment to the Constitution. (Applause)

Following that ruling, Madam Speaker, I recall very well that hon. Ben Wacha introduced an amendment, which was not in the Bill and was not even moved by Government, to introduce pension for Members of Parliament in the Constitution. Pension was discussed and all the Members of Parliament adopted the introduction of pension for Members of Parliament. As we speak, pension for Members of Parliament is part of the Constitution. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, there is precedence that once the Constitution is allowed for amendment, Members of Parliament can move amendments because the Constitution is ours and we have the powers to move amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please conclude your remarks. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I beg to report and respond as you – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: I asked questions about the report and he has answered.

MR OBOTH: What I have stated is what transpired, Madam Speaker. I beg to report.

11.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winnie Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. I rise to seek clarification from the chairperson. 

In trying to answer the reason why there is an insertion or a recommendation to do with the increment of the years or tenure of Parliament, the Member said that one of those who made elaborate speeches that were considered by the committee was Prof. Venansius Baryamureeba. He said the professor is the one who came up with the proposal of eight years and that the eight years was considered by the committee and they decided to reduce the years to fit those within the East African Community. 

I have the report of the committee, Madam Speaker. On page 36 of the report, they report verbatim what the professor presented before the committee and on that page, there is nothing indicating that Prof. Baryamureeba came up with a proposal of eight years. Can I just read what the professor said, for purposes of the Hansard? (Interruption)

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, and thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like you to refer to the Constitution. Article 61(2) clearly states the time at which our office and that of the presidency shall hold elections. It implies clearly that the tenure of Parliament, in line with Article 105, can only be sustained through free, fair and regular elections. 

Honourable members, I would like to implore you to really understand that what we are going to do shall not only be an illegality but also a nullity. This is because this Constitution says that people can only exercise their powers through free and regular elections on a given calendar. Therefore, unless you move to amend the term for the presidency, which is through a referendum –(Interjection)– I am trying to tell you what you can do legally - there is no way you can sustain an illegal amendment or extension of the term of Parliament. 

I would like to put you on notice that during our sittings in the committee, at no single moment did anyone appear before us and state clearly that they wanted a seven-year term extension for Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Those arguments will be good at the committee stage.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I still want clarity and I beg to be allowed to read verbatim what the professor presented before the committee. I do not want words to be put in his mouth.

Madam Speaker, this is what the committee reported about the professor: 

“He objected to the proposed amendment on grounds that since independence, all the Presidents of Uganda, elected and unelected, have been above 35 and below 75 years, therefore there is no data to support the removal of the presidential age limit.

There is no evidence that the youth and elderly want Article 102(b) of the Constitution repealed to allow those below 35 and above 75 years to be nominated for presidency. Professor reasoned that he has not seen any petition from the youth and the elderly demanding the amendment of the Constitution. 

Professor further reasoned that amending the Constitution will result in life presidency for President Museveni.”

The conclusion made by the committee was, “Professor cautioned that allowing young and inexperienced leaders with no temperament and other leaders who are highly prone to chronic ailments like…” –(Interjection)

MS RWABWOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, from all the different parties irrespective of our views, we cannot continue bending laws to favour our own expectations and interests. (Applause). 

Our Rules of Procedure are very clear and if you are not going to bend the laws, then listen to rule 195: 

“195. Scope of deliberations
Subject to any instructions by the House, the deliberations of every Committee shall be confined to the matter referred to it by the House and, in the case of a Committee on a Bill, to the Bill committed to it and any relevant amendments.”

Madam Speaker, what we need right now is for the chairperson to convince us whether all the other issues which were brought in the report are relevant to this Article or to the Bill that was sent to the committee. 

MR MAKMOT: Madam Speaker, rule 128 is on reference of a Bill to a committee and sub rule (4) says, “The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit, if the amendments (including new clauses and new schedules) are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.” That means that the committee can make its own proposals to the Bill. 

Therefore, is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to mislead the House that proposals can only come from other people and not the committee? The rules also allow the committee to amend by way of addition or deletion, among others. Isn’t it in order that these additions were done in accordance to the Constitution? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, rule 128 (4) says, “The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit, if the amendments (including new clauses and new schedules) are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.” I think that is what we have to decide on - whether the amendments are relevant.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I would like to refer you to rule 128(3) as well: “Except in cases of very minor amendments, and subject to rule 131, all proposed amendments to a Bill referred to a Committee shall be presented to the Committee by the person proposing the amendment and the Committee shall scrutinise it together with the Bill.”

Madam Speaker, the rule is very clear. It focuses only on very minor amendments. However, even with that exception, the amendment can only be presented by the very person proposing the amendment. What is under contention cannot be adjudged as a very minor amendment. Extending the term of the fountain of honour can never be minor. 

It is also not related to what was referred to this committee. The tenure of office of the President is articulated in Article 105 of the Constitution. What was referred to the committee was Article 102(b). It can never be, by any legal judgement, referred to as a minor. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I am one of those who restrains myself from raising points of order. I am at pain when I get to see how my colleague, hon. Moses Kasibante, whom I have known from 1992, a teacher by profession –(Laughter)– referring to the proposals that this Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs made as proposals to amend an entrenched provision in this House.

Madam Speaker, for the record, because most of them - most of us, to be polite - were talking as the chairperson was presenting, I will pardon ourselves for not listening. On the proposal of presidential term limits, the committee clearly stated that Parliament has no mandate to amend that proposal. We clearly stated that that is matter for the referendum and the laws under which that proposed amendment should be made must be complied with. I can refer you to the report.

It also not true that whatever was read - We just paraphrased but we have recordings of the Hansard of all those that appeared before the committee. It is not that whatever is written there is what was said by Prof. Baryamureeba. 

Madam Speaker, is hon. Moses Kasibante, my good friend, in order to mislead this House, as if what we have proposed is actually a recommendation to amend an entrenched provision of the Constitution on presidential term limits?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am glad you have clarified that that is not the responsibility of this House. The test of relevance on the other issues will come in at committee stage. Let us debate.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to wind up. Actually, when hon. Oboth rose to support his argument, he made the matter clearer, that what he talked about in reference to Prof. Venansius Baryamureeba became very critical that it did not need to be paraphrased. They needed to put it in the report to help us process their report.

I, therefore, find it irregular that we are introducing a matter purported to have brought forth by a member of the community, which is not captured in the record of the committee. Therefore, the matter of whether to extend the term of Parliament would be irrelevant and uncalled for at this particular time. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  The people with the minority report would like to say something.

11.54
MR MEDARD SSEGONNA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I normally restrain myself when my chairperson is speaking and it is out of civility. While giving clarification, my chairperson made reference to the minority report, which I co-authored. Now I would like to be on record on two points, which appear to be controversial. The first one relates to term limits and the other one relates to extension of the term of the President and Parliament.

It is not true, to the best of my recollection, that we had any memorandum submitted in relation to the seven-year term, whether of Parliament or of the President. (Applause) When we were in the retreat at Serena Hotel, my honourable colleague, hon. Gaster Mugoya, introduced this subject. Our argument was that the term for the presidency is a matter for a referendum and the chairperson referred this to a vote. Some of us who always wanted to go back to the people said we should go back to the people, whether for the President or Parliament. I voted to take this matter to a referendum, to the people, because that has been our consistent argument.

The issue of reinstatement of term limits came in from hon. Denis Hamson Obua and we all supported it. This is where I would like to implore this House to be patient and have a clear ruling from the Speaker. Our argument has consistently been, as presented by my senior colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige, that once there is a constitutional amendment, allow us to load whatever we have. It is in that spirit that hon. Abdu Katuntu and I requested the committee to allow us, on the last day, which was Saturday morning, to bring our proposals in the amendment. 

The questions that arose from the committee were: One, how relevant are they to this Bill? Two, why don’t you present them tonight? I protested that I had been in that committee from day one, working up to 7.00 p.m., and I had not had time to reorganise my proposals. I asked them to give me one hour on the last day, which was Saturday, to present my view. The chairperson indicated, as pointed out in our minority report, that he had a function the following day and directed the vice chairperson to chair that session. As we were still proceeding and deliberating whether to come the following day or not, the chairperson adjourned the meeting.

My insistence and argument was, we were there officially up to Saturday and I asked why he wanted to stop the proceedings midway because I wanted to introduce amendments. His answer was that we forget about those things that are not related to the Bill. He asked us to list the things that are related to the Bill. I laboured to explain but I did not get the opportunity. This is where I insist, Madam Speaker, that we need a ruling on the true interpretation of our rules - whether a person can introduce something that is outside the Bill or not. 

Secondly, I think our report has been questioned in terms of integrity. The process -(Interjection) - I am happy to clarify. (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Sseggona for giving way. From his submission, it is very clear there was a discussion on the matter in the committee. It is also a fact that at the end of the day, the committee disagreed and that is how the majority and minority reports came to be. Therefore, what point is he making? Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Let me receive the information and then I will clarify. 

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I am a member of that committee and I sat in almost all the hearings that we had as a committee. There was not a day we received a proposal that as Parliament, we extend our tenure for seven years. When we went for the retreat - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no amendment at present. We are talking about the report.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the point of order I am rising on is the continued reference to extending the term of this Parliament. I have read and internalised the report and nowhere in the report is it suggested that the term of this Parliament should be extended. There is a distinction between Article 77 (3), which stipulates the term of Parliament, and Article 77 (4), which provides for extension on specified grounds.

We are not proceeding under Article 77 (4). That Article provides for extension of an existing Parliament on specific grounds - state of war or state of emergency. When I read the committee report, their proposal is to enlarge the term of Parliament generally under clause 3. Those two are completely different. Extension is under clause 4 and it refers to one Parliament like the 10th Parliament. However, the committee is proposing to generally expand the term of Parliament. Those two are totally different. 

Therefore, is it in order for Members to keep on saying that we are not extending, when actually we are not dealing with extension but enlarging the term of Parliament? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. I am glad this debate has come up so that at an appropriate time, we can determine the relevance or otherwise of the observation. I do not know whether they are what we call the obiter dicta.

MR SSEGONNA: Madam Speaker, I was on the Floor. First, I would like to clarify for hon. Tumwebaze; there is no rocket science in this and I am sure if he gave it a bit of concentration in his mind, he would understand it - (Interruption)

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Speaker, thank you. I rise on a point of order. The committee was given work to do and they brought us a report. Is it in order for the members of the committee, like hon. Ssegonna and hon. Amoding, to continue debating as if they never had time to debate in their committee? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the House to discuss your report because we are all party to it.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here with a very heavy heart. As we sit here, the Catholic Chaplaincy was supposed to have prayers at 1.00 p.m. – (Interjections) - I am telling you, so first listen. 

I was called at 9.00 a.m. by our cleaner and she told me that the chapel had been occupied by soldiers. I did not believe her so I went there before coming into the House. I discovered that both the Anglican and the Catholic chapels have been occupied by soldiers. They even asked me why and how I accessed that place. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament dedicated places of prayer for different faiths. If you want to cancel prayers, let us be clear and state it here. However, this Parliament dedicated places of prayers. Yes, there are soldiers there and they are not allowing anyone to access that place. As a country, our motto says, “For God and my country”. Why are we pretending? Why are soldiers invading our places of worship? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask if you are aware of this. I am not happy with what is happening. Are we proceeding well as Parliament and yet we are the ones who dedicated these places of worship?

Why should we pretend every time we go for the Parliamentary Prayer Breakfast? Is that more important than God? Surely, we are doomed if we continue to put places of worship to shame. Madam Speaker, this is the issue I wanted to raise. My heart is really bleeding. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the morning, I happened to be one of the people that went to the areas that my sister is talking about. It is true there were some soldiers but these people were praying. I saw them in the mood of prayer. Is it in order for the honourable member to stand here and deny people of God? 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Okay, honourable members, I will suspend the House until 2.00 p.m. to establish what is happening in the places of worship. The House is suspended until 2.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.10 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.43 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to: 

Mr Michael Mawanda

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are obstructing the process of taking oaths. Hon. Mawanda, I welcome you to the Tenth Parliament. You will find some old friends but there are also new Members of this Parliament.

I am the coordinator of the Independents so I will assign you two committees - one sessional committee and one standing committee. However, in the meantime you are welcome.

I want to give you the instruments of your office; first the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which will guide you on all your issues; and the Rules of Procedure, which will help you do your work both in the committee and in this House. You will sit in that general area.  

Honourable members, on the 12th of this month, I issued security guidelines relating to this House: One, I said that only the Parliamentary police should be securing this place. I also said I wanted all of them in uniform with their names. I also said any other deployment of any police officers must be communicated to my office. 

This afternoon, a Member of the House complained that there were people who were in the Catholic Chaplaincy and so, we adjourned the House so that I could go and establish whether there were any people in the Catholic Chaplaincy. In the course of the lunchtime recess, I also received complaints from the Anglican Chaplaincy that there were people there. I also received information that there were actually cups and plates in both chapels. 

I want to know who those people are. I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain who they are and apologise to this House if you brought people here without my knowledge. I told you I want to know who is here for the security of this institution. If they are the parliamentary police, why were they eating in the chapels? Why should there be plates in the chapels? If you have come to pray, you do not eat. I want an explanation on who was in those two chapels before we proceed. (Applause)

2.54
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Muslim and one of the greatest sins in the faith of Islam is telling a lie. It is true it was reported that there were unknown individuals in the precincts of Parliament. When we broke for lunch, I took the trouble to walk down there. I asked the Sergeant-at-Arms who keeps the keys to the chapels and he informed me that the keys to the chapels are kept by the leadership of the faith. 

I also went to verify whether there were people other than authorised policemen and I went there with the Commandant of the Parliamentary Police. We were able to establish that there were policemen eating but not in the chapel – (Interjection) - indeed, there were utensils that had been used by the policemen but the utensils were in the corridor, not in the chapel. Therefore, it is not true that the chapel was used – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain first. Let him speak.

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: It is not true that the chapels – both the Catholic’s and the Protestant’s – were used as eating places. I thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, it is with pain that I receive such an explanation from the Minister of Internal Affairs on a matter that touches the faith of a person. I would like to tell you that I have priorities in life. My fundamental and number one priority is my heavenly father – (Interruption)

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, whatever comes to the Table of Parliament must be authorised by you. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to carry his empty mineral water bottles that he has picked from wherever he collected them and bring them here and lay them on the Table without authorisation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue we are talking about is extremely serious. If indeed there are people who have resided in the chapels, we would like to know. Why were they there? Did they sleep there? Were they eating from there?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, maybe hon. Namuganza is waiting to get saved on the last day like that thief who got saved when they crucified Jesus. I stated that for avoidance of doubt, the biggest priority I hold, and dearly, is my heavenly father. 

Madam Speaker, it is the Catholic Church that guides me to keep on the rails in my journey. The Catholic Church has instruments that they use and one of them is this rosary that I have carried in my pockets for the last 12 years I have been inside here –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please address the issue of the chaplaincy not you rosary.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, when this matter was raised by our chairperson of the chaplaincy, one of our colleagues, hon. Silwany, said there were soldiers inside the chapel but they were praying. I did not want to ask very many questions but in our minds, we wondered whether they were actually praying. When you suspended the House, we decided to go there physically. The Catholic Church is open to everybody and anybody who wants to pray, so we went there to find out whether these people were praying. 

What we found inside the Catholic Chapel, – because that is where I went – was total blasphemy and very unacceptable. Madam Speaker, we picked hundreds of plates and cups and we carried them to this place. When we got outside, we were intercepted but we overpowered the policemen. There was one who was actually, not a police officer because he wore a T-shirt inside. In the scuffle, he lost the buttons of his shirt. These are the three buttons we have. As we entered, they carried a number of them and we remained with a few - (Interjection) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with and appreciate the point raised by my sister, hon. Lucy Akello, that this is something that we should investigate. 

Madam Speaker, it just happened a few hours ago. As the presiding officer, you have not had time to investigate. What I see now is that the Minister of Internal Affairs has given his statement but some Members are not satisfied. These Members are entitled to their views, and some will even stand up and say their views are correct. 

The procedural point I am raising is whether we should not give ourselves time so that this matter is thoroughly investigated so that we know the truth. I do not think at this particular moment we will get the truth. I would like to request that we give ourselves time so that the Sergeant-at-Arms, the Minister for Security and the people from the Opposition carry out a thorough investigation and then we can come to a conclusion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is unfortunate that the matter happened here. I do not know whether to ask the Clerk to Parliament to give us a report because she is in charge of the administration here. If people were living here, it is not right.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution –(Interjection) The Minister of Internal Affairs has made a statement on the Floor and said that the keys to those two chapels are kept by the respective managers of the two places of worship. 

Madam Speaker, you have also rightly guided that this is an administrative matter. If we say there are strangers that stayed in places of worship then it means that the people who keep the keys must explain when they opened the places of worship. 

Secondly, the minister has also said that the police in Parliament are only the parliamentary police. Apart from a rehearsed plan of our colleagues to waste time of this House, what else are we considering?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats. Order! Let me direct the Clerk to Parliament to give us a report about the custody of the keys and the management of the places of worship. She will give us the report. Let us go to the next item. The Clerk will tell us how those things came about. You can lay your evidence on the Table. We shall hand them over to the Clerk to Parliament. 

MR TINKASIIMRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues and I collected a number of things, although now we just have a third of them. We have a number of plates which we cannot count.

I also beg to lay on the Table our destroyed musical instrument. I beg to lay on the Table serviettes and a number of used plates, cups and used water bottles.

Madam Speaker, we would like to request that hon. Solomon Silwany - We were raided inside here and I would like to lay on the Table a number of pictures of the so called police officers who are actually from the Special Forces Command (SFC) inside our chapel. The portrait of the Blessed Virgin Mary was destroyed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those items are handed to the Sergeant-at-Arms. The Clerk to Parliament will give us a report about those items. Let us go to the next item.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this procedural matter. I remember on 12th – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, you are about to breach the rules of conduct of this House. Honourable members, go back to your places.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, on the 12th when you gave your communication, which you have tried to reiterate, you called on the Sergeant-at-Arms to ensure that the exit to the President’s office is sealed off so that no suspicious people can enter Parliament without authorisation. 

I would like to report that the exit is not yet sealed off. It is even open wider than it was before. The presence of armed forces that are not part of the staff of Parliament has been registered in Parliament. As the Government Chief Whip guided, you should take time to find out more about this matter. 

Madam Speaker, the security and safety of Members has been paramount in this House. Members of the public have been thinking that our fights in Parliament are about ourselves and possibly because of failure to debate, but the issue -

THE SPEAKER: Now, what item are you on? 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: The procedural matter I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether it would not be procedurally right for you to first suspend the House for purposes of securing the safety of Members and to ensure that your directive is taken seriously. 
It will also show that you do not compromise the security of your Members of Parliament. We cannot continue as if it is business as usual when armed officers who are not part of your security detail can be allowed in the chamber and even take up the places of worship.  

Madam Speaker, for purposes of the safety of the places of worship in a country whose motto is “For God and My Country”, we cannot continue with the debate as if it is business as usual when we see places of worship being attacked in a place where laws are made. I plead with you, Madam Speaker, that for purposes of ascertaining whether this is true or false and for your security and that of your Members, you adjourn Parliament and iron out these issues and then we can come back and debate on a clean slate. We are not running away.

I, therefore, would like to invite colleagues that we need- (Interjections) - It is a procedural matter. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the issue of security is really the business of the Sergeant-at-Arms. If Members of Parliament have security concerns, the procedure is that you consult and inform the Sergeant-at-Arms.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! We agreed to listen to one another. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I would like to remind Members that we have immunity for what we say here in the Chamber. However, we do not have immunity for what we do. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to advise my colleagues. One of them has laid on the Table buttons from a torn police officer’s uniform. It is not our duty to arrest and beat policemen. We are here to be protected by the institution of Parliament but we cannot turn around to be the security of this House when we are Members of Parliament. I request that as Members of Parliament, we do our work and leave the work of security to the Sergeant-at-Arms.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already instructed the Clerk to give us a report on all the things which were tabled here. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2017

11.37
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to contribute to the motion for the second reading of the Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 which was moved by hon. Raphael Magyezi. I would like to take this opportunity to salute hon. Raphael Magyezi and those who seconded his motion for moving and steering the Bill this far. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to go on record to salute the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for producing a good report which, in my opinion, is relevant to the Bill. I would also like to salute the committee for having held public hearings to get the views of the people. From the outset, I oppose the minority report which, in my view, did not give the opinion on why it differs from the main report. 

Madam Speaker, compliance with court orders is very important. I would therefore like to applaud the movers of the Bill for having, among other things, captured the orders of the Supreme Court which they have given over the years. I would like to say I support the Bill in that respect.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution which we passed was promulgated in 1995. At that time, it was informed by the circumstances of 1995. In 1995, the life expectancy of a Ugandan was 48 years. According to the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics now, it is 78 years. Perhaps, if it made sense for the Constituent Assembly to provide for the age limit cap of 75 years then, it is now time for this Parliament to review that provision and completely remove the upper age limit cap.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow your colleague to speak. You will also speak.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, as the committee correctly observed, in all democracies of the world, including the United States, there is no upper limit cap on the Office of the President. In all the democracies in Europe, there is no upper age limit cap on the office of the President. In fact, the European Court has held that a mandatory retirement age is discriminatory and is therefore, illegal.

Madam Speaker, the only safeguard against life presidency and dictatorship is not age limit as such but periodic, regular, free and fair elections. Our Constitution continues and will continue to provide for free, regular and fair elections. For as long as there are regular elections, the question of life presidency cannot arise. 

I would like to agree with the recommendation of the committee that indeed the five-year term given to the President and even Parliament is not sufficient going by our experience. It is not sufficient for the President, Members of Parliament and local governments to execute their duties effectively and have the impact that Ugandans would desire. 

We all know that if somebody is a new Member of Parliament, the first and even the second year is spent learning the procedures of Parliament. The third year is spent serving our people. In the fourth year, one is going for primaries and the in the fifth year, one goes for elections. Clearly, the time left for a Member of Parliament to make an impact for his or her constituents is simply two years. 

As far as I am concerned, it makes sense for this Parliament to increase the term of Parliament from five to seven years. It also makes sense for us to recommend that the population of Uganda adopts the proposal to enlarge the term of the President in a referendum. I have read the law and I have not found anything unconstitutional and illegal; so even the existing Parliament now can benefit from the extension of seven years. I beg to recommend. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Almighty God for your tolerance and Members for maximum restraint this far.

Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point. Parliament would require a statement from the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs because the Private Members’ Bill is here because Government did not do its work. 

The Private Members’ Bill is here and you have acted under maximum guidance and restraint to keep Members of Parliament from fighting against each other and self-destruction. All this could have been resolved by the Attorney-General doing his work in terms of obeying the so many court rulings. There are so many court rulings directing the Executive to act and we have not got one. The Attorney-General should give this Parliament an explanation instead of fast tracking hon. Magyezi’s Bill per se. He should come and give this Parliament a statement in regard to Government’s compliance with all the pending court rulings. 

Secondly, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should have been the right person to have presented a constitutional review commission report. Madam Speaker, you have demanded this on the Floor of this House and I have asked questions; he promised he had names and I thought that by now, senior minister, Kahinda Otafiire, who was relieved by hon. Kahonda – (Laughter)- I am surprised today that Minister Kahinda Otafiire cannot bring this business to this Parliament. 

A constitutional review commission would help this Parliament in separation of powers and checks and balances. The Executive should generate a comprehensive constitutional review mechanism and then a report would be brought to Parliament, instead of Parliament replacing the Executive. The acrimony we now have in Parliament is because we are trying to do the engineering on behalf of the Executive. In today’s social media speak, the Executive is in kamooli watching us while we destroy ourselves, when actually they should have brought this business. 

Finally, the third procedural point, Madam Speaker, is to the effect that a lot of acrimony and division between the two sides is caused due to lack of national dialogue. Parliament is about dialogue but we are at a point where in many instances, we have become a Parliament of monologue. 

We cannot just be a Parliament of numbers. I would like to plead, Madam Speaker, that we can still be a Parliament of numbers, rationality, reason but also of relevance. That requires the Prime Minister to give a statement showing how far he listened to the eminent women of this country, who are demanding for national dialogue, and to the senior citizens including former Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi, Justice Ogola and others such as the Archbishops that have been pleading for national dialogue. 

The Speaker and Parliament cannot play the role of national dialogue without the Executive, Government, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business doing their part. I would like to request that it would be proper for the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to give a statement to this Parliament. This is because since September, the population has been waiting to hear what the Government has done. What is Government doing? When are we getting the other Bills? 

Madam Speaker, when we stopped hon. Kafeero’s submission on the Floor here, I warned that if we allowed piecemeal amendments, we shall open a Pandora’s Box. Today, you can confirm that a Pandora’s Box was opened. 

I have nine constitutional amendments but I have been under constraint, waiting for a comprehensive constitutional review commission to come on board. Can I now bring my nine amendments tomorrow because the Executive has failed to do its work? Is Parliament becoming the Executive? Have we forgotten that we are supposed to have separation of powers, checks and balances? 

3.32
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I would like to appreciate you for having sent us for consultations. It against that background that I am able to submit on this Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017. 

Madam Speaker, I consulted my people on Article 102 (b) of the Constitution and the majority have instructed me to support the removal of the age limit. My people wonder why the Parliament of Uganda should target one position for age limit and yet we have several elective positions, despite the fact that the position of the President has got executive powers and has control over resources.

They also argued that all our positions are very important therefore, lifting the age limit for the position of the President was agreeable with them. Therefore, I support the proposals by the committee and I will vote for their proposals.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of extension of the tenure of office, my view is that what the committee has moved does not only affect the position of the Office of the President but also the position of Members of Parliament and local governments. Therefore, I propose that the extension of the tenure should not only be limited to the position of the President but should cut across to local governments and Members of Parliament, effective this term.

I disagree with the committee on the issue of term limits.  With the justification that we have, based on the consultations we had, that there should be no age limit, I am also not in for term limits. This is because the two are interlinked. I, therefore, do not support the committee’s proposal on term limits. 

On whether the elections for presidential, parliamentary and local councils should be held on the same day, my people said, “No”. Their justification is that even with the status quo, we have many challenges; it is so tedious to tally and declare results on the same day. Therefore, holding local council elections together with the presidential and parliamentary elections will be more tedious. Therefore, their position is to maintain the status quo –(Member timed out.)

3.36
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that when hon. Magyezi brought a motion for a private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution, we were not in the House. Some of the things I would have said that day, if I had time, I will say today. 

I took the trouble to go back to the Hansard from the time that hon. Kafeero brought his motion and I went through in detail what transpired since last year. I have summarised some elements and I will lay this on the Table.

I rise to guide the House. When I went through the petitions, the motion, the Bill and submission of hon. Raphael Magyezi, three things came out. First, I recognize that hon. Magyezi’s motion and Bill was introduced on the basis of Article 94 of the Constitution. That Article does not give hon. Magyezi mandate; it only instructs Parliament to include a private Member’s Bill in our Rules of Procedure.

Secondly, when I looked at his presentation, he had two key justifications. The first one is that the Executive had delayed to submit a constitutional amendment Bill. The second was that Article 102 (b) was discriminatory. Madam Speaker, we can debate here as long as we debate on the basis of law, but if we do not do debate on the basis of law, what we are doing will be an exercise in futility. 

Why do I say that? A Member comes and says a provision of the Constitution is discriminatory. What is their basis? The Constitution itself, in Article 21, makes provision against discrimination and specifies what is discriminatory. When I look at the submission of hon. Magyezi, it has nothing to do with the provisions of the Constitution.

Secondly, Article 137(1) of the Constitution says very plainly that any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution shall be determined by the Court of Appeal sitting as the constitutional court. It is not determined by hon. Magyezi and yet the Bill that hon. Magyezi has presented claims that – (Interjection) - I want people to recognise that because it is very important.

Madam Speaker, I had wanted to make this submission when the issue of the private Member’s Bill came. Fortunately, our colleague just swore in today; we swear to uphold, protect, defend and support the Constitution. Any amendment of the Constitution by an ordinary Member must meet that test. I know that here we will argue and vote but I know that beyond Parliament, there is another institution to which we shall turn. Thank you very much.

3.42
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to oppose the motion and also the report and the Bill because Article 1 of the Constitution gives power to the people. We were given money to go to our constituencies and districts to bring views. Unfortunately, in the report that was presented by the committee, those views are nowhere to be seen. Therefore, I think the report is incomplete. 

Secondly, we noted with concern as Members of Parliament that the Constitution needs to be reviewed and we agreed that all issues that need to be reviewed should go to a constitutional review commission. I wonder why this issue of the age limit was pulled out from those issues that were supposed to be handled together. That is why the chairperson of the committee included issues such as the extension of the parliamentary term because they think it was supposed to be on the table. 

I, therefore, recommend that all issues, including the age limit, should go to a constitutional review commission. I thank you.

3.44
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank you for giving us the opportunity to go and consult with our people. Indeed, like some Members of Parliament, I also went and consulted my people and they said, “No”. 

Away from that, Madam Speaker, the committee report says that Article 102(b) is discriminatory. I would like to know whether the committee is really truthful in their report when they say that Article 102 is discriminatory. We may amend this Article to allow people above the age of 75 to stand for President. However, if we leave Article 77, which has one of the qualifications for one to be a Member of Parliament and also one of the qualifications for one to be a President, and we unlock Article 102 (b), how many old people will still be locked out even we open this Article? I interacted with older people and there are very many older people who do not have the qualifications of advanced level of education. Even if we are to open this, those people will still be discriminated against. 

Let us talk about the youth. In Uganda, most of our children get A’ level qualifications at the age of 19. Therefore, the argument that the youth are being discriminated against does not count because very many youth will still be left out as long as we do not untie everything as far as qualifications are concerned.

Madam Speaker, if we really want to do away with discrimination, the issue of academic qualifications must also be left out. That is why the courts are flooded with cases concerning academic qualifications. This means that if we want to address the issue of discrimination, that is one thing that we must address our minds to.

Secondly, when I consulted with my people, there were very many elders and they said they were not interested in the Office of the President because of their advanced age. What they want the Constitution and Members of Parliament to help them with is the issue of the money for the elderly, which is being given discriminatorily. Some people are getting the money while others are not. This was their voice, Madam Speaker –

Madam Speaker, I am a Christian and the Holy Bible, which I believe in, tells me that the age of 70 is the age of problems; we are living on borrowed life. If the Bible tells me that it is the age of problems and the Members of the Constituent Assembly rightly put the cap at 75, I have a feeling that even though we had never fought in Parliament, when this motion came I see us fighting. Yesterday, the microphones could not work because of this same thing and even the churches in Parliament are getting problems. I want us to address our minds spiritually to that. (Member timed out)

3.49
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to associate myself 100 per cent with the minority report. This debate will define the destiny of this country and define the future cooperation of what is called Uganda. I have four points.

First, you cannot just amend a constitutional provision when you have not even tested it. On that basis, I do not support this amendment.

Secondly, you cannot amend a constitution perennially for an individual to benefit from it. I do not support the amendment on that basis. I do not want to go into details, Madam Speaker, because there is no time. 

Let me go to my third point. I have been in this Parliament for some time. The people of the north have expressed a lot of concerns on a number of issues. We have had our own voting pattern for all these years and everybody knows that. Politics is about consensus; democracy is about consensus, not majority. It is about listening to the other group - what they have been talking about consistently - otherwise the nation will break. 

I want to bring you the message from where I come from. This debate may take any direction but the consequence is a demand from our people for two things: Uganda either goes 100 per cent federal today – we need federal power so that we own certain responsibilities ourselves - or we secede – (Interjection)- I want to assure you that there is going to be no way you are going to continue sitting on a population whose interests are different from yours simply because you have the majority. Never!  

I want to assure you that we are not going to accept that. We shall not accept that and you better take this warning. I am speaking on behalf of our people – some are in Parliament while others are everywhere where you know. By whatever means, I want to assure you, and you should take this seriously - 

That is why I have told you that politics is about consensus; democracy is about consensus. It is not about sitting on others because you have that majority. Never! You have sat on us enough. We have had our own voting pattern and we shall decide our destiny. We shall secede from this country. We are big enough. If those small nations - I know there are some individuals who will not agree with me and they are leaders here and they come from where I come from. Let us go back to the people through a referendum and ask them and you will see. We shall decide. 

Therefore, I would like to request Members that as we debate this motion, we should not just argue and say we have the numbers. As leaders, we have a responsibility. When I look at Prof. Kamuntu, I would expect him, having gone through all these years, to help us. You have gone through many regimes and you have served in many governments. You are an elder. We look to some of you.

When I look at some of my elders like hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, whom I respect very much, I would expect him to listen to these reasons. Politics is not about numbers, if you want to hold a nation together. You have sat on us but we have the resources to get our own autonomy. We have the human ability to be independent. I would like to assure you; you have heard in the past people talk about Nile Republic and all those kinds of things.

Madam Speaker, some people will disagree with me but I would like to assure you the destiny of this country will be decided by the people of Uganda in their respective places. If you want to take these words lightly, I am telling you we shall test it very shortly. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to request you to allow Members to speak. If even you do not agree, listen. 

3.54
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First of all, I would like to start by thanking hon. Magyezi for bringing up this Bill. We could have just found it in our pigeonholes but he brought up the Bill and we have been given time to debate. Although emotions are coming up about secession, I am not sure whether it is the north that should secede instead of the east - perhaps the east that has never tested it, but it is okay.

Madam Speaker, when I went out for consultations, my people told me that they have no problem with lifting the age limit. (Applause). The reason was that they do not see any problem; if a wife cooks well they do not see any reason as to why you should divorce her –(Interjections)– When you spoke, I listened -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member to speak.

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, there is a mechanism of removing a dictator and a President who is not doing well and that is through an election. We have had many elections and even in the future, it will be an election that will throw a president out especially if he or she is not performing. We do not see a reason to restrict a president who is performing well.

The only contention in my constituency, which has since been attended to by the committee, was the lower age limit. The Magyezi Bill says that Article 102(b) should be repealed. My people said that if we leave it as it is, a mother will carry her baby and say the baby has to become a president. The recommendation from my people was that there should be a lower age limit of 18 years, after all – (Interjection) - It is not a lie; you were not in my constituency. They said that Article 59 (1) and (2) gives an opportunity to a citizen who is 18 years of age to vote and therefore that citizen can also be voted for as president. What is wrong with that?

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the committee report and the recommendations. However, I disagree with the minority report because they have not given us any substance. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.59
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank You, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

I would like to specially thank you, Madam Speaker, for steering us this far. I would like to also thank hon. Raphael Magyezi and his friends who supported the motion for the effort and trying to cure inconsistencies in the Constitution. 

The preamble of the Constitution provides that all people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions. Article 1 gives the power to the people to choose who should govern them and how they should be governed. It goes ahead to provide for how they should change leadership through regular and fair elections.

Article 32 of the Constitution provides for affirmative action and non-discrimination. It provides that all people regardless of age, gender and those marginalised should access leadership positions.   

Madam Speaker, when it comes to Article 102(b) and Article 183, it departs. Throughout the preamble and other Articles I have cited, it gives with one hand but takes away with the other hand when it comes to this Article. It is against this background that the people of Isingiro empowered me to come and speak on their behalf to support the amendment of the Constitution, especially for those Bills.

Madam Speaker, new things have cropped up. One of the issues is why the Bill was brought as a private Members’ Bill. Article 94 of the Constitution provides the procedure of tabling a private Member’s Bill. There is no law that has been broken and the Government and everyone here is acting within the Constitution.

I oppose the reinstatement of term limits because the spirit within which we removed them is still abundant with us. We should not allow people to decide and yet on the other hand, you limit them.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of expanding the tenure of Office of the President, well people have given many reasons. However, I would like to invite Members to look at budgetary issues. We spend a lot of money through regular elections. While we appreciate that the one of the President is through a referendum, we implore Members to recommend that this referendum takes place so that we enlarge the tenure of the President. As for Members of Parliament, I do not see why we have to wait and not sort it out here so that we go ahead and become agents of change.

Finally, I would like to thank everybody for their contributions, which have brought us this far. I pray we have the spirit to listen to each other and come out with laws that will stand the test of time.

4.03
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a contribution. 

I would like to make my contribution based on Chapter Eighteen of the Constitution, which provides for Parliament to amend the laws of this country. I am convinced that those who made that law saw it fit that when the conditions warrant a change to suit society’s needs, Members of Parliament would change that law to make it fit to govern the society prevailing at that time. If some of us think it should not be done right now, even in the future Parliament will always be there to handle that issue that affects the society in order to maintain peace, economic development and the wellbeing of Ugandans.

I also support the amendment of the five-year tenure that is provided for currently. We have tested and proved that the time allocated at that time is not sufficient to cause an impact as we serve our people at the grassroots.

Finally, I speak for the people of Kyegegwa District who allowed the three of us to come and amend the Constitution. They do not see anything wrong. They have benefitted from the current NRM rule and they wish it the best. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.06
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I thank you. The people of Manjiya in Bududa District are against the removal of the presidential age limit from the Constitution and they are equally against the seven-year term extension.

The spirit and rationale behind formulation and eventual promulgation of the Constitution of 1995 was to bring an end to our chaotic past and also usher in a smooth, peaceful transition of power. Article 102(b) is now the only remaining constitutional guarantee to such a peaceful transfer of power from one president to another. 

Uganda has had nine presidents 56 years down the road but none of these has come peacefully into statehouse. They have come through the barrel of the gun and bloodshed. Uganda has witnessed peaceful transfer of power from one Member of Parliament to another, from Vice-President to another, from one Prime Minister to another Prime Minister, but we are yet to witness a peaceful, smooth transfer of power from one President to another.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that the sitting President will have turned 77 years come 2021 and therefore, he will be way above the 75-year presidential age cap. Apart from enabling him to run for President in 2021, there is no evidence whatsoever - no petition from those below 35 years or even complaint from those above 75 years - to justify repeal of Article 102(b). 

Therefore, I only see us legislating to entrench a life presidency of one individual and that is virtually against Article 8A of the Constitution, which says, 
“(1) Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy. 
(2) Parliament shall make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect to clause (1) of this Article.”

Madam Speaker, what the people of Bududa and I see here is the repealing of Article 102(b) in order to promote personal interests of an individual and individual good, not the common good of Ugandans. 

You and I as part of the Tenth Parliament owe Ugandans an obligation, and that obligation is to ensure that our President and those close to him are well guided and counselled to ensure he peacefully hands over power. Uganda is not short of manpower that the existence of this country should revolve around one person. 

You wonder, if five years are short for a presidential term, the fundamental question I would ask is: are 35 years also short? (Laughter) The other critical question I would ask is: how will seven years - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You made your point. You have half a minute to conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was asking a very critical question: how will the seven years help to build the institutions which 35 years in power have failed to build? Discuss. (Laughter)

4.12
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to bring a message that was packed in a file, which the voters of Bugabula County South gave me, that vote for me, for you and the President of this country. 

Madam Speaker, I wish every Member of Parliament inside here, like the colleague who was on the Floor, quoted Chapter Two, Article 8A (2) of the Constitution, where it says that Parliament is supposed to make laws that must be in the national interest of Ugandans. This is because we are here representing the interest of Ugandans outside there. Madam Speaker, you have seen the scuffle, the tension and everything that we have gone through since this Bill was introduced. I wish we would ask ourselves this question: if this Bill was in the national interest of all Ugandans outside there, would we go through what we are going through? (Applause)

The presenter of the Bill said it is discriminatory. On planet earth, there is no law and nothing that is not discriminatory. God would not have chosen only Jesus to be His son because we are all His sons. Everywhere we go, discrimination will exist.

Madam Speaker, in the same Constitution that we respect, when you go Chapter Three, they define who a citizen of Uganda is and they state that every citizen of Uganda must vote when it comes to elections. However, the same Article 102 of the Constitution also states that a person eligible to stand for presidency must be a Ugandan by birth and yet there are several Ugandans by registration, association and so on. Are we also going to amend that so that every Ugandan can stand for election? This is equally discriminatory. 

Even when it comes to voting, religious and cultural leaders are not supposed to stand for some of these positions, which is also discrimination. Are we also going to amend that so that even the cultural and traditional leaders can equally stand for presidency? 

When I was in Bugabula, I conducted four consultative meetings in the four subcounties that I represent. There is no subcounty where I had an attendance of less than 1,500 people. The biggest attendance consisted of 1,700 people from the subcounty I come from, which is Kitayunjwa. The biggest number that told me to go and amend the Constitution was 53. More than 1,500 said “do not amend”. These are the numbers in the rest of the subcounties that advised me to amend the Constitution: Butansi, 21; Bulopa, 23; and Namwendwa, 29. The rest - above 1,500 people - were saying, “Please, do not amend the Constitution.” 

Madam Speaker, I need to be quoted on this. As the Tenth Parliament, we can stand here and succeed in amending Article 102 (b) but we shall never succeed in amending the broken hearts of Ugandans outside there. (Applause) 

4.17
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and thank you, Parliament of Uganda, for having facilitated us to go to our constituencies and consult the people. Article 1 of the Constitution says that power belongs to the people and definitely, we went and consulted the people. Personally, I went to Ntoroko to consult and they told me what to do. Therefore, I am here to support the motion of hon. Raphael Magyezi to lift the presidential age limit. 

I want to make it clear on this Floor that Article 1 of the Constitution says that the people will express their will and consent on who will govern them. If I am a citizen of this country - (Interjections) - I am; do not doubt it. That is why I am here because I am a citizen of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Order! 

MR RWEMULIKYA: Let me address myself to citizens of this country who are in this Chamber. Madam Speaker, the Constitution gives the citizens of Uganda the mandate and the consent to determine who will lead them. If personally, I know that someone of 30 years can be a good leader, why don’t I vote for that person? Why do you allow someone who is 18 years old – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the Member to contribute. 

MR RWEMULIKYA: Madam Speaker, I am still on the Floor of the House. If someone of 18 years old can go and vote, why shouldn’t they be voted for? 

Madam Speaker, to me – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would like to quote Appendix F, on page 236 of our Rules of Procedure: 
“Declaration of interest
Members shall fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the House in respect of the declaration of interest and shall always draw attention to any relevant interest in any proceeding of the House or its committees, or in any communications with ministers, government departments or Executive agencies.” 

Madam Speaker, to begin with, talking about the seven years –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are not the Electoral Commission so take your seat. 

MR RWEMULIKYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I know I am a citizen of Uganda and that is why I am in this Parliament. 

When we see the word “amendment”, it means that the people who made the 1995 Constitution knew that the time would come and Ugandans would need to amend the Constitution. The time has now come for our people to amend it. 

Why do we have youth and elders elected at the district levels and yet they are not supposed to be elected at some levels? Now we have the youth who are honourable councillors at such an age. When they want to contest for LC V elections, they will be prohibited because they are not yet 35 years. That is being discriminatory in nature. Therefore, in my view, Madam Speaker, I support the lifting of the age limit.

In conclusion, I salute the proposal for the restoration of term limits. I think this is the fundamental safety value that we have in this country. I would like to say one thing to hon. Reagan Okumu; first of all, those threats are empty. This Uganda has come from –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have personally been waiting for this opportunity where we can come and debate. This is because I strongly believe in intellectual reasoning and thinking for the country and at the same time being able to tolerate each other as we discuss for our nation.

You recall very well when this Bill was introduced by hon. Magyezi, it created lot of acrimony right from the beginning both here in the House and outside. What we are dealing with at this point in time is not a small matter but a fundamental matter for the future of this country. I belong to the school of thought that should enable and give me the opportunity to think rightfully for my country.

Madam Speaker, I have read both the minority and majority reports. Through your ruling, you were able to get us to consult and as a researcher, I religiously applied the rightful methodology to collect information in as far as this matter is concerned. I did not want to leave any stone unturned. I wanted to ensure that the people who elected me give me their voice. I had a very big turn up. I managed to cover 11 parishes and concluded with one major rally. 

What I experienced is that the people of Fort Portal asked me not to amend Article 102(b). The people of Fort Portal elected me and I have to respect them. Even before we went for consultations, the opinion leaders of Fort Portal, including religious leaders, called and warned me inter alia. 

I love my President; I have made this very clear to everybody. He is one of the greatest men we have had. I want to repeat this honourable members; it will take us another century to get a man like him - (Interjections) – Yes, I want to acknowledge this fact because he has managed to lead us and he has really managed as you can see. 

We all know great nations that have been built over the years including United States of America, the greatest in the world. There were strong individuals behind them. Those individuals played their part. Uganda as a country has had a chance where we have had a great leader, a strong leader, who has emerged and managed to unite this country. In this present moment, I do not expect us to see our great leader go down after building a very important and long lasting legacy for Uganda. Anybody who wants -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, the country is at cross roads. When the committee was scrutinising this very Article, they came out with a safety measure and said, “Can we have the term limits back?” I will just quote one of the phrases written by the committee, which is very important for our scrutiny. 

On page 92, the committee says, “In supporting this amendment, the committee is persuaded that term limits prevent arbitrary and violent rule often associated with lifelong presidencies from recurring. Furthermore, term limits offer a periodic guarantee of personnel change in the Office of the President, open up political space for new ideas and thus consolidate democracy by ensuring that there is alteration of political power.” 

Madam Speaker, I will conclude with this point. Can we as Parliament constitute a team to negotiate with the President about the transition of Uganda? - (Interjections)- We can do it! The President is very scared about what he sees happening here. Even if I were in the shoes of the President, I would not just allow these things to happen. Therefore, we need a team to negotiate with the President about the future of Uganda and the transition of the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.32
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, People with Disability, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You sent us out to do consultations. When I left this place, I did not know which side to take. When I reached the ground, I was able to carry out five consultations in eastern region for people with disabilities. The consultations were not along party lines; for example in Teso, I had somebody from UPC chairing my meetings.

Madam Speaker, people with disabilities are synonymous with this Government, and I will give the reasons they gave me. They agreed on all the other areas that the report has talked about – the issues of petition and others. This is what they said, especially concerning Article 102(b):  They told me, “If you are a voter, is there a law which stops you from being voted for?” That was the first thing. I said that we did not think about this when I left Kampala.

They reminded me that Parliament passed a law for the elders in the Ninth Parliament and the elders are yearning to come to Parliament and of course, for the presidency, and they said, “Let it be open”. They said the power to vote, whether for President Museveni or anybody, lies with the people of Uganda. It is the people to decide to either to vote out the person they do not want or bring in the one they want. I am sure the President has never gone to that seat without the people’s mandate. It is the power of the people that brings him on board.

I had some young people in the meetings and they said, “We have been speakers; how can I control the council and I am not allowed to be the chairperson of the district or the chairperson of a division because of age?” They said they have been in charge of council meetings and resolutions as speakers –(Interjection)- I have a full report. Hon. Ssekikubo, I can go with you somewhere and show you the report I brought from the people. I have the names of the people who gave me these views. I am entitled to my opinion. Therefore, do not again interfere. You will have the time to talk for yourself.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to say that for the people with disabilities, I even have a pledge where I heard the ones of Busoga saying, “We, persons with disabilities of Busoga, support the age limit Bill”. I want to talk on behalf of the people who sent me here unopposed; they have allowed us to support all the amendments. They even went ahead and said Parliament should be given seven years –(Interjections)- Yes! I will bring them to witness -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, the people with disabilities said they are tired of always being called for elections, moving up and down. Mobility is a problem for them. Therefore, they thought maybe seven years will save them from the mobility problem. Therefore, on behalf of the people with disabilities of eastern Uganda, I stand here knowing my people are behind me and we support the amendment. Thank you.

4.36
MR MUSA ECWERU (NRM, Amuria County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the people of Amuria County. Amuria is in Teso and Teso is in north-eastern Uganda. I rise to report that the authority that the people of Amuria gave me was to come and support the amendment - the removal of Article 102(b)- for a number of reasons.

One reason is that in Amuria, the elders are respected. To us in Amuria, age is synonymous with wisdom and we are very convinced that at 76 or 79, the people will have accumulated enough wisdom to be very useful in the management of the country.

Madam Speaker, the people of Amuria also told me, and I want to make this clear, “Musa Ecweru, go and tell Ugandans that even if it means disagreeing, we are going to remain together as Ugandans.” Therefore, I want to assure this country that the whole issue of saying that north or north-eastern Uganda will secede is something that was said by someone who is in dreamland. – (Interjections) - Uganda will remain one. We will continue to disagree –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tolerate one another. You do not have to agree.

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, I am a Ugandan. I listened very attentively –(Interjections)- This country will never break up. We are here to make sure that this country will stand together. We will do everything possible to make this country one. We will disagree here, agree here but we will remain in Uganda. Nobody can come and intimidate us here and think he will make the country –(Interjections)- You tried and failed and we will make you fail again. 

Madam Speaker, I am on record as having defeated a group which wanted to secede. We defeated them and we will defeat again. This must never be a platform for intimidation –(Interjections)- Nobody can intimidate us and get away with it. I support the amendment in its entirety. I reject the minority report and this country will remain together. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR IBRAHIM KASOZI (FDC, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I air out the views of my voters, allow me to read the first paragraph of the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It says, “Recalling our history which has been characterised by political and constitutional instability…”

Madam Speaker, it is at this time that I would like to thank the framers of this Constitution. Having analysed and diagnosed the problem, which had taken this county into a lot of problems, they dwelt on two issues: politics and Constitution. They wisely put this at the start of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, to help us realise that whatever decision we are going to take, we should recall our history. Whatever decisions we are going to take, we should sit and save the future of this country.

Madam Speaker, I rise to support 100 per cent the minority report. (Applause) The justification which was given by the person who introduced the Bill was that this Article was discriminatory. If the Bill was brought in good faith, they would have started with Article 80. Article 21 (1) says that we are all equal before the law. However, Article 80 of the Constitution stipulates qualifications of Members of Parliament. Even those without qualifications are Ugandans but the framers of the Constitution put parameters for a reason.
	
When you read Article 246(3) (e) of the Constitution, cultural leaders are Ugandans but they are not allowed to participate in politics. That is discriminatory too. Our king is qualified to stand as President.  I would feel happy if our king became the President of the Republic of Uganda. However, the framers of the Constitution thought it wise that if you bring cultural leaders into politics, the country will go back to where we came from. 

Madam Speaker, we live by hope. In a situation where you lose hope, you become desperate. That was the same situation the leaders in Government today faced at one time; when they lost hope in the leadership then, they took up arms, fought and restored the relevant democracy, which we are enjoying today.

Madam Speaker, when I went to consult my people in Makindye East Constituency, they ordered me not to amend the Constitution. They also requested me to come before my fellow Members of Parliament to appeal to you to restore the term limits.  (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssentongo. This is her maiden speech; do not interrupt her. 

4.46
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to uphold the views of the people of Kyotera on Article 102 (b). 

First of all, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because when this Magyezi Bill came on the Floor, you gave us an opportunity to go back to our constituencies to consult our people regarding this Bill. I religiously went back to my people in Kyotera. I was able to go to all the 12 subcounties in Kyotera and I met people in over 32 centres, which were convenient to them, and they gave their views.

Madam Speaker, I would to like to tell you that in 2005 when terms limits were removed, I was there. I know before Kyotera was separated from Rakai, Rakai was pro NRM. No one would listen to anyone who talked about not removing term limits. The streets were full of people dressed in dry banana leaves advocating for that. I would like to inform you that this did not happen this time. Among the very people that loved President Museveni and NRM very much, this time it was different. 

I was the only Member of Parliament that went to the public to consult them. The rest consulted from hotels and invited people who were only NRM. My people can defend me on this. I was the only one and they kept telling me, “Robina is good; we voted for you because you love the people.” -(Interjections)- I am the only person who consulted in public. 

Madam Speaker, I consulted over 20,000 people from different places and only three of them, who were NRM chairpersons at village level, wanted Article 102 (b) amended. That is equivalent to 0.016 per cent of the number that I consulted. The majority, that is, 99.9 per cent, rejected the amendment of Article 102 (b).

Madam Speaker, the views of the people are critical. We should not amend the Constitution for our individual interests. We should go an extra mile and think about the people who voted us to Parliament. I know many of us are benefiting but many of them are out there suffering. I was amazed to see women who used to kneel down and listen to NRM take the microphone and say, “No, enough is enough.” I heard young people above 18 years say that if they do not have the capacity to stand as councillors, how do you expect them to stand for President?

Madam Speaker, no one among the people I consulted accepted life presidency in Uganda – (Member timed out.)

4.52
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in defence of the minority report, which in my opinion and in the opinion of very many Ugandans is the majority report. (Applause)  

I base my argument first on Article 79 of our Constitution, which requires us as the Legislature to make laws for peace, development and good governance of Uganda. (Applause) I also summon the preamble of our Constitution that recalls the turbulent times our country has gone through.

Madam Speaker, it has been said that there comes a time in the life of every nation when it comes to a crossroad and it must choose which road to go. My friends, if there is a time that Uganda has come to that point, it is today. If there is a Parliament upon which history has bestowed a very big responsibility, it is ours. We are brought here to be the representatives of the people of Uganda today, ladies and gentlemen. Today we have the opportunity to determine the future of Uganda. We have the opportunity to break or make our country. 

Honourable members, I would like to remind you that in 1966, an abomination happened right here in this Parliament when the Independence Constitution was murdered in cold blood by the leaders of that time. The outcome of their action sentenced Uganda to a long period of political instability.

When President Idi Amin came to power and suspended this Parliament, no single Ugandan rose to defend this Parliament. Why? It is because it had become irrelevant to them. It had become a club of politicians who come here to seek their personal interests. (Applause) The people of Uganda could not rise to defend a Parliament, which had raped their Constitution. They could not defend a Parliament, which had robbed them of their democracy which they had poured blood for. (Applause)

When NRA took power in 1986 led by President Museveni, he declared that the problem of Africa, and Uganda in particular, are the leaders who overstay in power. A Constitution was made and Ugandans swore to abide by it. This Constitution lies before us today. We are back to square one. The people of Uganda made this Constitution but I would like you to know that one man is trying to influence this Parliament so that he can do what he wants. If that person does not care about what happens to our country after he leaves, at least we can summon our minds, decide and think about the future of our country.

Today, we know that studies have been made and surveys have been carried out. Madam Speaker, I have had the rare opportunity to traverse the whole country and everywhere I have been, from the north to the south, from the east to the west, people are saying do not amend our Constitution. These people know what they are talking about, they know what this is about and who is pushing for it. They are not saying do not amend because it is a fashionable thing to do; no. It is because they know what will come if this Parliament disregards the popular view and amends this Constitution. 

These people are connected to the world and they have been seeing what happens in countries around us where leaders thought they could rule heir countries for life. That is why they would like to avoid it before it comes here today. (Applause)

I would like you to know that we are a young nation. Millions upon millions of young people are looking at us right now. Our people are watching us and waiting to see what comes out of this Parliament. I would like to warn you –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I only have one minute. I would like to warn you, Members, that if we do not -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, they are taking my time.

I would like to tell you, Members, that if we do not learn from the history of our country, then we are bound to repeat it. They always say history repeats itself but one man, Eriya Kategaya, argued that stupid people repeat history. Therefore, if we do not learn from the mistakes that have happened, we are bound to repeat the same thing. We have a chance to solve the problems of our grandfathers and grandmothers. We have a chance to reverse that and it is important that we save our children and the children of our children from this madness. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

4.59
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you sent us to go and consult, the people of Nwoya District sent me with strict instructions that I should tell this Parliament that Article 102(b) should not be amended. 

I will address myself to that issue later; let me first address Article 61(2) as proposed by the committee. There is a proposal by the committee to amend Article 61 that I feel is going to affect this country. They are proposing in the Magyezi Bill that the time for holding elections should be amended from the first 30 days of the last 120 days to the first 30 days of 172 days. That means we are going to hold elections in November. 

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with this because that is the time when our students are in school doing their exams. That is also the time when we have the peak of the rainfall season. When are we going to campaign? Therefore, I do not support that submission of the committee.

I also do not agree with the proposals of the committee on the whole of Article 102. The committee is proposing to actually amend the whole of Article 102 and replace it with new amendments. In these new amendments, I would like to draw the attention of Members to a proposal that is worse than even the age limit proposal. In the new proposal, they are introducing new restrictions on the candidature of the President. I foresee that we are going to have problems. 

The original Article 102 gives the age cap but the committee is saying in their proposed Article 102(c) that a person is qualified for election as President if that person is resident in Uganda on the nomination day. This is against the principles of multiparty democracy where any political party can nominate a candidate even if the candidate is not there. We are going to have a situation where presidential candidates are going to be exiled from this country at the time of nomination. I do not agree with this. It should be removed from the amendments that came from the committee.

Madam Speaker, everyone is saying Article 102(b) is discriminatory but when you look at the proposals from this committee, everything is discriminatory. Article 102 (2) as proposed by the committee introduces qualifications for a person to be elected as President. All these enumerate conditions that restrict presidential candidature. 

Madam Speaker, at this point, it is as if we are in a clan meeting and the clan is asking us to testify against our parents. We love President Yoweri Museveni; he has done a lot for this country and no one refutes that, but we should let him rest. I am 41 years old and 30 of those years I spent in a time of war. From 1976, it was only in 2006 that I saw peace in this country. This means that part of the –(Member timed out.) 

5.04
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the name of God the most gracious, the most merciful. As the Parliamentary Imam, allow me to extend my solidarity to the Catholic and Anglican chapels that have been invaded this afternoon. We pray that the report comes out so that the same does not happen again. 

Madam Speaker, the framers of the 1995 Constitution realised what we went through and indeed, tasked us to make the Constitution that President Museveni called one of the best constitutions in the world. 

Madam Speaker, I was here in the Seventh Parliament when we lifted the term limits. The spirit in which the Article on term limits was amended is the same spirit in which Article 102 (b) is about to be amended.  At that time, it was amended to favour H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I have no doubt that even this amendment is not creating room for Gen. Moses Ali, who is above 75 years, or hon. Muganwa Kajura to come in as President; it is only creating room for one person. 

Madam Speaker, when President Museveni was interviewed by NTV, he was asked whether at 75, someone can be very productive at the level of President. In his own words, His Excellency was quoted as having said, “At 75, your energy has been lost. You cannot move all the responsibilities of this country when you are 75.” I am surprised that he is the same person who is behind this arrangement. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that President Museveni, as chairman of NRM, has trained many cadres. However, he is doing his party a very big disservice because they are now saying that it is him alone, and Article 102 (b) is about him alone. 

We know that many of us here went to our constituencies. I believe that we are representing the right view of our electorate. When you sent us for recess to go and consultation, it was only Article 102 (b) that we were meant to consult on. I wonder whether Members consulted in anticipation of other amendments that are here. It is therefore very imperative for us to go back and consult on every amendment that is supposed to be brought here. 

Madam Speaker, I have been here since 2001 as a Member of Parliament. This is my fourth term as a Member of Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

5.09
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you and this Parliament because now we can sit, talk, debate and bring out our issues. I rise to support the report of the main committee. 

Out of all the amendments that are in the Bill, one contentious one is Article 102 (b). I looked at the report of the Odoki Constitutional Review Commission. When they presented it in this Parliament, the issue of the upper age limit was not there and the upper age limit issue was brought in this Parliament as a product of the late Brig. Noble Mayombo and others. 

In the debate that ensued, most people complained that 75 years of age was being put to bar the late Dr Milton Apollo Obote from coming back to contest as President. This is on record. This is why limiting somebody because of his age is not only discriminatory but it undermines the person’s rights as stipulated in Article 32 of the Constitution. Therefore, Government must ensure it corrects any law, custom and culture that limits somebody on the basis of his age.

Madam Speaker, the issue of age limit is a problem here because people thought that was the only safeguard that they would have to have in ensuring that power moved from one president to the other. I would like now to support the position of the committee that we reintroduce term limits in this Parliament as a safeguard, so that we have checks. 

This is common practice in most jurisdictions in the world. When you go to America, the Commonwealth and even in Kenya, you will find term limits. However, no one has brought scientific evidence to say that somebody who is 75 years of age cannot rule, think or lead. Because of that, I would like to ask this Parliament that let us come together, restore term limits and embrace them so that they remain a safeguard for this country, other than sticking to one thing, which is not even a common practice among many democracies in the world. 

On the question of seven years, I have looked at issues surrounding elections in this country. Immediately after the general elections, there is always inflation. The Central Bank often comes in to stabilise the economy. Many people have to spend a lot of money and people spend a lot of time not working. 

Even in Parliament, for the last one and a half years, we have been fighting. Come 2019, Members will begin going for campaigns. Due to that, Madam Speaker, I think it will be a nice thing for this Parliament and for the country to give people time to elect a person who can stay for seven years. If you do not perform well, nobody is going to elect you. You will have the responsibility to perform so that you know when you are out, you will take some seven or 14 good years outside before you get back to Parliament.

Madams Speaker, because of this, I am calling Members of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Kizige comes up, I wish to correct some information on page 44 of the main report, which made reference to Parliament as having brought the issue of the upper age limit. It was not Parliament but the Constituent Assembly. You should correct page 44 of the main report.

5.13
MR MOSES KIZIGE (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was one of the few people in this House who offered themselves in 1994 as a candidate for the Constituent Assembly. I was young, aged 31, but I lost the elections and it was so painful for me. 

When the Constitution was finally passed, there were two Articles which were so painful to me. One was the term limit and the other was Article 102 (b). By the grace of the Lord, we were able to remove the term limits in 2005. I now take this opportunity to thank hon. Magyezi for having brought this Bill, which gives us another opportunity to remove the age limit. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we take two oaths as Members of Parliament, the Oath of allegiance and the Oath as Member of Parliament. The oaths conclude specifically that we shall “preserve and protect the Constitution as by law established”. The law as established is very clear on the process that is followed to amend the Constitution. We are not violating any law in amending the Constitution. We are being constitutional in amending the Constitution and that is why I support the Bill and the report of the committee.

I was at pains when an honourable Member of Parliament said that there will be secession in this country. Madam Speaker, I have two of my sisters married in the Acholi sub region; one is married in Pabbo and another in Anaka. The children of my sisters cannot be party to such concoctions. After all, we know very well that the NRM Government has the capacity to defend its territory and therefore, nobody will secede and nobody should be intimidated.

I would like to agree with the report of the committee that the term of five years is so short and, therefore, the President and Members of Parliament need seven years. The people of Bugabula County North, unlike my colleagues from Bugabula County South, were properly consulted.  Madam Speaker, since you do not have a voice in this House, I want to tell you that the majority of the people of Kamuli are in total support of the amendment and so we go ahead and support the report of the committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.16
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, let me thank the committee for the report and thank hon. Magyezi for using his right to bring a private Member’s Bill. 

I would like to thank the framers of the Constitution who in Chapter Eighteen provided for amendment of the Constitution and the same Constitution provided that a private Member can bring a Bill. Therefore, the Bill and the report are properly before the House.

When I went to Kinkizi County East, which I represent in this Parliament, the people told me that as long as we continue to improve services, they have no problem and in any case, they regularly vote leaders whom they want. Therefore, they Okayed the amendment of the Constitution and particularly, Article 102(b).

In addressing this matter, we need to examine what is happening globally. There is a demographic transition where countries are transiting from the first to the fourth phases of transition. These transitions mean that the wellbeing of the people continues to improve according to the phases. 

In most of the countries in Africa, we are in the first and second phases. What does it mean? We are experiencing situations where we still have high fertility, which means that our population is young, but there is also decline in mortality and people are surviving. This means the youth constitute a very big segment of our population. Therefore, should the current provision in Article 102 (b) stop young people from accessing political offices? The answer is “no”. 

What has happened world over is that many countries are reviewing their constitutions to accommodate young people. That is why the proposal by the committee says we need to do away with Article 102 (b) so that anybody who is 18 years and above can contest for the position of President or district chairperson. This is happening in Austria, Denmark, France, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, and in the UK where the lower age is 18 years while in Scotland it is 15 years.

How about the upper age limit? When you scan the constitutions all over the world, today you come up with three countries - Uganda, Djibouti which passed theirs in 2010 by 59 Members of the Parliament, and Mauritania. Côte d'Ivoire removed the 75-year age limit on 30 October 2015. 

Therefore, the tendency in countries all over is to move away from constitutions, which have rigidities, to constitutions which are flexible and allow the population to vote leaders of their choice - (Interjection) - You go and read; the information is there.

What has happened in Uganda? In Uganda, life expectancy, which was a major consideration in the Constituent Assembly –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Finally, there has been a question in the public on whether somebody aged 75 can be eligible for leadership. I would like to give a professional opinion. 

In assessing that, we measure what we call biological age of an individual, which does not follow chronological age. The functioning of the body, particularly the brain, has been studied very well. The pathophysiological pathways of the brain have been studied and there is no scientific evidence whatsoever to show that at 75 years, one lacks the capacity to lead. That is why countries all over have no upper age limit and that is why even the few, which have, are removing the upper age limit.

I would like to put it on record that this is a professional position and I challenge anybody who has medical knowledge to prove me wrong. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.22
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale East County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to first thank you so much for skilfully steering this House to this level where we were able to substantively debate, informed by the consultations we had in our constituencies.

I stand here to support the majority report and report without fear of contradiction that the people of Kibale East County, whom I represent in this Parliament, agreed with the proposal to amend the Constitution, specifically Article 102 (b). They did this on the understanding that the more this Article remains in the Constitution, it continues not only to impose limitations on the aspirants because of their young or old age but also limits voter choices.

Scholarly literature is available to prove that limitations in a constitution cause voter apathy. This is because if I am a voter and my candidate is ineligible to contest on account of being young or old, I will stay home. Therefore, when you limit, you are not only limiting the aspirant but also the voter.

When I came to Parliament in 2006, I was 30 years old and I was very vibrant, before hon. Cecilia Ogwal advised me to be gentle. I was extremely vibrant and there is no reason why I could not contest for President in 2006. Unfortunately, the Constitution could not allow me to aspire to be President because I was 30 years old. It does not, therefore, make sense to limit somebody.

Madam Speaker, in 2001, a year after my university education, I wanted to contest to be a Member of Parliament. I consulted my people in Kibale East County and many of them told me, “We shall not vote for you”. I asked them why and they responded that I was not yet married and was still young. What does that mean? That tells you that Ugandans will know when not to vote for you because they believe you are immature or young or when you are too old. That means you do not need to limit with a technicality in the Constitution to decide for them.

The 33rd President of the United States, Harry Truman, had this to say on leadership: “In periods where there is no leadership, society stands still. It is only when skilful leaders take the centre stage that progress happens.” The emphasis from that statement is the skill and quality of leadership. It is not about the period of leadership. 

Many colleagues here have talked about the turbulence of our political leadership; granted, the framers of the Constitution were aware of that. However, what caused that? Was it because we did not have limits? Was it because we had leaders who were here for long? Colleagues, a dictator will take our country down the gutter even in one year. Therefore, if we really want to entrench constitutionalism and real democracy, we must talk about the following: full participation of the citizenry –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR MATIA KASAIJA (NRM, Buyanja County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, it is nice to live long. I first entered this House in 1980 as a member of the National Consultative Council (NCC) but I have never seen a House so difficult to govern and guide like this House. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I wish to congratulate, salute and recognise your efficiency, persistency and courage to guide this House the way you have guided us up to where we are now.

Having said that, my nyara, hon. Santa Alum, said that at the age of 70, problems begin to come. Can I testify? (Laughter). I am approaching 75 years but I do not use glasses to read, I speak before you for two and a half hours without stopping or drinking any water –(Interjections)- Some people told me, “nkyali mbooko”. I would like to challenge any one of you to challenge me in any human activity. (Laughter)

Therefore, to say that people aged 75 are tired and expired is not related to science. Of course, there will be a few individuals because for everything in human life, there is an exception. However, there will be people who are 70 years old or even 80 years old who are still capable like I think I am, although I do not want to become the President of this country but I can serve you as the finance minister very effectively as I am doing today. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, when you sent us to go and consult, I went and consulted my people of Buyanja County in Kibaale District. They told me that we can come and amend the Constitution and I am here to “touch it”. For people who are saying that this is being done for President Museveni, please, do not insult some of us. People who want to become President when they are beyond the age of 75 are there. I am not one of those but they are there.

I would like to conclude by saying that we should look at this issue soberly. For those who are talking about when we made this Constitution, history has changed. When things change, you can also change. We cannot live in the past. We do not lose sight of the past but we should not live in the past. We should support this motion. I thank you.

5.31
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to present the views of Bududa District, which I represent. Bududa is comprised of 16 subcounties and 13 of those said “No” to amendment of Article 102 (b). Therefore, according to democracy, it was a “no” for Bududa District to the amendment of Article 102 (b).

The people are comfortable with the status quo. They said at 35 years, someone will have gained the experience and exposure and can handle the office of the presidency. They also said that beyond the age of 75, there are diminishing returns because someone is wearing out and getting tired and so they said “no” to the amendment of Article 102 (b). 

Above all, they also noted that amendment of Article 102 (b) is against the principles of democracy. They said it was one of the two remaining safeguards to democracy, having removed the term limits. They therefore overwhelmingly said “no” to the amendments.

On page 92 of the report, the committee proposed to expand the term of the President from five to seven years. Article 105 (1) of the Constitution is very clear on this; the amendment can only be achieved through a referendum specified in Article 260 of our Constitution. Therefore, lifting the tenure of office from five to seven years should be left to Ugandans to decide. Like we went to consult on Article 102 (b), we can also go back to the people and hear their views about the amendment of Article 105 to lift of the tenure of office.

Madam Speaker, lifting of the tenure of office is in line with other Articles in the Constitution which should be amended by referendum. These include Articles 1, 2 and 128 of the Constitution, which are about the sovereignty of the people, supremacy of the Constitution and the Judiciary respectively. Therefore, I would like to request Members that we go back to the constituents and hear what they have to say.

On page 78 of the report, the committee proposes amendments to Article 104 in regard to challenging a presidential election. I agree with the committee’s recommendation that the time for filing a presidential petition be lifted from 10 to 15 days. Further, the same Article in clause (3) says, “The Supreme Court shall inquire into and determine the petition…” I agree with the committee’s proposal to stretch the time from 30 to 40 days. 

In addition to the above, I would like to also agree with the committee’s recommendation that the time for holding fresh elections should be increased from 20 to 60 days. I support the committee’s proposal to these amendments because the courts and the petitioners need enough time to verify and bring the evidence respectively and also to prepare for the elections – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen you. You are on my list. Please sit. I will call you.

5.35
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to defend and represent the people of Kashongi County over the matter on the Floor. I take the honour to support the motion. 

The Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 is paramount. The Constitution of 1995 was made in such a way that at some time, there would be need for amendment. Chapter Eighteen entails that we can amend the Constitution and in this regard, the Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 is in motion.

In Uganda, a leader’s choice in a multiparty dispensation is not necessarily dependent on age but rather on the leader with the right experience, wisdom, sense of maturity and acceptability by the voters.
	
Madam Speaker, this amendment is long overdue. When you sent us for recess to carry out consultations in our constituencies, I held four big rallies in my constituency and all the people I consulted gave me a go ahead to amend the Constitution. The people of Kashongi are being represented and amending the Constitution is very important to them. Even the councillors in my subcounties passed a resolution that we must amend the Constitution

Madam Speaker, in Uganda, we need a leader who is democratically elected with economic vision and a sense of direction.  Where we are going as a country, we need a leader who is going steer us to a middle income status.

In most of the democratic states, including Uganda, age limit is not a problem. Age limit was meant particularly for public servants who should retire and benefit from pension. In Uganda, I do not think there is any merit in having age restrictions to this effect –(Interjections)– Please give me space because I am on the Floor. I entirely support the recommendations of the committee and disagree with the recommendations of the minority report.

On the issue of extending the tenure of office, Madam Speaker, when you consider the time and resources we spend during the campaigns, it is too much. If all those resources were put to their rightful use on projects that would benefit the country, the trickle-down effect would be very big. Therefore, I concur with the recommendations that we amend the Constitution. I beg to submit. 

5.39
MR DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to make one or two remarks as far as this debate is concerned.

First of all, I would like to request the indulgence of Members to stop calling each other names. There is tomorrow and this country is not about to go away. Make responsible remarks. Issues of secession are extremely uncalled for. These kinds of statements are not going to push this country tomorrow. We are being watched by the whole country. Therefore, we need utmost sobriety when we are discussing issues of such significance. It is not necessary to lose your cool. It is uncalled for, in my considered view.

Madam Speaker, laws, constitutions and politics constitute what in a political economy we call a super structure. A super structure superintends over the economic base. These things continue changing. If you never got a lecture on this, let me lecture you today. (Laughter). These things continue changing from time to time. They are not static.

Between 1994 and 1995, I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly which put this Constitution into place. The thinking then, 22 or 23 years ago, was different from what it is today. A flexible rather than a rigid constitution is the best for a fast growing country like Uganda. Therefore, amending a constitution is absolutely healthy. This is the reason why law reforms are put in place. 

I, therefore, wish to ask for the indulgence of Members and the support of both sides of the House to support hon. Magyezi’s Bill and the recommendations of the Committee on Legal and Parliament Affairs to amend this Constitution. The proposed constitutional amendment before us, if passed by this House, will constitute a good Christmas package for Ugandans in these dying days of 2017. It will help the country to continue on the steady progress trajectory. 

Members, it is in the interest of the entire country that this country remains stable. It was already balkanised by 1986. It is now one solid state –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. 

First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for creating a wonderful, thoughtful and wholesome report. I would like to emphasise the word “wholesome” because it not only ably addressed the issue of lifting of the presidential age limit but also addressed the attendant and related matters to do with the same. In particular, it dealt with the expansion of the tenure of the President and related officers in the governance of the country.

Madam Speaker, I also stand here on behalf of the people of Busiro County South to support all the recommendations of the committee. The people of Busiro County South believe, after the consultation, that the presidential age limit should be lifted. I also stand here on my behalf to support the same.

Let me conclude by saying that for all the wonderful reasons that have been given by the honourable colleagues in support of lifting of the age limit; for the purposes of getting rid of the discrimination that is enshrined in Article 102 (b) as it stands today; for purposes of getting the citizens involved in the presidential leadership in this country; for purposes of the continuance of stability and development of this nation, I am chomping at the bit, eagerly in anticipation of the day or the time we shall be able to vote in favour of lifting the term limits and the related recommendations. It is my hope that it comes sooner than later. I beg to submit.

5.47
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to strongly tell the House that I openly consulted the people of Rakai District the same way I did when I was traversing for my votes. They told me, “Young lady, we trust you, go and touch it”. (Laughter). I think that even if I stop here - 

However, there is one important thing they told me. They said Members should stop being selfish because the voters are not. They told me that if we are to respect the term limits, let it be for all elective positions, not only the President. They told me that they know of honourable members who have been here since the Constituent Assembly and they are saying, “Mzee should go”. They told me we should also amend the Constitution for such Members to leave too. Thank you so much. I beg to submit.

5.48
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Praise be to the living God. Praise be to the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.

Madam Speaker, allow me at this particular moment to report that I consulted the people of Soroti Municipality and I have evidence. Each of the wards of Soroti Municipality has a return: 3,867 people responded in these books and 3,792 said, “Ariko, do not touch it” and 75 said “Yes”. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this evidence on the Table. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I will not absolve the illegality of this Bill. I would like to address issues of ethics and justice. As the nationally elected people to be in this Parliament, I appeal to people to look into their conscience and duty to uphold the unity, stability and tranquillity of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda enumerates where we have come from. There was the crisis of Obote and Mutesa in 1966; the 1971 overthrow of Obote; the return of the Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA); the overthrow of Lule and Binaisa by the Military Commission; the war between President Museveni and Obote; the overthrow of Obote by Gen. Tito Okello; and the war through which Museveni came to power. In all these, we lost blood, we lost our people and our country was broken down. 

I would like to request that as the leaders of Uganda, we should give the people an opportunity to have a peaceful transfer of power. I would be glad to be at Kololo to see for the first time a peaceful handover of power. 

I know that the honourable members would like to mention that the issue of term limits is restrictive of democratic choices and discriminatory. However, I wish to categorically disagree. Why do I say this? Biologically, it is known that people towards the evening of their lives begin to wear out. They begin to tire. Yes, indeed, I know the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said he is still strong. However, I challenge him to a contest somewhere with a person of our age; he will definitely see that the results are a different. The ladies will attest to this. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when we are addressing the issue of discrimination, we must also look at other aspects. I would like to speak as the Shadow Minister of Public Service. Article 80(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires public officers to resign before they go for elective office. Is that not discriminative on people because we do not want competition? Moreover, the Uganda Government Public Service Standing Orders provide that public officers must retire at the age of 60 years. Why then do we want other servants of this country to get out of office and the others should not? 

I would like to say that indeed we are looking at the aspect of preserving leaders. One of the most acclaimed leaders in this world was Nelson Mandela, Madiba. He was not known for having totally transformed South Africa in one term but he was known for having been true to his word of handing over power after one term in office – (Member timed out.) 

5.54
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Nakaseke South County are against the amendment of the age limit. In summary, they told me “do not touch it”. The reason is that they still have fresh memories of the 1966 crisis and the 1981-1986 bush war in the Luweero Triangle. 

Madam Speaker, when we are here, we are a family. We either liberate ourselves from the curse of people or we perish together as thieves. Today, according to the percentages of people that vote countrywide, the majority of Ugandans are against the removal of age limit – (Interjections) - We may pretend and sugar-coat our words but the world will judge us harshly. 

As we embark on our role this week, we should not forget what happened in this country between 1962 and 1966. Ugandans are there to judge us. The indicators are very clear; everywhere we go, Ugandans are saying, “enough is enough”. They cannot afford an appointment of life presidency in their Constitution. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am calling upon fellow Ugandans who are here - The decisions we are making today may be a replica of 1966 crisis. Some of you might look at us as enemies but when history judges this country, we will be judged together. I rest my case. Thank you. 

5.56
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am so grateful for this opportunity. Initially, I was so disappointed but the Constitution gives us the mandate to amend it. 

Three months back, I drafted a Bill and I gave a copy to your office and it was received. I also served the Office of the Clerk. This Bill was calling for reinstallation of presidential term limits. Up to today, I have not received a response from your office and yet I visited the Office of the Clerk more than twice. The Clerk promised that the Bill will appear on the Order Paper. However, today I am so grateful to the committee for proposing what was in that Bill as one of the amendments to come. 

Secondly, I must tell you that the people of Aringa South County in Yumbe District deserve to be called a special tribe here in Uganda because they have suffered so much from the previous civil wars. You have heard of the Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF) 1 and 2 but some of you here are not aware of all those wars and suffering. I believe Gen. Moses Ali can explain that better. 

I would like to thank the Government because right now, we are in a recovery process. West Nile is in total peace. The people of Aringa South County in Yumbe District are now enjoying peace offered by this Government. (Applause) It must go on record that the recovery processes are ongoing. The elders are currently receiving Shs 25,000 per month. 

I went and consulted the people of Aringa South County in Yumbe in four subcounties and out of them all, there was no single subcounty that had less than 1,000 people. Hence, the people of Aringa South County in Yumbe District told me to come and amend the Constitution. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow members to debate freely please. 

6.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I read all the two reports and I understood them very well. 

I will first address my mind to the issue of challenges in the presidential election and the number of days as provided. The main report proposed that we extend the number of days. I am here to disagree. When you read Article 104 (3) of the Constitution, this is what it says, “The Supreme Court shall inquire into and determine the petition expeditiously and shall declare its findings not later than thirty days from the date the petition is filed.” 

The issues of election petitions are not like criminal trials. Whereas in criminal trials you arrive at judgement, under our Article here on presidential election petitions, our judges are supposed to arrive at findings. Whereas criminal cases are tried, electoral petitions are inquired into. Whereas in criminal cases all evidences are looked into, in electoral petitions there is choice of evidence that the judges rely on and you do not need all evidence. 

Therefore, to extend the number of days as if you are extending in matters of criminal cases yet this is an electoral petition to which judges must only arrive at findings, inquire and choose the evidence they want to rely on is a legal mistake. I therefore do not support it. I do not support this because any incumbent whose election is being petitioned can easily take advantage of the many days and turn around the whole inquiry into his favour. Therefore, I do not agree with that proposed amendment.

Secondly, President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso was only 63 years old and had ruled for 27 years when his people thought it was too much. That was at 63 years old, forget about the finance minister who says he is 75. Therefore, that tells you that the question of being entrusted with executive power over people’s welfare may not be based on the justifications we have listened to. It must be based on the uniqueness of different countries’ political and constitutional backgrounds. 

Madam Speaker, this is well captured in the preamble of our Constitution. Looking at the tyranny, oppression and the suffering that we went through, we decided to write and say that these are our limitations and these are our interests.

I consulted the people of Padyere and, Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I will lay the whole of my iPad on the Table as evidence because it has videos and pictures of my consultations. The people of Padyere said “no” to the amendment of the age limit clause.

Finally, Article 44 of the Constitution is about non-derogable rights. When you look at rule 126 of our Rules of Procedure, it says, “Prohibition of Bills derogating from particular human rights and freedoms.” What are the rights that are non-derogable under our Constitution, Article 44? These are rights about freedom from servitude, freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment –(Member timed out.)

6.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, when this matter came to the public domain, I heard people saying “we want to touch”. I asked them what they wanted to touch and what instrument they were going to use to “touch”. However, they just kept saying, “I want to touch; we want to touch”. What I see is the Constitution. What instrument do you what to touch it with? 

Members of Parliament must realise that we have a responsibility to this country. We have to decide and we have the duty to defend this Constitution. We swore at the steps of our Parliament that we shall defend this Constitution. I think this is the time, honourable members, that we need to defend the Constitution. 

I asked Members who wanted to amend why they wanted to and they could not give me any compelling reason. They were saying, “We need to allow Mzee to continue” - (Interjection) - That is what you have been saying - do not deny it - and that is exactly what you are doing today, not knowing that the likes of Okot Ogong are present and we are ready and prepared to lead this country even better.

Honourable members, we all know that there is no country that has only one person that can lead it. Actually, it undermines the country because with the number of people that we have, we think we have nobody better than this person they think is better than Okot Ogong or anybody else and nobody should contest with him.

Madam Speaker, I want to urge Members of Parliament and my brothers and sisters that we need to address this with a very sober mind. We do not need to hurry it because we have been itching to get a new team to lead this country with a new programme and new ideas, not from the Opposition but from the National Resistance Movement.

We have a very good team in the Movement. I can cite hon. Ruhakana Rugunda as a good leader; my brother, hon. Edward Ssekandi, our Vice-President; and our beloved Speaker who has run Parliament for many years and has maintained the unity and dignity of this Parliament. I think she can be the President of this country.

Madam Speaker, the second point that I wish for Members to understand concerns this position of yours where you want to extend the tenure. In the transitional provisions of this Constitution, it is written that the term of Parliament shall expire with that of the President. When you amend Article 77 on Parliament, it means you have to amend –(Interjection)- Then you need to put a transitional provision, otherwise it would be very unconstitutional.

I would like to tell Members of Parliament, especially those from my side, that we always think together but today, we are not together –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. I happen to come from a district called Mubende, which is one of the historical districts, where the first bullet was fired at Kabamba Barracks. It is also the most marginalised district where land evictions have taken place and as we talk, almost over 100 people are going to be evicted from the so-called forest reserve.

I conducted five consultative meetings and they were massive. Out of the five meetings I held, I was arrested at three meetings by the Uganda Police because they never wanted me to hold public rallies. Actually, for one of the rallies, I ended up going disguised in a gomesi to reach the place. However much I went in a gomesi, people of Kasambya County in Mubende District said even the best dancer leaves the stage. They said they love President Museveni but he must retire and we respect him as our leader.

Madam Speaker, when I was consulting, I never found any old person above the age of 75 complaining that they were being discriminated against. This means they are content. Actually, their complaint was that they are not receiving their Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) money.

Madam Speaker, recently, when we went to Dar es Salaam, where I got five medals for this nation, our function was officiated by their former President, Jakaya Kikwete. We were very happy to see a retired president. When you go outside Uganda, you even find airports named after former presidents - Julius Nyerere, Jomo Kenyatta. When shall we see those in Uganda named after our former presidents? 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, a hunter who was never satisfied was obliged at one time to carry an elephant and he collapsed under its weight. People say they love President Museveni as a member of NRM but they do not want us to amend the Constitution.

Finally, the extension of the years is real greed for us as MPs. If we know we are performing, let us go back after five years; people will judge us and vote us back. People are saying they have numbers. You might be having numbers and pass this as legal, but it is illegitimate for this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.16
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to give my views on this very important matter.

For the last 20 or so years that I have been in this Parliament, by the grace of God, this is one of the most controversial debates that we have had in this House. I know that my colleagues have spoken on both sides of this Bill - some have supported while others have opposed. I am not going into much of those reasons that have been given, but I just want to talk to you, colleagues. 

We have Uganda as a nation. Uganda was created by God for a particular purpose and as people, we are here for a purpose and for a reason. The reason we are here as Members of Parliament is to carry out a historic mission. There were problems of peace before 1986 and the President of Uganda now, H.E Yoweri Museveni, went to the bush. He has accomplished his historic mission. We, as Parliament, have a duty in this nation to support the people of Uganda to do exactly what is important for this nation in terms of leadership.

For many years, the people of Uganda have been struggling to get righteous leadership, peaceful succession and sustainable peace. As I make this point, let me read just one verse from the Bible. In Ezekiel 22:29-30, the Bible says, “The people of the land have used oppression and committed robbery; they oppress the poor and the needy and wrongly oppress the strangers. So, I sought for a man among them who would make a wall and stand in the gap before me on behalf of the people, so that I should not destroy that land; but I found no man.” 

Right now, we only need about 130 people to oppose that very bad Bill in order to be in tandem with the people of Uganda. Right now, God and the people of Uganda are looking at just 130 people. Therefore, I just want to speak to you, honourable colleagues, to rise up and be among the 130 people to defeat this very wrong Bill. 

Therefore, in the few minutes I am remaining with, let me just pronounce certain words on you in form of a prayer. Father in Heaven, we want to thank you for this season. We thank you, Father, that you have given us the mandate to be in this place at this time. I pray for my colleagues and I pray, Father, for myself that we may stand the test of time and history to support the people of Uganda to defeat this Bill that is going to bring problems for the future of Uganda. 

Right now, Father, we need only few people; convince them. Let your Spirit speak to men and women to stand when the time comes and talk on behalf of the people of Uganda to say “no” to this amendment. Father in Heaven, you can harden men and you can soften hearts. We ask for reconciliation among all of us here and that tomorrow or any day as we vote, the people of Uganda shall be victorious and all the Members of Parliament shall sing with power in this nation. 

I pray, Father, that just as you gave Moses the power to lead the children of Israel and cross that river, you give us a few people to cross –(Member timed out.)

6.21
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this motion. First of all, I would like to thank you and the Parliamentary Commission for providing facilitation for us to go and consult in our constituencies. It was intended that all of us get the views of our people so that we can handle the Constitution in the interest of our people.

Madam Speaker, I would like to recall a statement by one scholar called John Rolly, who was a constitutional lawyer. He said that when making laws, you need to appear like you are putting on a veil so that whatever you are doing is not for yourself but for posterity. I have nine subcounties in my constituency and out of the nine subcounties, the least number of attendance I got was 1,500 people and the highest number that supported the amendment of Article 102 (b) was 23. I had two subcounties where I got none. 

The Members who consulted targeted people got the results they wanted and not what the people wanted. I would like to recall your statement, Madam Speaker, and I than you; when a certain consultation in Kanungu was conducted, you condemned it. I would like to thank you. We are here as representatives of the people and not as representatives of anyone else.

This amendment Bill is premised on a claim that it was the Supreme Court ruling that caused the expeditious handling of this Bill. When you read this report and the Bill, out of the 10 recommendations given by the Supreme Court, only two recommendations are being handled. The remaining eight are left at large. Therefore, is this Bill in unison with the Supreme Court ruling or is it a sham? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the President, who is the chairperson of my party. He has done well and there is no question about that. He foresaw this when he was fighting the previous regimes and he said that the problem of Africa is when people over stay in power. We need to redeem this man and ourselves. We should not apportion blame to President Museveni because he does not vote in this Parliament. It is we who have the mantle to control.

Madam Speaker, whatever we do in Uganda is a shared activity. As the Speaker, Members of Parliament and the President, we have a role to play. He has done all this in conjunction with other players –(Member timed out.)

6.26
MR TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge Central County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your capacity to manage this House and restore sanity, discipline and decorum in this House. I thank you.

Yesterday, one of the honourable members – (Interjection) - I have just talked about decorum and it appears the Member there does not understand the word decorum. Please, learn from me. 

The other day, one of the honourable members was wondering whether members of this Parliament had carried out appropriate consultations in their constituencies. Every Member of Parliament here has his or her own style of carrying out consultations in their constituencies. Therefore, you cannot ask me how I carried out my consultations. 

Madam Speaker, I carried out LCIII district council meetings in their chambers with the public. All of my six sub counties – (Interjection) - Yes, in the chambers of the LCIII councils. I also carried out consultations with Kyenjojo District Council in their chambers. I will lay on the Table all those resolutions as I have said. 

Madam Speaker, I have seen some Members here talk as if they are aware of what is happening in their constituencies and districts. I have a resolution of the district chairpersons of Uganda. (Applause) The resolution is with me here and I will lay it on the Table. It is also signed by the district chairpersons of Kanungu and Mubende districts.  
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow members to contribute. Let him make his contribution. Hon. Butime, please conclude.

MR BUTIME: Madam Speaker, Article 102(b) and its amendment is popular in the districts where we come from. I have evidence on that. I also consulted the military, civilians, veterans in the areas of Rwenzori, Kabarole, Kyenjojo and I have a resolution here from those. 

Madam Speaker, I support the motion and I congratulate hon. Magyezi. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the resolutions.

6.32
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I really tried to catch your eye, so I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this historic debate. It has not been easy to catch your eye. I would like to also commend you for your patience and tolerance in conducting the affairs of this House. 

You sent us for consultation and I consulted. I would like to report that in the House, we are three of us from Sheema District. I can confirm to you that the voice of the people of Sheema District was very loud and clear in support of the proposed amendment to the Constitution. Their justification, if you can listen to me, honourable members, is on two principles.

The first principle is the sovereignty of the people. This is a fundamental principle and it is about the supremacy of the people. Colleagues, the people are the reason we are here. Consequently, when power belongs to the people and the people exercise their power through their elected representatives, no one should obstruct their choice. It is the sovereignty of the people to choose who should govern them. You cannot put, justifiably, any obstruction or limitation on their choice. Their choice is supreme. 

Secondly, the people of Uganda had a referendum and chose that they shall be governed through a multiparty political system. Madam Speaker, this is very important. In a multiparty political system, which the people of Uganda chose, political parties compete for the consent of the governed. In competition, we offer manifestos and front candidates. Consequently, no Opposition parties can choose for us who our candidate can be. That is the principle. 

If the candidate we are fronting has defeated you before and you think you can stop him through imposition of age limit, my good friends, this is inconsistent. Parties must be free to front their own candidates – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I request for one minute, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have one minute.

PROF. KAMUNTU: In conclusion, Members, I would like to draw your attention to rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure. This is a fundamental point. In some of the Commonwealth parliamentary systems, there is filibustering, and it is a procedure which is regulated and restricted. 

Filibustering is a tactic adopted by Members of Parliament, particularly minority Members of Parliament, to frustrate the will of the majority. They will make speeches, raise points of order and procedure, they will speak when other Members are speaking. I invite you to decide in this regard on how filibustering in this House can be regulated –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MS PERSIS NAMUGANZA (Independent, Bukono County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me contribute to this debate and also convey the message from my people of Bukono County whom I went to consult on this very matter. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work they did. I appreciate the majority report. When I went to consult my people of Bukono Constituency, I had a very big crowd. In fact, if we had a PowerPoint provision, I would show you a video and I am sure everybody would stand up to dance. 

Madam Speaker, the people were very happy. I met the youth and old people. The old people asked with a lot of bitterness why we even hold their hands to take them to vote if we think they do not understand and yet when it comes to them, we do not want them to be voted for. The old people told me that if the Constitution is discriminating them, I should come and pass a resolution that stops them from voting. 

Madam Speaker, those were serious feelings from the old people of my constituency. They told me that there is a proverb that says, “A new broom sweeps well but the old one knows the corners.” This is from my constituency and I am sure they are watching. 

Madam Speaker, under the laws of Uganda, a person who has attained the age of 18 is allowed to transact business; they can also enter into a legal contract, can vote and be voted for and can also sue and be sued. When it comes to those above 75 years old, I have not come across a law that says that such people cannot enter into a legal contract.

Madam Speaker, the people of Bukono County sent me to thank you for sending us for such consultations. Actually, they prayed that if there is another amendment, you again facilitate us to go and consult them so that they can contribute, dance, be happy and celebrate. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to give some information. The US Constitution has been amended 2,211 times -(Interjections)- and yet we say that the US is a great country. Now, where do we get this sickness of not allowing –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please tolerate one another.

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Even if my colleague, hon. Reagan Okumu, said that politics or democracy is not about numbers, he is here in this House because of numbers, and all of you are here because of numbers. One of the principles or the rules of democracy is numbers and it overlaps all the other rules. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.44
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this indulgence. I come from Kachumbala County, Bukedea District, Teso sub region in the eastern part of this country, where wise people come from. No wonder, Madam Speaker, your wise leadership of this House is because you come from the east. 

There is time for everything; there is time to be born and a time to die. There is time for the best dancer to enter the dance hall and there is time for that dancer to leave. There is time to promulgate the Constitution and there is also time to amend the Constitution. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to thank the chairman of our legal and parliamentary affairs committee and his team for going to some extent to identify the inconsistencies in our Constitution. Colleagues, being discriminated against is the worst treatment you can subject a human being to. In our Constitution, there are a number of inconsistencies which lead to that. 

We are three Members of Parliament from Bukedea District and clearly, the people of Kachumbala and Bukedea in general have told us to “touch” and amend Article 102(b). I am, therefore, here to “touch” the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the committee went ahead and proposed to bring back term limits. However, colleagues, in modern society, through weapons of democracy, the people of this country have the power to either renew the mandate they gave to their leaders or to withdraw and transfer it to better leaders. Therefore, there is no need for this. Since the principle on which this committee brought this Bill is based on Article 1, I would beg the committee not again to strangle the spirit of giving power to the people. 

If a leader is very good, the people will decide to continue renewing his mandate. If the people find the leader unworthy, - maybe if he is a drunkard – even the leader himself can decide to abandon power. It has ever happened. In 1985, a leader abandoned power here because he saw that he could not manage it. Therefore, I do not support the reinstatement of term limits in our Constitution. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

6.47
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to at least support the motion. First and foremost, I would like to congratulate hon. Magyezi and the committee members for having come up with a very good report that we are now trying to debate. 


Madam Speaker, when I came here in 2013, I was a very young, brilliant, active, disciplined and intelligent man. People have reasons why they sent me here as a young legislator. Madam Speaker, remember that you also came into Parliament as a young woman. I was given very good examples of you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Frank Tumwebaze and many others. Those people that I have mentioned have managed to be useful to our country, their families and constituencies at large. 

Madam Speaker, when you sent us for consultations, the people asked us whether when you enter Parliament, they give you a Constitution and the Rules of Procedure and I told them, “Yes”. They told me that if I really had that book, then I should go and read Chapter One, Article 1 of the Constitution, especially Article 1(1), (2) and (4), and then I would be able to know who the voters are and who the citizens of this country are. 

They also told me to go read, internalise, observe and respect our people’s views. The only way we can serve our good Ugandans is by giving them our good ears and by respecting them. Let us give them the opportunity to choose the leaders they want; they should not be discriminated against and restricted. This is the time for us to sit here, deliberate, talk about it and see how we can help our good people. We should not separate or eliminate our people. We should not tell them how to get their leaders. 

Madam Speaker, I managed to traverse the whole of my constituency. I have 10 subcounties with two town councils and we agreed unanimously. The people sent me to amend the Constitution and see how I can help them so that we maintain peace, stability, love, oneness and good governance in our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.51
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank you for the resilience that you have exhibited in chairing this House. The arguments were very many but we are grateful that we have come this far. I would like to also thank the committee for a job well done. 

Madam Speaker, you did well to recommend that Members of Parliament go back to their constituencies, consult and get the views of their constituents on this amendment. I did consult and I bring the views of the people of Budadiri East County here. Honourable members, you need to note that these views cannot be similar. 

In my case, the people of Budadiri East, who are concerned about issues of service delivery, are of the view that we must amend the Constitution and give opportunity to any Ugandan with experience and leadership skills to lead this country. The people hold the view that discriminating somebody on the basis of age, young or old, is not good for the country. Therefore, I bring their view, which is that we must amend Article 102(b) for the good of the country. 

Madam Speaker, service delivery is our emphasis and, therefore, I would like to second the proposal of the committee that did this work that we should expand Parliament for purposes of enabling Government settle down and provide services especially for those hard-to-reach areas. Yesterday, I spoke about hard-to-reach areas. We need schools up there; we need health services to be improved. This cannot be done in five years. We can do that when we expand the parliamentary and presidential terms because you need to settle down and do this work for Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise the point of age. In our place, people drink malwa, a local brew, and like the saying goes, the best brewer is the one who has done this job for a long time. He will produce the best brew. My brother, Ssekikubo, knows this because in his place he is always taking it. I, therefore, second the amendment of Article 102.

6.54
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I would like to thank the committee members for the report and the Parliament of Uganda for facilitating me to go and consult the people of Nakapiripirit District.

Madam Speaker, in Karamoja we believe in elders and this is the reason that God has given them to us; we keep consulting and asking them for guidance. We have also come to this Parliament and we shall continue getting guidance from people who have been here before us. All the three Members of Parliament from Nakapiripirit District went systematically to consult the people in public spaces. We did not hide any single meeting, and all the eight subcounties told us to amend the Constitution.

They asked me as an individual, “Did we send you to Parliament for the first time to go and remove anything from that Constitution?” Madam Speaker, Nakapiripirit District has just seen the light at the end of the tunnel and we are expecting to see more light. During other governments, we did not know that they were working. I grew up not knowing anything about other governments but right now, we are able to see all the services, let alone the security. 

I am actually living by chance. If it was not for this Government, I would not be alive. I would like to confess that so many people died due to insecurity in Karamoja. Now we are enjoying and appreciating security in Karamoja and this is more paramount to us than anything else. (Applause)

Fortunately, the Constitution in Article 1 to 4 gives us the powers to make a choice through free and fair elections. Therefore, let us go back to the ballot; the same people will bring us back and all the leadership that they want to lead this country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to warn hon. Ssentamu to stop intimidating us. I came all the way from Nakapiripirit for all those kilometres and someone is coming here to warn me; as who? I have an opinion and a right; I am a warrior. (Applause) Therefore, since we were sent to go and do consultations, you should talk about what your constituency said and not about other people’s opinions, not about Nakapiripirit district. Stay warned.

6.59
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to air out the views of the people of Matheniko County, Moroto District. I would like, in the same vein, to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the job well done.

Madam Speaker, in September, through your wise ruling, you advised this House to go and get the views of Ugandans, the which will guide this Parliament in arriving at a position that is acceptable. I would like to support the Constitution (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 because it gives us the opportunity to address the discrepancies in some of the Articles in the Constitution.

Secondly, amendment of the Constitution will help us to address the discrimination by some of the Articles in the Constitution. Article 20 is about fundamental human rights and freedoms of an individual. Article 21 is about equity and freedom from any discrimination of any nature. Some of these discriminations are evident if one is contesting as a Member of Parliament and later comes to this House and would wish to serve this country as the Speaker of Parliament. 

We are all aware that Article 109(5) is about instances where the President and Vice-President are unable to discharge their duties. If they are not able to discharge their duties in those offices then the Speaker steps in. What happens if somebody who is less than 35 years comes to this Parliament and is elected as Speaker and the Vice-President and President are unable to carry out their duties? What will happen to this person who is less than 35 years? We shall run into a crisis in the country. Therefore, Madam Speaker, these amendments give us an opportunity to address some of those gaps in our Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, even in the Bible, when Jesus came and he commented on the teachings and the laws that Moses was using to govern the people, he said he was not coming to destroy the laws but to make them better so that the people can be served better. That is in Matthew 5:17. Madam Speaker, someone who is less than 35 years of age can also vie for the position of Member of Parliament but the same person – (Member timed out.)

7.03
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here as a messenger of the people of Bukoto Mid-West in Lwengo. Our people are cognisant of our history and recall that it has been characterised by political and constitutional instability. Our people take cognisance of the struggles we have had as a country against the forces of tyranny – (Interjections) - my dear, I can assure you I am standing. 

Madam Speaker, having seen and recalled our history, they know of a great leader that has stabilised this country for over 30 years. My people are therefore saying that if we touch this Constitution and the effect of it is to enable this leader stay in power, they have no problem with it because they recall what he has done for this country.

Madam Speaker, we know that leadership is a resource and Ugandans do not have this resource; it has been very hard to come by. We have a leader who has been very resourceful and we want to harness this resource. We do not want to keep this resource away just because of a restriction. We know that leadership is scarce as a resource in this country; that is why in 30 years we have had almost nine presidents but we have one stabilising factor for 30 years. Therefore, we need to harness this resource and keep it.

Madam Speaker, 20 years ago, the life expectancy of Ugandans was 50 years. Now, the life expectancy of Ugandans is clocking 65 years. In the not-very-distant future, the life expectancy of Ugandans will clock 80 years. This means we shall have a big class of people above the age of 70. We need to tap into this vast experience of leaders by not merely locking them out because of their age since they still have a great contribution to make to our country.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of reinstating term limits, I remember very well 12 years ago this Parliament removed term limits. My question is: What mischief was meant to be cured by the removal of term limits? Has that mischief been cured so that it requires us to reinstate term limits once again as proposed by the committee? (Member timed out.)

7.07
MR IBRAHIM ABIRIGA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not have much to say. (Laughter) I have got only three points, which are very important –(Interjections)- Do not chase me; I know these three points will help you.

Madam Speaker, I have given you my sincere thanks. When you released us to go and consult our people, we went back and talked to our people. However, my consultation was very unique. (Laughter) I did not go through the local councils or NRM structures; I went directly to the people. I have about six wards. I divided this Shs 29 million among them and nobody has complained so far. (Laughter) They said we should “touch” immediately.

Madam Speaker, these people are still going to “touch” but for us the people of Arua Municipality, we had already “touched” a long time ago. That is why I tell some of my brothers who are here that twagikwatako dda. (Laughter)

Secondly, I give my sincere thanks to the committee chairperson, hon. Oboth, for the report he presented yesterday. The report is very good; it has covered everything all over the country. That means hon. Oboth has carried out a referendum already and there is no need of going for a referendum. 

The minority report; I do not want it, – (Laughter) - I do not support it. It should be taken somewhere else. That minority report is completely in bad faith because it says that some people are there and this one has done this and the other one has done that. That is the report of the minority, which cannot help us here. However, the Oboth report is clear. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

7.11
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you also for sending me to my constituency for consultations. I would like to deliver the results of the consultations. 

Madam Speaker, I held 12 rallies in my constituency. The total number of people who attended the rallies was 6,574. On the question of amendment of Article 102(b), 6,523 said, “do not amend it” and 49 stated “amend” – (Interjections)- I am being sincere. I have evidence of the events that transpired. 

Madam Speaker, I have read the two reports. The majority report and the Bill itself is premised on the Supreme Court ruling and discrimination by age. Article 21 describes what discrimination is and details the areas where discrimination is supposed to be applied and age is not one of them.

This was definitely done because there are limiting factors on age, which are enshrined in the Constitution. Article 144, which is about judicial officers, has limiting factors on age and that is not discrimination. Similarly, concerning public servants, there is a limitation on age and this is not discrimination. Are you telling me that you are going to also amend these Articles since you are describing age as discrimination?

This morning, I heard a project proposed by the Attorney-General here. He termed it “expansion of the Tenth Parliament”. My conscience tells me that when I was campaigning, I signed a social contract with my voters. (Applause) In order to change that contract, there are two parties involved and these two parties must agree. Therefore, this project is definitely something I, Engineer Sabiiti, cannot support and I will never support it – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, one of the things the drafters of our Constitution looked at was the state of institutions at that time. They looked at the infrastructure, processes and procedures for decision making. They focused particularly on institutions which act independently, and the performance of the Judiciary is not controlled or directed by any power or authority. Some of these institutions include Bank of Uganda, the Electoral Commission, among others. Honourable members, has the situation changed to warrant this change? I say, “No”. What has changed - (Member timed out.)

7.18
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your stamina and resilience. We entered here at 2.00 p.m. but since then, you are still in the Chair. I thank you for your resilience. I would like to also thank the Members, especially Members of the Opposition, for being calm and for listening to the views of the people. I would like to thank them.

Madam Speaker, the majority of the people in Bunyole West County said, “Go and amend”. (Applause) Bunyole went through many issues until President Museveni retrieved us from very far. I stand here with tears - (Interjections) - but thank God, those tears were wiped away.

Madam Speaker, they told me to reduce the age limit of the President from 35 years to 18 years and then the upper age should be unlimited, on condition - (Interjections) - I am giving my report. The first condition is that the term of service of all elected political leaders should change from five to seven years, including the LCs I, III, V, Members of Parliament and the President, beginning with the current leaders.

Madam Speaker, the Bible says that in whatever we do, we should be considerate of others and not our own interests. My people told me that we restore the term limits not only for the President but for all elected Members of Parliament. There are Members of Parliament who have been here for several years but they do not want to leave. Why don’t they serve two terms and go? That is what they told me.

On the issue of academic qualifications, my people told me that we should scrap academic qualifications because there are people who are able to lead this country but are discriminated against because they do not have academic qualifications.

Finally, I would like to inform Members that this Bill is not intended for the President alone. Let everyone come on board. Let me tell you, you will get shocked when the President says he is not going to contest again. (Interjections) Thank you. For God and my country.

7.22
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last time we called you the iron lady, and I referred to Margaret Thatcher, when she commanded the Falklands War 8,000 miles away; indeed, you are. Since we came here, I have not seen you going out either for a cup of tea or any other business. You are really an iron lady. 

I stand here to represent Bukoto County South, Lwengo District. I would like to thank the committee which did a very great job on the proposal to amend Article 102(b). At the same time, I would like to thank hon. Magyezi and others who came up with the private Member’s Bill. 

When we talk about lifting of Article 102(b), we are talking about building the capacity of Uganda. Some people have been locked out, especially the youths. At district level, where leadership is capped at 35 years, you will realise that many people are locked out. My uncle, the late Sir Edward Mutesa, was the first President of the Republic of Uganda in 1962 at the age of 34. Now, this is the time for young men to also come up. 

As we talk today, we are mandated by the Constitution - When you look at Article 79, Members of Parliament have the power to amend the Constitution and Articles 259 to 263 provide for amendment of the Constitution. When I went to my constituency, my people categorically told me they are in agreement with me to amend Article 102(b). It is clear, with evidence, that they sent me here to deliver the message. When it comes to increasing the tenure, they are in agreement with amending the term from five years to seven years for both Parliament and the President. 

There is a misconception by my dear colleagues that we are amending Article 102 in favour of an individual. That is wrong. We are looking at the interest of Uganda. We are looking forward to a better Uganda and how to develop our motherland from peasantry to middle class.

Uganda has three major problems including service delivery. You cannot, under this current arrangement, deliver any service to the people when you have only five years. You remember very well - (Member timed out.) 

7.26
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, hon. Raphael Magyezi, for having brought this Bill that has raised national concern but also received overwhelming support from both the public and us here in the House.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides the manner in which it can be amended. The framers of this Constitution, some of them still here in this House, found it fit to provide for amendment of the Constitution. Parliament is mandated under Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution to amend by way of addition, variation and repeal. We are amending Articles 61, 102(b), 104 and 183. 

Madam Speaker, when you sent us to our constituencies to consult, I consulted in the 15 subcounties in Burahya County. Remember, Burahya County has a population of 350,000 people. The people of Burahya County asked me to come and amend this Constitution. They actually stated that I should have amended this Constitution yesterday. Not only did they ask me to come and help this House amend the Constitution but they also said that if I can reach the President, I should tell him he must appear on the next ballot paper. 

Madam Speaker, their reason was that they have gone through a lot of hell. You know that the Rwenzori people have suffered from catastrophes like floods and it was the President who brought about peace they had never tasted in a very long time. Therefore, they do not want to listen to the prophets of doom. The prophets of doom project that if the President continues leading this country, there will be a catastrophe. This is the same President who brought the peace we are enjoying here and they would like him to continue.

Madam Speaker, during this consultation, I encountered a district councillor who is currently our deputy speaker of the district. He was barred from running in the town council as the chairperson because he was below 30 years. We had already finished the primaries of NRM and so he would run as an independent. However, this young man is an example of victims of the law that bars young people from participating in elections. He is called Martin Koojo.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end with just two verses from the Bible, and I hope the Members of the other side can read them. Ecclesiastes, chapter 3, says that there will be time for everything and that is how the President shall continue with us. Romans 13:1 says, “Let everyone be subject to the governing authority, for there is no authority except that which God has established.” I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.31
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde):  Madam Speaker – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he will not vote but he can speak.

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Madam Speaker, sometimes, it is very important that first of all, we exhibit as much respect as we expect to receive. The big question for today’s Parliament is simply whether we are living by the law. My view is that we are living by the law. This is because the law is very clear about who can amend the Constitution and how it can be amended. It even mentions how one side can decide a matter, and it is by majority vote. We have not gone out of the scope of what is expected of Ugandans, especially as the laws are written down. 

Madam Speaker, we have a grand history. I always see Ugandans quite very unrespectable to our population. When our population has wanted to change leaders, they have changed them. I would like to inform you of this, in case this Parliament is not on record on this matter: 83 per cent of the last Parliament did not come back. If we doubt the capacity of Ugandans to change leaders, it is because we are misreading the situation. 
People speak like they are helping the population and that it has no capacity to choose leaders and that is why they must depend on things like age limit and so on. My view, Madam Speaker, is that when the time comes, Ugandans will change leaders. I think this is what should guide this noble Parliament. 

I actually get very impressed that all our laws are inside this Parliament and we are not using guns or anything, except when people go physical; that is when the rules change. However, when we debate by ourselves, I have no problem with that and I respect this kind of situation. 

Madam Speaker, the other point I would like to raise is that people tend to give an impression that NRM has become so weak in that we cannot choose who we think can be our leader. As far as I am concerned, this is a matter you should leave to the NRM. We have the numbers and the brains. I do not think we are lacking on this side. We have the capacity and when the time comes, we shall sit and change leaders. Yesterday, the African National Congress (ANC) pronounced itself in many peculiar circumstances. You know very well how disadvantaged Cyril Ramaphosa was, but they changed leadership and he is the leader of ANC. 

Let me be on record, especially on matters of why we must amend the Constitution and the effect of amending it. In the case of Ssemogerere v. the Attorney-General, Constitutional Appeal No.2 of 2002, a precedent of The Queen v. Big, a Canadian grand constitutional case, was determined. I would like to read you this quotation, which was the most important bit of this ruling: “Both purpose and effect are relevant in determining constitutionality; either an unconstitutional purpose or an unconstitutional effect can invalidate legislation…” – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Madam Speaker, thank you for the minute that you have given me. “All legislation is animated by an object the legislature intends to achieve…” - The Legislature is us - “…The object is realised through the impact produced by the operation and application of the legislation. Purpose and effect respectively, in the sense of legislation’s object and its ultimate impact, are clearly linked, if not indivisible. Intended and actual effects have often been looked to for guidance in assessing the legislation’s object and thus the validity.” This is what should guide this House today, Madam Speaker.   

7.37
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Magyezi for bringing the Constitutional (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017 to this House. I would like to support the chairperson of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee for the majority report. 

During our consultations as workers, four of us moved extensively. We are five representatives in this House and you have heard my colleague who spoke earlier. He must have consulted somewhere and you have heard the prayers. 

During our consultations, one Member paused a very sensitive question and that was the fundamental basis of this Constitution. It was about Chapter One of the Constitution, which is about the sovereignty of the people. I beg to quote Article 1 (4) and it reads, “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.” 

Madam Speaker, we need to be sober here. We are different people with different perceptions and the best we can do is listen to each other. This is a very fundamental Article. In the wisdom of the framers of this Constitution, they did not say here that you will be limited; maybe in other Articles. They did not talk about age, gender or whatever has been raised. 

Therefore, in my opinion, the fundamental issue from the workers, after doing my consultations, was that this is the only period that as a marginalised group, they have been identified in different boards and even on the Floor of Parliament. Hence, they told me to go and “touch” the Constitution and amend it to lift the age limit. 

Madam Speaker, we were consulting in different constituencies and I respect my colleagues because I do not want to indulge in that debate to waste my time. I have enjoyed being in this Parliament for some good time. When I hear some people say, “Our Constitution” it is as if us who participated in coming up with it do not know what we put there. 

You have to believe that society is dynamic. For the framers of this Constitution, by then that is what was prevailing. The Constitution, like any other law, is subject to amendment and you know that. What is very interesting, Madam Speaker, is that there are my colleagues in this House who are below 30 years and there are those that are above 75 years and they are all contributing nicely. That means you still have the capacity. 

Secondly, let us be free and open to what exactly is being hidden by others. We are in a multi-party democracy and I thought my colleagues would be celebrating this. When we bring the old one of 75 years, you bring your young one of 30 and then we go to the field. Thereafter, we will see who will win. It is simple and clear. 

Madam Speaker, I have got the opportunity to listen to my colleagues, who I have been with in this House for some time. They have been defining politics. Apart from doing the art of managing human beings, what is politics? Somebody went to the extent of saying that politics is about consensus – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude, honourable.  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask my colleagues, including my good friend, hon. Nsereko, to show me any person in this House who can say he got 21,000 votes and his colleague got 35,000 votes but they brought this one of 21,000. This is because you have said that politics is not about numbers. 

When it comes to the variations in the term of the presidency and Parliament, indeed with our experience we deserve to increase from five to seven years. This is because the majority of our colleagues have been in court, some take more than one year learning the procedure, some are even still shouting as we talk now; they still need more years to be educated.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit by saying that we are here as workers to support the amendment to lift the age limit and if possible, extend the tenure of Parliament and the President from five to seven years. Thank you.

7.43
MR KENNETH LUBOOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given to me to make a contribution to this motion. I would like to thank the committee for the report although I may not agree with them entirely. Sometimes, I wonder, if I were to be sitting on the opposite side of this House, would my actions have been any different? I, therefore, appreciate the great energy that has been manifested in debating this motion. 

I would like to thank my senior brother, Dr Lyomoki, for the prayer he said here. However, I would like to say that when we are talking about the Bible, we have to be extremely careful. At the time of the crucifixion of Jesus, there were quite a number of voices, which were saying, “Crucify him” but they may not have been right. Therefore, we must be cognizant of that kind of irony.

Madam Speaker, back to my case, this particular report talks about amendments including amendment of Article 102 by adding a requirement to be a resident of the country. A colleague here raised it. I think, chair of the committee and honourable colleagues, we need to be careful with this particular requirement of being a resident because it is not defined in the Constitution. 

Article 257 does not define who a resident is and I think legally, a resident does not mean simply sleeping here. Therefore, I think it can be abused if it is not clearly defined in the Constitution. In any case, we cannot expect to find it defined in another Act of Parliament. It has to be within the Constitution itself. Therefore, at an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I will have to move that we define it within the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, the report talks about reinstatement of term limits and entrenching and expanding the same. I agree with reinstatement and entrenchment of the same but I disagree with expansion from five to seven years. I think that we need to show some bit of civility. We have been violent enough and I think we do not need to expand this. It is too much and we will be seen or perceived to be greedy. I think we must maintain the five-year term and restore the term limits.

Madam Speaker, I submitted a memorandum to the committee and I am aware that rule 131(2) of our Rules of Procedure mentions a committee’s ability to include new clauses. The committee can include new clauses and it can even include new schedules within a Bill. For that reason, I submitted to the committee that this country has been turned into an electioneering and politicking country. All the time, you are talking about politics, voting, and so forth. When we vote for the President, we vote for MPs, and after maybe a week or two, we vote LC V chairpersons and then councillors. After a short while, you talk about voting LCs III and so on and so forth. 

I made my proposal because section 61, which actually captures this, is part of the scope of this particular Bill. We should resize these elections so that we have two sets of elections instead of three. It is cumbersome, laborious - in fact, when you see the number of people who vote in subsequent elections, it goes on reducing - and it is really expensive for this country.

When I read this report and the reasoning of the committee –(Member timed out.)

7.49
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the committee and their report and I also want to congratulate the committee for working in a very difficult situation. I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for steering this House in such a manner even when we have not been easy to manage.

Madam Speaker, sometime back I did say I have been part of several parliaments, but the Tenth Parliament has gone down in history for the wrong reasons. We have been fighting, jumping on tables and so forth. We owe this country a duty to heal the community. We have done a lot of things and the community has been fractured. Therefore, after all has been said and done and we have finished the amendment of the Constitution, we should get back to the community to cause healing.

Madam Speaker, colleagues have been saying we were elected here and we swore to defend the Constitution. That is true. I think defending the Constitution means you uphold the provisions of the Constitution including Chapter Eighteen, which provides for amendment. Therefore, we are here to amend and we shall amend. (Laughter) 

The issue here, however, is: what are we bringing in? Are we adding, varying or deleting? That is the most important thing. Otherwise by saying, “Do not touch” you are being unconstitutional yourself because the Constitution says there is a way you should amend it and it will be amended.

Madam Speaker, I want to give a scenario where someone who is 74 years and 10 months old will be allowed to contest and a person who is 75 years and two months old is denied yet they have a four-month age difference –(Interjections)– I thought we were here to listen to each other; when hon. Nsereko was talking, people were listening. The people of Bugangaizi West sent me here so he should listen when I am speaking.

I was saying that someone who is 74 years and 10 months old is allowed to contest but someone who is 75 years and two months old is now barred by the Constitution, which is very unfair. The person who is 74 years and 10 months old will rule for five years and end his term as President at 79 years old. So, why did you stop the person who was 75 years and two months old from contesting? Therefore, the whole thing should be that the people decide - We vote and whoever wins becomes President or Chairman LC V and life continues.

Hon. Lokii brought out a very good scenario. He said that the Constitution provides that when the President or Vice-President are not available, the Speaker shall take charge. He gave a scenario of when the Speaker is below 35 years old. We can have a Speaker who is below 35 years but we can also have a Speaker who is 80 years old who will not be allowed to sit in the chair of the President because he or she would be above the required age. Therefore, why don’t we just leave it open so that someone can take charge?

As I conclude, I would like to say that this Parliament owes the country a process of healing after we have finished amending the Constitution. We should get back to our constituencies and cause people to come together – (Member timed out.)

7.54
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I come here with history. However, before I speak about the history, I would like to say that this amendment is going to determine the following: It will separate men from boys; it will separate women from girls; it will separate money from the people of Uganda. This is the determinant act we are going to carry on.

Madam Speaker, during the time of removing term limits, President Museveni, although there were people here saying it was not for him, indeed benefited. Some of those who participated in lifting the term limit have just returned; one of them is Kizige, there is Yeri Ofwono – (Interjections) - They actually took 10 years to return and if it was a seven-year term, they would have taken 14 years. (Laughter) 

I want to tell you that if you count those Members who were there, you will realise that the majority of Members who are here now are the ones who opposed it. Now, you have come again saying that you want to remove the age limit, I want to assure you that history will repeat itself. Madam Speaker, President Museveni in one of his manifestos said poverty in Uganda will end by 2017. We are remaining with 11 days and I hope poverty has ended in Uganda. (Laughter) 

For us who consulted – I heard one man from Budadiri East saying he consulted; he never! When we went for consultations, I would get more than 5,000 people and his were about 12 people –(Interjections) - I can tell you that of all the over 5,000 people, there was only one person who said “touch” but the remaining said “do not touch”. There were even people who crossed over from Budadiri East and Bulambuli to attend my rallies because they said they have been denied a chance.

Madam Speaker, we need to make this Constitution saying “the President of Uganda will be Museveni” so that we stop amending the Constitution every minute and this becomes constitutional. This business of claiming it is not for him - Who are you lying to? Are we kids? We are not kids and I want to tell you why we are not kids. 

By the way, I want to thank all the members and chairman of the committee for the main report. I also want to thank those Members who came up with the minority report. They have come up with a good report, which we are now discussing, and they all did a good job. 

Madam Speaker, through a one Pius, you wrote to the Managing Director, Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation, on 28 September 2017, that you want to gazette this law and yet in the morning of 28 September 2017, the Gazette had already come out with the Bill. On 29th November, the Clerk was writing saying “I am going to send you the Local Purchase Order (LPO)” while the Gazette had already come out. This efficiency is very interesting.

I want to add the years for you. If you go on amending the years and bringing your term limits, it means if you get 14 years plus five, you will get 19 years. Right now, President Museveni is 74; if we add 19, he will be 93 years old at the end of the term.

Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear on declaration of interest. There is this issue about seven years. Even in the report here, it says they sampled 19 countries and 15 had five-year terms, two had four-year terms and only one had a seven-year term. It is on page 92 of the report. 

The rules here mention declaration of interest. If we are talking about seven years and we are benefiting from it, we have erred in this law. The rules say that Members shall fulfil the requirements of the House in respect of declaration of interest. Therefore, my brother, my sister, if you are the one interested in the seven-year declaration, you are offending this rule. (Member timed out)

8.00
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by reminding my honourable colleagues about the prayers we make every time we are in this House. Let me just quote the second paragraph: “Let your blessings descend upon them here assembled, and grant that they may, as in your presence, treat and consider all matters that shall come under their deliberation, in so just and faithful a manner as to promote your honour and glory, and to advance the good of those whose interests you have committed to their charge.”

Madam Speaker, I am honestly disappointed in the stories which have been related here. Some are stretching the truth in order in to achieve an objective, which I personally cannot say is in the best interest of the people we represent. 

We are dealing with a very critical matter of amendment of the Constitution. The first amendment of the Constitution of Uganda – it was not a republic then - was in 1963. In 1963, it touched on the presidency. In 1963, we had a Governor-General appointed by Her Majesty the Queen and then the Government removed the Governor-General and replaced this with the President to be elected by Parliament. Today, we are back, making an amendment to deal with a particular individual. In 1963, although it was not specified, anybody who watched any political route knew that it was dealing with one particular individual and this was done in the interest of keeping unity of Uganda. 

People have dismissed this issue of secession. It was real in the 1960s, it can be real tomorrow. The reality today, when you consult and hear what people are saying, is that the majority of the citizens say, “Do not amend”. 

I have been on record before the last election as someone prepared to engage in an honest and faithful manner across political lines. The whole question we are trying to deal with is: How do we handle transition? Whether we like it or not, transition will come. People in Uganda say we have never had a peaceful transition. We have had transitions but we have never had a managed transition. 

Whether we like it or not, even though we bring this amendment, we are merely postponing a conversation we need to have as citizens of Uganda. Article 102(b) provided us that opportunity and we are squandering it. For what? Is it for the interest of the citizens of Uganda or we are sending Uganda down a path which we do not know? However, because we are benefiting personally, we are comfortable with it. 

On this, I am challenging my colleagues as Members of Parliament; are we honest, are we dealing with this matter in a just and faithful manner? For those who said they consulted, when I consulted, only 16 people said, “touch it”; which Ugandans did you consult and they said “touch it” overwhelmingly? They are not there. 

Taking you back to 1963, we made an amendment. There was a referendum which was negotiated in London. (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute

MR AKENA: The referendum, which was in the system, cost lives of Ugandans. When we put this issue to a referendum, it can still cost the lives of Ugandans today in 2017 or 2018. You say you have the numbers, but there are numbers outside. When you go for a referendum, those numbers shall also speak. If you think you are going to manipulate it, God help Uganda. I say all this for God and my country. (Applause)

8.06
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I speak on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality. In the preamble of my submission, I would like to quote Albert Einstein. He said, “The strength of the Constitution lies entirely in the determination of each citizen to defend it. Only if every single citizen feels duty bound to do his share in this defense are the constitutional rights secure.” 

I was in Gulu for 14 days. In the consultations I had in the four divisions, only six citizens of Uganda said we could amend but the entire municipality said, “No”. (Applause) My methodology was very clear: consultations during rallies, consultations of senior citizens, religious and cultural leaders and even radio talk shows. Those were the methodologies that I used that have produced these results. 

I would like to add to what hon. Reagan Okumu said. These are very serious issues. This country called Uganda is a product of historical accident. In 1900, when the Buganda Agreement was signed, that was the start of the journey of constitutional development in Uganda. However, along the way, you have seen the challenges that we have gone through in our constitutional history. 

They said that given that we have gone through all these processes, if even up to now we have removed one of the speed governors called “term limit” and we are now removing the second speed governor called “age limit”, then the bus is going to be driven nonstop. They said this is not correct for this country. They also said – (Interjections) - I am speaking on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality. I would not like any footnotes to be added to my main narrative. 

The position in northern Uganda is very clear. This is why we have to speak very clearly. In Gulu Municipality during the consultations we had in the district council hall, a fundamental issue came up, which hon. Reagan Okumu talked about before, and I should be very clear on this. The people of Gulu Municipality said if there is going to be bias in the process of amending this Constitution, then since we are used to sharing districts, we shall also share the country because resources are not being shared equitably. (Applause) I need to be very honest.

I would like to add, as I conclude, that the argument on the issue of discrimination cannot stand any ground here. In law, what we call limitation should not be misinterpreted to be discrimination. Limitation is about how you manage in the positive national interest of a country. The period of 35 to 75 years is 40 years to nationally serve in the country; is that too small? If you have no speed limits on a highway, what happens? Complete accidents! 

I would like to resume my seat by reiterating the position of Gulu Municipality; they say “No” to amendment of Article 102(b). I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

8.11
MR BENARD	ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I thank those who have spoken in support of the status quo. 

Madam Speaker, from the time this Bill was presented when you were in that Chair, you ruled that each Member of Parliament goes back home to consult the people that sent them here. I too had the opportunity to consult my people. Ayivu County is one of the six constituencies in Arua District with over 300,000 people and a voting population of, 103,000. I consulted all of them in their subcounties. I had eight public consultative meetings, two radio talk shows and a press conference. 

Madam Speaker, in all the consultative meetings I conducted, over 20,000 people participated and I administered a secret ballot for all the people that turned up to express their interest. Those in support of the amendment were instructed to write “yes” or tick and those against the amendment were instructed to write “no” or put a cross. The outcome of the secret ballot was very clear that I should come back to this Parliament and defend Article 102(b) of the Constitution to remain as it was crafted by the framers of the Constitution of 1995.

Madam Speaker, we have been here from 27 September 2017 and discussions have taken place. However, the opinion of the majority of Ugandans out there is that we have turned this Constitution into something we can play around with any time we wish. When His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was about to finish his second term in office in 2005, Members of Parliament were bribed with Shs 5 million and the term limits were removed. As we talk, money is changing hands to remove the age limit. I was called and promised that the moment I vote “yes” for the Bill, there will be Shs 160 million transferred into my account immediately. I have rejected that money. 

You may argue here that no money is changing hands but some of you have picked money to come and mutilate this Constitution. If you go ahead using the influence of money to amend this Constitution and remove Article 102(b), my people were very clear just like hon. Reagan Okumu said here - (Member timed out.)

8.15
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. I also thank Parliament for giving us the money to consult our people about amending the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, when I went to consult my people in Amudat District, they said we should amend Article 102(b). They gave me a clear example from the Bible. When God instructed Prophet Samuel to anoint one of the sons of Jesse, he went and paraded eight strong men and some were very tall and handsome. He tried to anoint one of them but God said “no”. Prophet Samuel asked Jesse whether he had another son and he said he had only a shepherd son. Prophet Samuel asked Jesse to bring him. When David was brought, Prophet Samuel said David was the chosen one. 

What am I trying to say? I am saying that leadership is not about age; it is about personality. People are born leaders. If David was here at this time, he would not be made the King of Israel. That is why my people said you should amend, so that they can choose their leaders. They are the ones who have the power, not us. I wonder why people are talking about Museveni here. This is not about Museveni; it is about old people. You might be 75 years old next time and you would like to aspire for leadership but the law will knock you out. 

I am a professional human resource person and I know that when you recruit people, you need to recruit some people with experience. When they mix with the new ones in a company, they may make more money and the company will be productive. Therefore, it is very important, honourable members, that we should not bring up Museveni here. This Bill is for all of us. 

The second thing I would like to talk about is elections. I come from the border of Kenya and Uganda; in Kenya, they have elections on one day for President, Senators, Women Representatives, Members of Parliament, Governors and local councils. Here, we have elections three times and that is very costly to the country. We should actually have all the elections on one day -(Member timed out.)

8.20
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the authors of both the main and minority reports. 

There are a lot of issues embedded in the way the report was written and one of them that I feel is really contradicting is the methodology used. The methodology is skewed and it does not reflect a true representation of a sample of the Ugandan population. I am a researcher and I have been working for the United Nations (UN) for quite a long time. I know what it means to come up with an authentic report. 

As a matter of justification, I would like to request the chairperson who authored this report to give us evidence of proper consultation including of the military and police. It is because these two institutions are the basis of stability in this country. I do not think they consulted these institutions. I know the army have representatives here and they are supposed to talk about themselves, but how about the police? Therefore, although the report has some good recommendations, they should make some clarification on the choice of methodology so that we see it as a representative and authentic report.

Madam Speaker, there is a saying that you do not know where you are going until you know where you are coming from. I would like to say that the issue of age limit started way back in the year 1881. Otto Von Bismarck, who was the German Chancellor, indicated in Parliament that there must be a retirement age. He said this when he was 60 years old so he put the retirement age at 65 years, over and above his by five years. The reason he gave was a pragmatic one, that he had to retire after five years. 

Many countries of this world are putting in place an age limit and a retirement age based on life expectancy. Uganda’s life expectancy is actually 58.66, -(Interjections)- unless there is a new statistic that we are just coming up with. I told you that I am a researcher and I have evidence to that. The women’s life expectancy in Uganda is 60.22 and that of men is 56.66 so when you get the average of that, it is 58.62. 

Madam Speaker, why do we want people to retire at a certain age? I am a psychologist and psychology says when you reach the age of 40 to 60, your vision starts becoming impaired, you will have disability in terms of your performance and you also deteriorate. Hon. Kasaija is over and above this -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR OKIN: I had not yet declared for the people of Kitgum. The people of Kitgum say “no” to the amendment of Article 102(b) of the Constitution. If the Constitution is amended, they only said three things: one is secession, two is secession and three is secession. Thank you very much. 

8.26
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Busujju Constituency has five subcounties and I thank you for the facilitation you gave me. I went and carried out my consultations and almost 89 per cent of the people told me “Togikwatako”, which means, do not amend the Constitution. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we went through a lot during the consultations but we are saying we are going to stand with it because we are here to represent our people. Much as we are being intimidated by some political leaders within the district, we are going to stick to what our people have told us. 

What I can tell you is that during the consultations, some of the District Police Commanders (DPCs) were even changed because of our presence and the results that we were getting from our constituencies. My DPC was changed from Mityana to Maracha –(Interjections)- Someone is asking me if he was mine; he was my leader. 

They told me that if we are to create a peaceful transition in Uganda, we should not tamper with Article 102(b) of the Constitution. The people are not willing to see what happened in the early 1980s happening today. We had issues of Sokolo and Kuuku, the Kasirye-Gwangas of today. Our people are not ready to face such scenarios that used to happen. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk now, we have got information that Members objecting to this amendment are going to be arrested tonight. We have been told that we should not even go home and that we should sleep somewhere else, wake up in the morning and come here. Therefore, if it has gone to this extent, we would rather come to you because if we do not speak out and anything happens, we shall be in for it.

Back to the point of the tenure extension, I want to say that it was not part of my questionnaire and I did not consult about it. However, my view is very clear that I am not in support of it. Let us use the five years to work for our people. If we are ready and we have worked, those same people will re-elect us and we will perform. That is my point.

Madam Speaker, I am team togikwatako - do not touch it - because that is what my people have told me. I am here to support the minority report. Thank you very much.

8.30 
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am not feeling well and I would like to ask my Member of Parliament, whom I represent – (Interjections)- For that matter, I would like to say Ssembabule District has got five Members of Parliament here and all of us belong to the NRM party. 

Honourable members, I was in the Constituent Assembly –(Interjections)- Yes. Honourable members, you are my colleagues and I respect all of you. We may defer in opinion and political ideology, but let us respect each other. Let us disagree politically because we are in a multi-party dispensation and hence, we cannot agree because of our ideologies. However, let us listen to each other, please. 

In addition, as we debate and present our people’s views, you do not expect me, Anifa Kawooya, to say the people of Ssembabule told me not to amend the Constitution. I would be deceiving you.  Hon. Ssekikubo is aware about this, because I went to his constituency as well. We have three constituencies; Mawogola North represented by hon. Kutesa; Mawogola South represented by hon. Ssekabito; and Lwemiyaga Constituency represented by hon. Ssekikubo. 

During consultation meetings, I would bypass hon. Ssekikubo going to his constituency. At times, I would find areas where he had been with the red ribbons and people told him not to “touch”, but the moment I would arrive with the yellow ribbons, they would tell me to “touch” the Constitution –(Interjections)- Honourable colleagues, I have recorded evidence in form of tapes and what I am telling you is nothing but the truth. 

I have been here for some time and I have been listening -(Interjections)- I am the Member of Parliament for Ssembabule District. Since you want the position, I will tell you that we are five Members and I am speaking authoritatively -(Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS KAWOOYA: The position: We are going to vote and it is open voting. Wait for the four of us to vote. Hon. Kutesa is touching it, I am touching it, hon. Ssekabiito is touching it and even hon. Ssekikubo may touch it -(Interjections)- He may or may not touch it; I do not know. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order!

8.30
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this great opportunity. Before I present the views of my people from Kamuli Municipality, I would like to say that this evening I have received a note from one of my colleagues coming from the opposite side, intimidating me that I should not contribute anything on this Bill. Madam Speaker, I have the evidence and I want to request that I lay this note on the Table before I continue.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Watongola, read it and then lay it on the Table.

MS WATONGOLA: Madam Speaker, hon. Kiyingi Asuman is not a member of this House currently. He was a Member in the previous Parliament. However, the note says, “Dear my sister, Asalaam aleikum. The submissions of hon. Kibalya were overwhelming. We need to go slow on this matter. You should be careful, very careful my sister. Please, dispose of this letter after reading it. Your brother, A. Kiyingi” I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that person is not a member of this House.

MS WATONGOLA: Madam Speaker, I decided to present that note because I am worried for my life. I was seated here and someone presented it to me. Actually, it was sent through the line of the ministers to where I was seated. I just wanted to notify the Speaker that someone wrote that note to me. In case of anything, Madam Speaker, you are in that office and you can use your wisdom to investigate that matter further. 

Back to the debate, I am here to support the “Magyezi Bill”. I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the legal committee and the members who accepted the Bill and those who did not accept. They did great work. 

Madam Speaker, I do represent the people of Kamuli Municipality, both the youth and elderly. You gave us time to go and consult. During my consultations, I tried to bring all the leaders on board, all the councillors of the divisions, all the chairpersons -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in half a minute.

MS WATONGOLA: Madam Speaker, the people of Kamuli support the amendment of Article 102(b). They said that it should be up to the voters to choose their leaders, since we have Article 1 of the Constitution which states that power belongs to the people. If you amend that Article, it will be up to the voters of Uganda to vote for a youth, middle aged or elderly leader. The people of Kamuli have the capacity to front even youth to stand for presidency. Therefore, they are requesting that we amend Article 102. 

Madam Speaker, as I end because my time was eaten up by the note, the people of Kamuli still ask that we let the voters be the judges and not the Constitution, because if we prohibit them from participating –(Member timed out.)

8.42
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Indeed, I want to thank you for giving us a chance to go and consult the people. 

I did consult my people of Katakwi. In Katakwi, we have ten subcounties and out of the ten subcounties, seven agreed to the amendment of the Constitution and the other three did not. As a safeguard, however, they also recommended that the term limits be reinstated in the Constitution. In addition, the other question was whether we were going to continue having periodic elections and our response was “yes” and they said that would be another safeguard. 

Honourable members, I am wondering why we are continuing to argue that Article 102(b) is not discriminatory. To me, it is. Why would an 18-year-old be allowed to vote but cannot contest for the position of LC V chairman? Why would an 80-year-old be allowed to vote but cannot contest for president? To me, that is discriminatory.

I do not agree with the minority report. In the minority report, they indicated that there is no evidence whatsoever where someone below 35 years or above 75 years had tried to contest for a presidential position. Indeed, there is no evidence because already the Constitution limited them from contesting. Therefore, why would there be evidence when it is very clear in the Constitution that below 35 years and above 75 years, you cannot vie for a presidential position?

The people of Katakwi, who I represent, agreed that we amend the Constitution so that their youth and the elderly are not left out. They should be able to either be voted for or to vote as provided in the Constitution. I think there are safeguards in place in addition to the term limits, if they are reinstated. 

On the issue of the seven years, personally I support that. We did not consult on it but that is my view. Indeed, within five years, you cannot do much. They consulted me as an individual on that and I gave them my view. I was in court almost for a whole year. We have been here, like the rest of the colleagues have been saying, learning the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and another year goes wasted. The last two years we go back for elections. The only time you have is one year in the middle of your term. Therefore, I support the extension of the term of office from five to seven years because it gives us ample time to do work for our constituencies. Thank you.

8.45
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking you for making a very wise decision to send us for consultations. Some of us will submit basing on the issues from the people we represent. We consulted very thoroughly. 

Madam Speaker, there are issues that came out from these people very consistently from all the subcounties in Pader District. There were critical questions that were asked, which questions some of us could not answer. I would like to put on record that no level of explanation, reason or justification will convince the people I consulted that this Bill is not tailored to favour an individual. 

They kept asking, why now? What are the eventualities that were not there before? On the issue of this Article 102(b) being discriminatory, was it not so in 2006? Was it not discriminatory in 2011? Was it not discriminatory in 2016? Why now? Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that the timing of this Bill tags the amendment to the current President, H.E Yoweri Museveni. 

Madam Speaker, it also came out from some people very strongly that they are very grateful for what H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has done for this country. They love, respect and honour him but he must retire.

Madam Speaker, it came out very strongly from the people I represent that Article 102(b) will ensure a peaceful transition of power, which they have not seen in this country since Independence. They are praying to this Parliament and making a strong appeal that their hope should not be shattered.

Madam Speaker, it also came out from a number of people, mainly those in NRM, that come 2021 they want to see H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni traversing the country, accompanying and campaigning for a new candidate that NRM will front.

The people I consulted are concerned that NRM is an institution and an institution which seems to be centred around one individual – (Member timed out.)

8.50
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the majority report on the following grounds: First, as an individual, I believe that the same qualifications that bring a Member of Parliament into office should be the same qualifications that bring the President into office. To be a Member of Parliament, you must be a citizen of Uganda, you must be above 18 years of age and you must have a senior six or equivalent qualification. There is no upper requirement of 75 years of age.

Madam Speaker, in this regard, my opinion is that if I qualify to be a Member of Parliament, there is no reason I should not qualify to be President. Therefore, on this ground, I support the proposal to lift the upper age limit and also lower the 35-year age limit to 18.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I stand here as a representative of the people of Rubanda County East in Rubanda District, formerly Kabale District. I did consultations, first of all, in my constituency. I held over 50 rallies in Rubanda County East. I did consultations at the district headquarters and also joined other colleagues such as hon. Bahati, hon. Baryomunsi and others from Kigezi region. 

I want to affirm that the people of Kigezi generally support the idea of lifting the age limit in the Constitution -(Interjections) - Madam Speaker, when hon. Kaberuka, was submitting, I humbly listened to him. He also ought to know that we all come from Kigezi. Therefore, am very vivid about what I am submitting –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a free debate. Let people say what they want.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, it is true that the term of five years is not good enough to enable Members of Parliament to cause impact on ground. Therefore, I would have no problem with the idea of extending the term of Parliament from five to seven years. (Member timed out.)

8.54
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present my findings from the people of Mbarara Municipality.

Madam Speaker, I consulted very widely. I am under instructions that I do not only support the amendment but support it vigorously. The reason was hinged on particularly three fundamental questions that are cited as contradictions in our Constitution.  

Madam Speaker, there is a saying from the wise that before you tamper with a speck in your neighbour’s eye, be mindful about the log in your own. In the same respect, the log in mine shall commence with Parliament and the three questions related to that are as follows: First of all, it is the consideration of the people of Mbarara Municipality, and my own consideration therefore, that even when one of the qualifications for one to stand as President, under Article 102(c), is that one should be qualified to be a Member of Parliament, our own colleagues in this House still fall in the category of those not permitted to qualify. 

That includes those in the category of Members of Parliament representing the youth and those who are serving as Members of Parliament but are above the age of 75. Therefore, I fail to find sense as to why Members who are here cannot even be protected by the same Constitution and yet we are presumed to have the same rights and opportunities in this House.

Secondly, it was disturbing particularly to the people of Mbarara Municipality to have found out the same constitutional provision bars someone to run for the Office of President because he has attained the age of 75 but again, the same Constitution is currently in agreement that the country can be led by someone at the age of even 79. That is a contradiction that must be addressed.

Thirdly, we cannot see Article 1(1) of the Constitution, under Chapter One, permitting an individual, giving him or her rights or powers to choose his or her leader and yet at the same time, you are withdrawing those powers under Article 102(b). That is another contradiction.

Madam Speaker, I know it is absurd that you can refer to yourself as a democrat to promote democratic –(Member timed out.)

8.59
MS VERONICA NANYONDO (DP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Finally, I have caught your eye.   There are five subcounties in Bukomansimbi District and 99 per cent said we do not amend Article 102(b); only one per cent, from Bukomansimbi North, accepted the amendment of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the Bill that was laid on the Table accommodates the young people from the age of 18 and above to contest for presidency. In reality, at the age of 18, most of them are either in school or just completing their studies and struggling to find a way to survive in this nation. How can we amend the Constitution to accommodate an 18-year-old boy or girl to contest for presidency?

I think we should be thinking of solving problems the young people are facing like creating jobs instead of pushing them to contest for presidency at the age of 18. If we amend the Constitution to allow them to contest, they will only be interested in joining politics. 

The Constitution should not be amended. We must retain the 35 years to 75 years age bracket for one to qualify to contest as President. This will give them time to work and build themselves before thinking of joining politics.

We should look at things realistically. Look at your children at home; if you amend the Constitution to allow people of 18 years to contest, they will instead be thinking of joining politics. Are we all going to stand for President? 

Madam Speaker, I suggest we consider the problems affecting the country instead of amending the Constitution to benefit one person. This amendment is not going to benefit the people in this country. It only benefits President Museveni and the people who were given money to support the Bill. You should consider other people out there suffering because of you. Let us give power to another person to lead us and we see where the country will go. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 73 Members have contributed to this debate. I am aware that other Members would like to debate. The House will be adjourned to 9.30 a.m. tomorrow. We shall continue debating tomorrow but I am also giving you notice that we will be required to take a vote. Therefore, come back tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 9.30 a.m. 

(The House rose at 9.04 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 20 December 2017 at 9.30 a.m.) 
