

Thursday, 6 December 2018

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I do not know whether the Government is boycotting my sittings.

There are things I wanted to talk about but since only few of you are here - this mainly has to do with the conventions that we enter into as a country. The other day, we were putting pressure on the Minister of Internal Affairs but actually, it is the work of the Minister for East African Community Affairs to come here and lay the outcome of the meetings. 

I do not know when he last came here. It must be in the Seventh or Eighth Parliament. Therefore, we have been cut off with the consequence that certain things are happening. 

Similarly, with the African Union, summits are held and councils of ministers sit and no one knows what happens. The Government is moving on their own with their thing and we are also here yet it is Parliament which is called upon to monitor, evaluate and advise on the implementation. When we go for those meetings, we are the ones they ask questions.

Last time, I told you that I went to the Pan African Parliament and, among the Speakers, I had the longest list of the conventions that had not been ratified. It was not very good.

I would like to ask the Government to pull up your socks so that we move on at the same wavelength. We have just a few matters of national importance.

2.55
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance regarding the flagrant abuse of the rule of law.
 
We have a matter in Ssembabule District between two families that was adjudged by a competent court; the High Court in Masaka District between Mushabe and Geoffrey Makumbi. The first judgement was upheld by the second judgement. Indeed, the other parties have gone on a notice of appeal in the Court of Appeal.

Yesterday, the Minister of Security, Gen. Elly Tumwine, summoned the parties and told one party (Geoffrey Makumbi) to the effect that “I am ordering, you have no ownership over that land. Go back and nobody has a right over that land and do not disturb any person. Allow them to resume their activities.”

Madam Speaker, just in the last month of September 2018, the chairman of Ssembabule District, Dr Elly Muhumuza was arrested on the allegation that he had breached the quarantine. He was detained and brought to Masaka and finally, detained here at Jinja Road Police Station for four days. He was eventually driven back to Ssembabule and that case was dismissed by court.

What is happening to this country? Gen. Elly Tumwine said: “We can put soldiers to manage those courts. We are the ones who brought back those courts and we are going to do away with those courts.” This is a disturbing trend. Can the honourable minister, therefore, be brought here to explain what he means when he interferes with the rule of law in the country? When he makes his orders – I hope he does not call me because it is a strange number.

Can the Minister for Security inform this country, how and which powers does he have to overturn competent court orders? What did he mean when he said that they will now start using the soldiers to run the judiciary? That they brought back these courts and therefore, he is the one in charge? These are very disturbing pronouncements. From the chairperson of the district, now calling and overturning competent court judgements without following the due process of the law. Can Government inform this House so that we can also know how to tell our people?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Security, Gen. Elly Tumwine, is required to come here on Wednesday next week and respond to the issues raised by hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. 

2.59
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. On 1 December 2018, I had a fatal accident in my constituency. This time it was not a boat accident but a motor accident. 

A total of seven people died on the spot; two died on the way and one died this morning in Mulago Hospital. The reason, I am raising this issue, is that the basic health facilities that our people access - not only islanders but even in other districts like health centres IVs. We took a number of survivors who had lost a lot of blood to Buvuma Health Centre IV. 

However, in the whole country, these health centres IVs lack blood transfusion services. People can only access blood transfusion services in the big hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, adding to that, is the lack of the ambulance system in this country. The Members of Parliament have now become the ambulance service-providers. In fact, when I was calling, I would only call hon. Isaac Mulindwa that: “Please, send your ambulance –” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you just tell us what you want the Government to do?

MR MIGADDE: My prayer is that, the Government should undertake to provide blood transfusion services in health centres IVs.

We should put in place an ambulance system with special consideration to islanders because you have to use the boat and later, you must find a vehicle on the main land which is quite very difficult. We would have saved many of our people if such services were available. Those are my prayers.
	
THE SPEAKER: To the Minister of Health, over the several years, we have talked about marine ambulances. I told you about how I nearly drowned on Lake Bunyonyi with hon. Bahati when we had gone there to open a health centre. (Laughter) Yes, the boat stopped in the middle of Lake Bunyonyi for some hours. It was not a very good experience. 

We were there on that day but there are people who use the canoe services every day. I came here and asked the Ministry of Health and Government to support the island constituencies with ambulances. Can the Minister of Health come here next Wednesday and update us on this issue? It is extremely serious. 

As hon. Masika comes, I would like to announce that in the public gallery we have members of the Old Girls’ Association of St Cecilia Secondary School in Bushenyi District. They are represented by hon. Mawanda and hon. Mary Karooro Okurut. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.03
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of national importance concerning our natural resources in Uganda. Some time back, I worked with Chinese companies all over Uganda and East Africa, Central Africa and North Africa. There is a company called Good Luck Construction Company. We went to Tirinyi and they had a drone which took pictures of Tirinyi swamps and many places in Uganda. 

They came out with a plan that they want to bring a machine which can make wonderful mats out of our traditional materials. They took one to china. For a mat which measures the size of ours – which is about Shs 7,000 – Shs 10,000 – they have got a market where they can make the best mat out of our natural materials and the same mat can cost $5,000. 

Therefore, I am informing those Members of Parliament living around the swamps that there are some investors who are coming to use your natural resources, which your grandparents have been sleeping on for years without knowing that it is money. I would like to tell you that you will regret and make wishes like in an African saying that goes: “A hen discovered in the morning that it was sleeping with a cockroach and it lamented.” 

I was taken to China. I know where these machines are bought –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could make a formal statement because you want Members to be aware. Can you make a statement so that we can debate here?

MR MASIKA: Therefore, I would like to make a formal statement that –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No. (Laughter) Hon. Masika, prepare a statement and I will give you time on the Order Paper so that you can explain for us to debate and take a position. However, thank you for the vigilance.

MR MASIKA: Thank you.

3.06
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding what I read in today’s Daily Monitor newspaper about the Government’s plan to expand road reserves from 15 metres to 40 metres. Land is a contentious matter these days and I would like to know how Gen. Katumba Wamala and his colleagues came to that conclusion of expanding the road reserves from 15 metres to 40 metres.

My prayer is that Government becomes transparent in this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should ask the Minister of Works and Transport, first of all, to tell us whether it is true that they are expanding the road reserves. Let him come and give us an update next Thursday.

3.07
MR JULIUS OCHEN (INDEPENDENT, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On page three of today’s Daily Monitor newspaper, there is a story concerning the Uganda Cancer Institute where the board sat and resolved to impose a fee of Shs 300,000 on cancer patients. Others are charged Shs 500,000 and foreigners are charged $2,000.

Madam Speaker, last week but one, there was a burial in my constituency of a cancer patient who was at Mulago. The husband to the lady who died of cancer sold all the land his father had appropriated for him in an attempt to meet the cost of cancer treatment at Mulago. During the burial, it was the villagers who were mobilising support. He is left with a home but without even an acre of land. That is the cost that Ugandans who are poor meet in terms of accessing services yet they pay taxes –

THE SPEAKER: What is your prayer?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I am praying that Government stops the cost that has been introduced until a policy on non-tax revenue, which they are hinging their decision on, is reviewed in order to accommodate the most vulnerable Ugandans that are dying in our sight when Government has the responsibility to provide health services to the country equally.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it was free but maybe the Government can tell us. 

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we do appreciate the fact that it is important that when things come up in the papers we can talk about and crosscheck them. However, we also need to remember that, really, this is Parliament not a newspaper review sitting. If we are going to be reading in the newspapers and coming to Parliament, it is going to be very difficult –(Interjection)– Therefore, for us to read something in the paper and come and – (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My father is at the Uganda Cancer Institute and I am paying money every day. The minister is saying the Member is just getting information from the newspapers. Our people are dying at Mulago. Is he in order to insinuate that the Member is telling lies or just picking information from the newspapers, yet it is true that people are paying money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the Access to Information Act – you can access information from anywhere and the newspapers are a good source of information. I think what we should be asking is whether it is true or not. This is because he could have got the information online using his telephone or any other source. I think what we should be doing is to find out whether it is true. Can the Government explain what is happening? Is the service free, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we shall ask the Minister of Health to make a statement on Tuesday regarding that.

THE SPEAKER: The minister should come and explain to us the policy and the practice before we build things around it. Your issue was different. I think the minister came here and explained to us about those charges.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was in the hospital today for some check-up. I met the doctors on the issue of the women hospital that was opened in Mulago. They told me “Please, can you bring this to the attention of the minister and the House? We opened the hospital but there was no budget for its operationalisation. They are now asking us to start charging the women. How do we operate?” 
I think there should have been a start-up budget for the women hospital; there is nothing for operational purposes and we cannot buy the gloves. Therefore, can the minister explain why they have not put a start-up budget for the women hospital?

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that as the minister comes to explain the issue of cancer, she should also explain this issue. Good enough the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here; he should tell us why he did not bring a supplementary budget to enable the doctors to start working properly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is an important issue. Can we ask the minister to come and brief us on the policy and practice for the cancer treatment and whether we opened the Women Neonatal Hospital without money being provided for it? 

3.17
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on 15th November, hon. Hellen Adoa, hon. Okabe and I, convened a meeting in Serere District. This meeting was convened because we had heard persistent complaints from the teachers that they had not been getting salaries.

During that meeting, we were shocked with the revelation that 256 teachers in Serere District, have been working for the last two to three years without salary but they get payslips. Those are primary teachers who get payslips but they do not get their salary in the banks.

Madam Speaker, we have tried to engage the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Education and Sports but he told us that the problem is in the district. On the day of the meeting, we gave the Chief Administrative Officer up to end of November to give us the update. To-date, none of these teachers have got salaries - not even for last month.

Madam Speaker, it is our prayer that you direct the Auditor-General to audit the salaries of teachers in Serere District.

Secondly, the minister responsible should ensure that payments are met for the teachers’ salaries for this month, as we sort out the issue of the last three years. It is affecting about 256 teachers.

What also shocked us was that the district has been continuously deducting Shs 5,000 monthly from all teachers. I do not know where they got the mandate to deduct people’s salary on monthly basis.

It is also our prayer that the Minister of Local Government picks interest in this matter. Those are some of the prayers from the teachers in Serere District.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What my colleague has raised is true and the situation is alarming in Serere District. Most of these teachers had loans, children in schools and most of their children dropped out of school.

There is a particular woman who called me and cried on phone saying “I am walking away from this marriage. My husband who is a head teacher has not received salary for eight months. We have a loan, children in schools and we can no longer continue like this. I do not know who to believe; whether my husband or someone else because the money is not there and my husband does not bring salary.”

Madam Speaker, in some schools, at least more than six teachers do not get salary. It is very painful. Now that Charismas is coming and the teachers cannot get salary –

THE SPEAKER: The point has been made by hon. Okupa. Let us find a solution for all those that have not been paid.  

Minister of Finance, yesterday, or the day before, I think I also heard on the radio that some police officers were getting half and others were getting more salaries. How are you managing the payment system in this country? Is the problem with Public Service? Hon. Karubanga, where are the teachers’ salaries?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have additional information. We also discovered that one ordinary teacher is earning more than the deputy head teacher. These are the discrepancies. How does it happen and yet he is not even a science teacher.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karubanga, I do not know whether you are in position -

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Okupa is not late. We decentralised the processing of salaries to the districts; the accounting officers are responsible for the preparation of all payrolls. Our role as the ministry is just oversight and it is the finance ministry that pays. Therefore, if there is any problem of teachers getting payslips without any pay - or the deductions of Shs 5,000 as hon. Okupa has said - it is the responsibility of the accounting officer who is the CAO. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development say something about the salaries?

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the payroll has been experiencing difficulty for the last 10 years but there have been quite a number of reforms the ministry has put in place including decentralisation, fighting ghosts – we have now almost reduced the ghosts close to five per cent and we shall continue fighting.

One of the challenges that we are facing - which we are working upon using technology - is that at the beginning of the quarter, you find an accounting officer submitting a list for payments - Madam Speaker, we release money on a quarterly basis. For example, we release money in October according to the estimates of the accounting officer.

The challenge we are trying to address is that in November, one of the people in the payroll disappears or the account number changes; you find people saying, “I am not appearing on the payroll; my money has been cut…” and yet at the beginning of the quarter, all the resources were released.

What we are trying to do is to continue perfecting the payroll system and we are handling case by case. When we get a problem like now in Serere, a team will go there tomorrow to sort it out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will write to the Auditor-General about that.

3.22
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance being the continued prevalence of Foot and Mouth Disease in the cattle corridor but most especially Gomba.

We do not have any vaccination; there is no assistance to the cattle farmers - we are overstretched and there is no help from Government. The quarantine still exists, milk has now gone down to Shs 400 from Shs 1,200 per litre and it is what people rely on to educate their children, buy essentials and conduct marriage ceremonies. So this is very hard on them.

We also have numerous types of ticks and we have no specific acaricide that has been pointed out by Government. It is a bad situation for them and I would like Government to come in to explain to us through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as to what should be done because we need a permanent solution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall direct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal, Industry and Fisheries to come and address the issue of the Foot and Mouth Disease outbreak in Gomba and the related diseases on Thursday next week.

Join me in welcoming a delegation from Ntenjeru South, Kayunga District they are represented by hon. Fred Baseke and hon. Ida Nantaba. (Applause)

3.25
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance arising from my constituency in a place called Muzizi, Buswaka Parish, Kyaterekera Sub-county.

Government is constructing a mini-hydro power project and whereas the residents cooperated by welcoming the project, there has been an unfair compensation to a situation where one is being paid Shs 1,800 - a person who was asked to open an account with Shs 20,000, to present six passport size photographs that cost Shs 8,000 and they deposited on the account of that person only Shs 1,800.

Madam Speaker, the rates that were used are not known and the list of the people which they displayed for compensation was full of ghost people who were not known to the villagers.

When people were signing to accept compensation they signed on gunpoint; they contracted a company called “New Plan” and it moves -

THE SPEAKER: Just make your prayers so that we can take action; we shall find out whether they move with guns. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: We would like the minister to come here with rates that they used to make assessment in this compensation; secondly the list of the people who are being compensated in this area; and thirdly, to tell us why they are not involving women because husbands sign for the money and take off.

Lastly, there has not been any sensitisation; we would be interested in Government giving us the action plan on the resettlement in this compensation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall ask the Minister of Energy about the parameters for compensation, evaluation, the level of sensitisation about the project and output.

3.28
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is related to what hon. Okupa said. The ministry of finance should accept that this issue goes beyond the payment to workers; it is also affecting the development budget.

There are sub-counties that cannot receive their development budget allocation because the title of their accounts have been changed by the same Ministry of Finance and to correct that they have to go to the Accountant-General’s office.

One of the sub-counties in my constituency was affected and did not receive money for the last two quarters until last week that is when we corrected an anomaly that was not theirs. 

How does the title of an account change in the Ministry of Finance? That is what we should concern ourselves with and who is making the system imperfect.

Secondly, the Shs 5,000 deduction we are talking about is by design; to give you evidence, the LCI chairpersons in this country are receiving Shs 10,000 per month and is paid Shs 120,000 for the whole year. They are even going to start taxing it; they are already sensitising all the LCI chairpersons in my district of Zombo.

On Mulago, if the minister is coming to give us a report, they should explain why a Government facility has allocated land to a privately-run clinic to build a facility and sell – over-commercialisation of the health sector in this country especially in Mulago; how did-

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Committee on Health to go to Mulago to establish whether there is a private facility in a Government hospital.

3.30
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, I raised the issue of the people of Lusanja who were evicted and you indeed ordered the Attorney-General to come and present a Government position. Two weeks down the road, we do not have any response.

We heard that there was a ministerial committee which was put in place about the issue of the people who were evicted in Lusanja; we were informed that the report was ready.

However, up to now the people are suffering; over the last three days there have been clashes with the police as they were demonstrating - others are in prison and the situation is very worrying. 

May I know from the Government what the position is because the President was greatly involved when he visited the scene? May we know what the Government position is in as far as the people of Lusanja are concerned? That is all.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to update us.

3.32
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, some time I also stood here and talked about these very people whom we are talking about again. Regrettably the matter has not yet been resolved up to now.

Last time, I said - and this is the position at hand still today - that the matter is very legalistic; it has been referred to the Attorney-General to advise. As of this morning, I read the newspapers as I was coming to the office, that the case on the issue has started. The proceeding for this case of these people has started today, which therefore means our hands are tied; because if the very issue is being heard in court, it will be difficult for us as Government to go and interfere. Therefore, I would say let the law take its course and decided what is next.

3.33
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business is a lawyer - (Interjection)– he may not be senior but he is a lawyer and a senior army officer (retired); when it comes to law, I am more senior to him on the record. You can have that. And of course the Speaker is overall. - (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a matter that generated a lot of interest; the first of its kind. To see where an eviction with a court order is being carried and then the next in the night and whatever happened; in the next few days we see the President and ministers going on site. It is unprecedented. If it has ever happened I did not get to know.

There was a court order in my belief; can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister elaborate further whether to-date the court proceeding on-going is an appeal or not. Who is proceeding against whom? Where the President has come in, do we again go legalistic? I thought you needed a political solution that Ugandans would love to hear.

Give some hope, Prime Minister, to the people who were evicted. The legal battle can take two years; do you want them to live on those shacks and tents forever? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the senior general and counsel to elaborate further what nature of court proceeding this is and in anticipation when this would take place and concluded to give justice to those evictees and to the person who purports to be a land owner. Those two people got mixed up here.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Prime Minister will respond. However, my issue is about something I have been waiting for from the Government; an order, whether lawfully obtained, cannot be executed at night or on a weekend. Why has Government not taken action on at least that part; of acting outside the official hour? Why? You cannot execute an order after 6.00 p.m. and you cannot do it on a weekend or at night.

This is what happened; why has Government not taken action? That part is clear. It does not need anybody not even the Attorney-General. Why has that court bailiff not been handled by the Government? That is impunity.

MR SEBAGGALA: Further still, Madam Speaker, as we talk now, these people are living under fear that Mr Kiconco is going to evict them again. The tents were destroyed by the rains and the situation is terrible. They are always as you have ably put it; they come at night.

I would not like the Prime Minister to hide behind a court process because the court issue he is talking about - these are the people who were evicted, who tried to say, “Can we have some kind of legal redress somewhere?” However, when the President came in, it turned political and we need a political solution because people are suffering. 

I would like to request, Madam Speaker - he has a report. A report was out and indeed he knows what is contained in the report. Therefore, let him not hide under the cover that there is a case in court.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, Christmas is coming. I do not know; give us a way forward. Can you help us give some hope to those people who are Ugandans, being hit in the rain and living in tents?

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, there is a lot of confusion in this issue as you can see. However, it is true also that there is a case in court which is on-going. Therefore, when the eviction started, the President came in and that turned the matter political. Last time I said it was published today that the matter has been referred to the Attorney-General to advise legally, which advice is yet to come.

Now I am not hiding behind anything; I am saying what is happening. I have nothing to fear anyway because there is nothing I should fear. Therefore, what we have to do is to perhaps make more consultations with people involved or concerned so that we come back with the latest on the ground and how we can handle this matter. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: On that note the Attorney-General is directed to come here on Tuesday. He has had enough time. This issue occurred almost three months ago. The Attorney-General should come here on Tuesday and explain the issue of Lusanja. Thank you.

Honourable member, did you want to answer the issue about cancer or you are waiting for the line minister? The Minister of Housing had information on the Uganda Cancer Institute.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN PLANNING (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the issue of payment in the Uganda Cancer Institute was raised, I just went to make a phone call to the director of the Uganda Cancer Institute on whether the money is official or is under the table.

His response was that they have instituted payment of Shs 300,000 per patient and that it is official and has been running for one month now. However, he says they have exemption criteria where the very poor are exempted from payment of this money –(Interjection)– yes. I am reporting what I was told.

When I was Minister of Health, the payment was not there - that is why I wanted to crosscheck whether it is now there officially. He says it is official and they charge this money –(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: I am sorry to disrupt you honourable minister. However, I was compelled to give you this information. Two weeks ago, I received a phone call from a patient who is admitted at Uganda Cancer Institute. He has a problem with cancer of the mouth. According to that patient, the cancer department had refused and stopped to give him any form of treatment. He was compelled to call me, actually his brother called crying that their patient was going to die simply because the Uganda Cancer Institute has refused to continue giving him treatment because he is too poor to afford it. I think the information you have been given is not correct. It was until I called the director myself - I remember you are the one who gave me his number. It was after that phone call that he decided to change his decision. 

He had decided to take this patient away from the hospital. It was until I intervened that, that patient is in hospital to-date.  Therefore, that information needs further verification.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Your information is not different from mine. What I was told was that the money is official but the institute has exemption criteria where the very poor are exempted from the payment. I think as you guided earlier on, the Minister of Health should still come and give us an official statement detailing this payment. 

Also, there was an issue raised that there is a private pharmacy in Mulago Hospital. I do not know whether the Member was referring to Ngasi Pharmacy, which is owned by the Nurses’ Association. It has been there for over 20 years. Even when I was working in Mulago in the early 1990’s it was there. There is a pharmacy in Mulago but it is owned by the nurses in Mulago Hospital. I think that is what she was talking about. Otherwise –

THE SPEAKER: I have instructed our committee to go there. They will tell us whether it is that one or another. The minister should come with a circular indicating that poor people can get exemption. She should lay it here.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Soroti; the lower local government speakers, represented by hon. Elotu, hon. Eitunganane, hon. Ariko, hon. Osegge and hon. Ebaju. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I will be amending the Order Paper to allow hon. Mwine - Last week when he moved a motion here he wanted to lay some documents so I will allow him to do so in relation to that motion, which we passed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED BRUTALITY METED BY POLICE AGAINST SOME LEADERS AND SUPPORTERS OF FORUM FOR DEMOCRATIC CHANGE (FDC) IN RUKUNGIRI DISTRICT

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mario Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, this statement is made in response to the issue that was raised by the Leader of the Opposition on the 27th of November regarding the alleged brutality, which was meted out by police against some leaders and supporters of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) in Rukungiri District. I do hope the statement is on your iPads by now.

There are some attachments to this statement I will be referring to. 

The statement makes reference to the letter from the Clerk to Parliament addressed to the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, dated 28 November 2018 on the above alleged brutality. I have attached a copy of that letter from the Clerk and marked it "A". 

On 14 November 2O18, the FDC wrote to the Inspector General of Police (lGP) notifying him of the intention to have Prayers and Thanksgiving in Rukungiri District Stadium on 26 November 2018 and requesting to have security for the event. Again, that letter of FDC is attached as item "B".

The IGP, however, on 16 November 20l8 wrote to the organisers of the prayers and thanksgiving and cited non-fulfilment of Section 5 of the Public Order Management Act as grounds for disallowing the event. We have attached a copy of the IGP’s letter. 

Section 5, which the IGP is referring to essentially, talks about giving notice, date, venue, permission of the owners of the venue and the number of people who would attend the programme. 

On 26 November 2018 at around 9.00 a.m., hon. Amuriat, the President of the FDC Party met with the Rukungiri District Security Committee over the disallowed meeting and insisted to hold the same. The discussions failed.

At 2.00 p.m., Ms. Ingrid Turinawe, using a microphone and standing at the FDC Rukungiri offices, incited the public into violence against the police. As a result, people blocked the roads, burnt tyres, and started to stone the police who were on the patrol.

The Police responded with their techniques of public order management and arrested 56 people. On 27 and 28 November 2018, 50 of those arrested were produced in the Magistrate’s Court in Rukungiri. They were charged with various offences, where the court process relating to the offences continues.

The circumstances as narrated above necessitated the police to stop the meeting and take necessary legal action to restore law and order. These steps were in no way aimed at brutalising some FDC leaders and supporters and the minimum reasonable force was used. FDC was not targeted as a political party. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition –(hon. Muhindo rose)– I thought he was answering the Leader of the Opposition’s question. Are you the leader? Okay three minutes.

3.50
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and also to bring to the attention of this House that while we presented this matter again, a number of us had presented it because the response was not coming in time. I think it is why my colleague, hon. Mwijukye, was attempting to.

Honourable minister, the issue that was raised was a general one because police have interfered with matters of the FDC, not only in Rukungiri and this is what we presented to Parliament.

A statement was placed in the newspapers that no activity for the FDC would take place in the Ankole sub-region and it was not specific to Rukungiri.

Madam Speaker, in this same House we had presented that the activities of the FDC, specifically the visit of the president of FDC Party was not cleared for the Kasese activities. I was part of the team that went to meet with the Inspector General of Police (IGP) where we were not given audience to see him.
 
Because of this, I would like to bring to your attention, honourable minister, that the matter is not limited to Rukungiri. I am sure that it is clear in the Public Order Management Act, 2013 that the party, which is supposed to do mobilisation is cleared to do the mobilisation but given responsibility to inform Police and Police should provide the necessary support to ensure that the activity takes place.

If there was any individual who was cited inciting the public, it was the mandate of Police to have ensured such person was handled while the activity took place. I am not convinced by your statement that Police is not deliberately disorganising the activities of the FDC. Otherwise, it should have done its role in keeping law and order and leave the activities of the party to continue.

I know you are aware that FDC is a registered party just like other parties and it needs to do its activities within the legal framework of the country.

3.53
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised a matter where the police banned FDC activities and also laid at the Table letters from the IGP instructing FDC not to carry out rallies but town hall meetings. (Interjections) You can see I am also being intimidated from here by the - Madam Speaker, the police wrote to the FDC instructing us to stop doing rallies and that we should instead mobilise our people from hotels. This is a police attempting to determine which activity a political party should do - I laid those letters at the Table.

The minister is saying there was violence in Rukungiri - I cannot say that there was no violence because I was not there at that time but now he is talking about what happened after they had stopped the meeting. We expect him to tell us why Police is telling FDC not to hold rallies in Mbarara, Rukungiri and Kasese. 

Today, I saw the spokesperson of police saying it is not yet time for campaigns. Asking why we do not have rallies yet, it is not yet time for campaigns. Meaning that it is police to determine what type of activity the party should carry out - this is criminal.  When we attempt to meet the police so that we discuss this, they are not willing to meet our party leaders. I expected him to come and - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I expected him to say, “I am going to organise a meeting between the party leaders and the police and we iron out this.” Maybe, that would go a long way in solving this impasse. However, he is saying it is okay and we should continue seeing people fighting on the streets. That is not the best way to go. We expect you to go and tell the police to accept to meet the FDC leadership. Otherwise, do they meet only political parties?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was with hon. Nankabirwa in 2005. When we went to consult about whether we should restore political parties. The public was not very comfortable but we held a referendum and eventually, we said we should go multiparty. Therefore, I do not know why - you know multi means many - it does not mean one party. I do not know who is curtailing a constitutional right of freedom of association.

3.57
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The bone of contention is in the interpretation and implementation of the Public Order Management Act, 2013. The Constitutional Court, in the ruling of my case - Muwanga Kivumbi Vs Attorney General, deleted a section that gave police powers to prohibit a gathering.

You were in that Chair when we enacted the Public Order Management Act, 2013. Extreme care was taken to ensure the police do not have powers to prohibit. Sections 5 and 6, which he is quoting are very clear. They entail an organiser to notify police. If police has any issue, it is only on two grounds; it should inform the organiser and call them for a meeting to discuss an alternative venue. Those two grounds are clear: one is if it will interfere with the flow of traffic and two, if the gathering will interfere with ordinary business. Those are the only two grounds where the police are mandated to invite the organiser for a meeting to discuss an alternative venue or a date.

However, two issues are now coming into play and one is that they assume that for every gathering, the organiser must notify the IGP as the authorising officer. The law is very clear. It talks about the representative of the IGP and goes as low as being a District Police Commander. I do not know how on earth, a peasant from Butambala in Bulo can write to the IGP for him to have a gathering of a party branch. That is not purely possible.
Secondly, what the police are saying that they have the authority to ban political gatherings is total abuse of the law that Parliament made. 
Madam Speaker, the issue we have as the Opposition –(Member timed out.)

3.59
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate was very critical in this House when we legislated the Public Order Management Act, 2013. 

Madam Speaker, you have guided and given a historical background. The police finds itself in conflict with one of the political actors. It is about time, Madam Speaker, we also ask ourselves; do we play by the rule of the game?

There is a difference between political activism and doing politics. Political activists like some of us would want to be would mean that one wants to show everybody they are what they are and nothing should hinder you. The minister quoted section 5 in his statement. I expected my brothers on the other side who are offended to say they complied with everything but that the police went ahead to stop them. That would be a breach on the part of police. We should condemn such because that would mean police are acting as political activists - doing some things to protect particular interests.

If this other side is not willing to play by the rules –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is related to what is going on as far as police activities are concerned. 

In a related manner, police has stopped hon. Kyagulanyi from doing business, which is not a political activity without giving proper reasons. I do not know why police should even interfere in some person’s private business, which is not political.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for the information. I do not know - we were talking about playing by the rules. Multiparty dispensation requires rules because the actors are many. The intention is one, the one who is in the seat wants to keep it and the one outside wants to get that and so, the rules must be respected.

Madam Speaker, I am at pain. Today, you just indicated that most Ugandans were reluctant. They were forced to get back to this political partism because some - like in my area, I know how many people were killed during multiparty politics and this has made us look back; are we ready for this multiparty politics? We have enmity; we –(interruption) 

MR OCHEN: Honourable colleague, it does not matter who you are. By the fact that I am here as a Member of Parliament, I am entitled – according to procedure. 

Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Issues concerning political rights in this country are the issues, which are the subject matter on the Table. When the Leader of the Opposition came with a programme to consult on the age limit Bill across the country, the IGP office wrote a letter banning that consultation. Look at that. It was until they went to courts of law that that restriction was removed. Where did you see the Opposition failing to comply with the rules of the game? 

Therefore, is my brother in order to insinuate that the entire Opposition is not complaint to the laws that require the practice of multi-partism in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: I have not been monitoring the political actors; so, I find it difficult to make a ruling on what each party has been doing. Hon. Oboth, please, conclude. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. In fact, I have not said that. My interest today is that we live in a peaceful country, where we are guided. Government, the authority and security must tolerate one another. If you are to come for me, you should say it on record here. The issue of not playing by the rules is what is killing us in this country. Other people have a sense of entitlement, ownership and this is across the board both for those in Government and the Opposition. We have a sense of entitlement but we should have a sense of belonging that this country belongs to all of us. So, let us have a fair space. 

Madam Speaker, it is not fair when the police unlawfully stop others but also getting a microphone and inciting other people –(Member timed out.)

4.05
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement. I will refer to National Broadcasting Services (NBS) TV news broadcast of yesterday at 9.00 p.m. They showed the police stopping hon. Kyagulanyi’s shows for whatever reasons they were giving. 

However, my concern was, there was a lady who had invested in hon. Kyagulanyi’s performance who fainted while at police and was carried away to a private hospital unconscious and up to now, we do not know whether she will come back normal or not. 

This is unfair on the part of police. In case there are disagreements, let us come on table and agree on certain terms, like other colleagues have said. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Probably before the minister comes to clarify on these issues, do you have machinery where you can have a dialogue with the actors? When you come to answer, please, let us hear a bridge somewhere. 

4.06
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the duty of Government – and fortunately, the Leader of Government Business and the Deputy are in the House to hear this. It is our duty to nurture the multiparty political dispensation in this country. To save the situation where there is much eruption during campaigns, the stage needs to be set early in time. 

However, it is worrisome that those who are supposed to nurture the multiparty political system are distorting multiparty politics in this country. I belong to the NRM but it is painful that we are committing the same mistakes that were made in the past. It is as if we have learnt nothing and forgotten nothing about our political history. Where is the problem? If people want to associate freely in a peaceful manner, why are you engaging the police? I know the police are being used. The actors are this side and they are seated here. 

Madam Speaker, on 1 December, 2018, I had a fundraising at Ntuusi Parents Nursery and Primary School. Somehow a rumour had circulated that hon. Bobi Wine would be coming to the fundraising. The police was deployed – 

THE SPEAKER: There is no hon. Bobi Wine in this House; he is called hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, a rumour circulated that hon. Robert Kyagulanyi was to attend and contribute to the fundraising –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, as we prepare the budget this year, I want assurance that we do not fund political parties because they are in this House. We fund all the parties here from the Consolidated Fund so that they can work but if they are not wanted, I should also not budget for them – yes, because we fund them.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, much mayhem was done in Rushere in 1980, where a place that falls in a constituency that my friend, Col Mwesigye represents in Parliament. He remembers very well how the then civilian, hon. Sam Kuteesa, caused havoc to the then Leader of the Front for National Salvation, Yoweri Museveni, now the President. He knows that in a distorted situation even civilians can use the forces of coercion. 

Therefore, can we step back from that history, Members and nurture this multiparty political system? If we do not want it, let us tell Ugandans that we are not ready for a multiparty system. However, to tie one group and allow others to flourish is not good for democracy and we would rather be honest. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, respond because we have other work to do. 

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, let me say that this statement was specific. As I said, in this statement, we were required to answer and the letter from the Clerk was specific. She asked us to respond to the issues in Rukungiri. However, if there are other issues in Kasese and many other places which you want us to explain, we shall do so. 

Secondly, where you want to engage and consult the leadership of the police and the ministry, before such meetings take place, we are absolutely available. 

Thirdly, there is no policy in the police that allows them to stop the rallies of any political party because they are from a particular political party, including FDC. Nevertheless, honourable members, you made the Public Order Management Act, 2013 in order to keep law and order in meetings and your recognition is that when a gathering of people occurs, matters of law and order will occur too. That is why the President of FDC, hon. Patrick Amuriat, was wise enough to hold a meeting with the leadership of the Rukungiri District Security Committee. 

Anyhow, as I have said in my statement, before the outcome of that meeting, a one called Turinawe took it upon herself to incite the public against the police who were being stoned. I have said this in here that because of that, it was absolutely necessary for the police to come in to restore law and order. If the police did not do that duty, which is theirs, you would today be blaming the them.

Stoning the police is not a joke. These are not only human beings who are Ugandans; they are law enforcement officers whom we should, in spite of their weaknesses, respect first and foremost. Go to our neighbouring countries and see how people treat the police. Even touching and molesting a uniformed police officer, you will see their response.

Police is not here for only one party but for all of us. We commit ourselves that we have not, and where consultations have taken place, like with the leaders in Butambala, the rallies went on very smoothly in spite of those meetings having been organised by leaders predominantly from the other side.

Therefore, let us appreciate what is good so that we can have this country run on the basis of security. (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there are some members of the Opposition who just want to show off. The information we are getting is that the interparty dialogue process (the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue, (IPOD), where they are supposed to bring views, is being shunned by all the Opposition. So, they just want camera and comedy. They do not want orderly things.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, to conclude, I would like to assure you and the House that there are many avenues for consultations over these matters and we are absolutely prepared to play a neutral role at the police level. We are not a force for any particular party. We are a force for the State of Uganda. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We would like to know where this IPOD reports? Who is the consumer of their reports? Where does it sit? Where does it report? Is it effective?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, the issue of consultation I thought you referred to, is when a Member, whether from NRM, UPC, FDC or any Ugandan wants to hold a meeting and it is within the purview of the Public Order Management Act, 2013; where can somebody consult? We have the district authorities. What we call the district police forces, the IGP and the political leaders. 

When one initiates a meeting, these are the offices to which you send your intention. You are then called for the consultation. Mark you, that consultation is not for purposes of blocking anybody. It is for making sure that the meeting runs smoothly in terms of the venue and the security of the people, like in the case of Rukungiri where the FDC specifically asked that the police should provide security. 

At that particular moment, not necessarily in the case of Rukungiri but anywhere else, you may be able to note that the police at that time is seen on the ground and on that basis. Since you will have asked for security, they may advise that you either push it to another place or another date. This is the kind of consultation that can take place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us encourage all the actors to consult so that we have a better Uganda.

STATEMENT ON THE PARLIAMENTARY SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION WEEK, 10 – 14 DECEMBER 2018

4:18
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr David Mutebi): Madam Speaker, I make this statement in accordance with Rule 53 (1) of our Rules of Procedure. It is in respect to the Parliamentary Science, Technology and Innovation week scheduled for 10 to 14 December, 2018.

Parliament, through its Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation has organised a science, technology and innovation exhibition week to take place from 10 to 14 December, 2018 at the Parliament ground floor car parking lot. 

Parliament expects a big number of exhibitors. The theme is “Transforming the Country through Ugandan Innovations”. The objectives of the exhibition are to: 

    1) Empower and support Uganda’s innovators
    2) Enhance socio-economic transformation of the country through the application and use of Ugandan local materials; and 
    3) Identify innovations that require Government interventions and funding and recommend to Government accordingly.
The innovations to be exhibited include new ideas, creative thoughts and new imaginations in the form of device or methods and value chain additions. 

This exhibition will motivate innovators and in turn, Uganda may get enhanced better solutions that meet current requirements and challenges and existing market needs by providing more effective products, processes, services, technologies or business models that are made available to markets, governments and society.

It is common knowledge that when one has a great idea for a product or service, there will always be people who will want to duplicate one’s success and sell his/her ideas as their own. 

Parliament is well aware of this danger and in an effort to instil confidence in our exhibitors, depending on individual circumstances, preventive measures have been taken by inviting the Uganda National Registration Services Bureau to participate at the exhibition. This is to ensure that the exhibitors' intellectual property rights are registered where possible or helped to start the registration process.

It is also appreciated that some innovators have exciting and would-be reasonable innovations but are constrained by lack of adequate funds to complete their research and developments. The exhibition is expected to expose viable innovations to Government for consideration for funding from the Innovation Fund.

Government is also expected to appreciate the urgency of establishing a legal framework or guidelines for allocating funds to various innovators.

It is also noted that even innovators who have some funds have found it difficult to access Government interventions to ensure their products are eligible for national and international markets. This is the reason the relevant institutions and ministries have been requested to participate, appreciate and assist the innovators. 

The institutions that have been requested to attend include: the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the National Agricultural Research Organisation, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology and the National Drug Authority, among others.

Relevant Government ministries and departments have been specifically requested to interest themselves in this exhibition in order to appreciate the need to appropriately allocate funds to the innovation sector and to identify the actual innovators that require Government funding and other forms of interventions. 

The Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga, the Speaker of this Parliament, is expected to officially open the exhibition, on 11 December 2018, while the Rt hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, will close it on 14 December 2018. 

The Rt hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, together with his officers in the Office of the Prime Minister are expected to participate and take note for further action, of all the potentials of Ugandans to enhance development and lead the country even beyond the middle income status. 

The exhibition and entrance is free of charge and all Ugandans are invited to attend. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and members on the Committee of ICT and National Guidance. I would like to add that the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation and his officials should really come. 

Furthermore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also attend so that they can appreciate what is available and plan. There are many things that Ugandans are doing. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY ANNUAL REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the National Planning Authority Annual report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT BY THE DELEGATION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AT THE 139TH ASSEMBLY OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) HELD IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND, 14TH TO 18TH OCTOBER 2018 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Abdulatiff Sebaggala comes, I have noted that it is only the IPU, ACP and Commonwealth, which are reporting. When you go for benchmarking visit, that is the work of Parliament; we would like to know what you got from there. 

Last time, the Committee on Appointments reported but the others – please, that is also part of our work. Please, report on what you found out from whether in China or – we would like to know so that we can pick some ideas.  

4.26
MR ABDULATIFF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 139th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 14th to 18th October, 2018.

The entire report is already on our iPads and so, I would like to just go through the executive summary of what transpired. 

The 139th Assembly of the IPU was held from 14th to 18th October, 20l8 in Geneva, Switzerland under the theme: “Strengthening the Global Regime for Migrants and Refugees: The Need for Evidence-Based Policy Solutions.”

Delegates from nearly 130 countries, including over 50 Speakers of Parliaments, 40 Deputy Speakers and 700 members of Parliaments (MPs) of which 20 per cent are young MPs under 45 and 33 per cent being women, convened in Geneva under the umbrella theme of: “Science, Technology and Innovation.”

The Assembly covered multiple subjects including human rights, disarmament, counter-terrorism, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and migration. 

Meetings attended

The Assembly commenced its general debate on 15 October 2018 with the high-level segment reserved for Speakers of Parliaments on the theme: “Parliamentary Leadership in Promoting Peace and Development in the Age of Innovation and Technological Change.”

At its sitting on 18 October 2018, the Assembly adopted resolutions and other documentation as follows:

    1) The outcome document on the general debate on Parliamentary Leadership in Promoting Peace and Development in the age of innovation and technological change; 
    2) The resolution on strengthening inter-parliamentary cooperation on migration and governance in view of the adoption of the global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
    3) The declaration on the 70th anniversary celebrations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; and
    4) The emergency item on “climate change - let us not cross the line” was debated and adopted.

The general debate at the 139th Assembly on the theme: “Parliamentary Leadership in Promoting Peace and Development in the Age of Innovation and Technological Change” provided an opportunity for parliamentarians from around the world to share their national, regional and international experiences and identify ways of engaging parliamentary leadership in the promotion of peace and development in the age of innovation and technological change.

The Uganda delegation ensured country representation in the following meetings:

    1) The governing council 
    2) The executive committee 
    3) The four standing committees namely - Committee on Peace and International Security, Committee on Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade, Committee on United Nations Affairs and Committee on Democracy and Human Rights;
    4) The two forum meetings - the Forum for Women Parliamentarians and the Forum of Young Parliamentarians of the IPU
    5) The Association of Secretaries General of IPU; and
    6) The Parliamentary Union of the organisation of Islamic Conference (PUIC).

The delegation also attended workshops, meetings and events that were organised on the side lines of the 139th IPU meeting.

Other meetings attended

The delegation presented briefs on the following topics, which were discussed in the standing committees:

    1) Engaging the private sector in implementing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) especially on re-newable energy
    2) The role of fair and free trade and investment in achieving the SDGs especially regarding economic equality, sustainable infrastructure, industrialisation and innovation
    3) Strengthening inter-parliamentary cooperation on migration and migration governance in view of the adaptation of global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
    4) Parliamentary leadership in promoting peace and development in the age of innovation and technological change; and 
    5) Combatting sexual violence in UN peacekeeping operations.

The delegation also attended the following events that took place on the side lines of the 139th IPU:

Parity debate

At the 139th IPU Assembly, the Forum of Women Parliamentarians organised its fourth parity debate. One of the aims of the debate was to foster dialogue between women and men at the IPU and encourage them to debate issues of common interests together. 

Meeting with the Burundi delegation

The delegation held a meeting with the Burundi delegation at the sidelines of the Assembly. One of the issues highlighted in the discussion was the mandate of the IPU Bureau of Speakers and its association with the summit in light of the recent appointment of the Speaker of the Parliament of Burundi as the chairperson of the bureau.

Meeting with Uganda's Mission to Geneva and the Association of all Ugandans living in Switzerland
The delegation met and interacted with all Ugandans living in Switzerland organised by Ambassador Ananyanga Opar, the Head of the Uganda Mission to Geneva. 

In the discussion that ensued, issues were raised about the role of Parliament, legislations made, corruption, property ownership in Uganda by the diaspora, acquisition of National IDs for the diaspora, voting by the diaspora, operations of Uganda Mission in Geneva, fighting corruption in Uganda and responses were accordingly made. 

The Speaker undertook to arrange for the team from National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) and the Citizenship and Immigration Board to visit Switzerland.

Meeting with Waterflex

The delegation held a meeting with Waterflex, an organisation geared towards finding solutions for access to water and sanitation for the people that have been left behind due to issues such as poverty, water scarcity, climate change, conflict situations as well as cultural or gender barriers. 

The Governing council

The governing council discussed the situation of certain parliaments, namely: Congo, Guinea- Bissau, Libya, Thailand, Burundi, Cambodia, Maldives, Nicaragua and South Sudan.

Activities of committees and other bodies

Activities of committees and other bodies were presented to the Assembly, notably the Vice-President of the Committee on Human Rights of Parliamentarians, Ms Delsa Solorzano, presented decisions on the 19 parliamentarians from 13 countries, including Uganda.

Uganda

She noted that five MPs had been arrested and charged with treason, which carries a death penalty for stoning the convoy of H.E, the President of Uganda. The committee commended the Parliament of Uganda for its swift and decisive efforts to establish an ad hoc committee to ascertain the facts at hand, to condemn the torture of two MPs by the security forces and the other serious violations of the fundamental rights of Members of Parliament and to demand immediate accountability under the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act.

The chairperson informed the governing council that the committee would send a delegation to Uganda, at the earliest convenient time, to conduct a fact-finding mission and meet all relevant leaders of the Executive, security and judicial authorities, including the President, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Inspector General of Police and the Attorney-General so as to establish clarifications on their response, meet with the Speaker and all relevant parliamentary authorities, the five members of Parliament concerned and their legal counsels, representatives of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, main political parties, civil society and any other organisations, and any other persons in a position to supply relevant information to establish the issues on the ground and to ensure that due process is followed. The committee’s decision was adopted.

Further, the chairperson presented issues on Congo, Senegal, Mauritius, Venezuela, Afghanistan, Cambodia, Malaysia, Maldives, Philippines, Turkey and Palestine and they were adopted by the governing council.

Forum of Young Parliamentarians of the IPU

Hon. Maureen Osoru, the Arua Woman MP and the President of the Young Parliamentarians of the IPU presented the report of the Forum of Young Parliamentarians. She informed the Assembly that the meeting monitored youth participation at national level and had examples of types of actions taken by different countries to enhance youth participation. However, she noted that despite advancements made, youth participation in parliaments remained low. She proposed targets for youth representation in Parliament based on the proportion of young people and taking into account several age ranges. 

She invited young parliamentarians to participate in the Global Conference of Young Parliamentarians that is scheduled to take place in Azerbaijan from 14th to 15th December 2019. The venue for the 140th IPU Assembly was agreed as Doha, Qatar, from 6th to 10th April 2019 and the 141st Assembly of IPU will take place in Serbia, from 13th to 17th October 2019.

The Assembly

Address by the IPU President

In her address to the Assembly, the IPU President, Ms Gabriela Cuevas –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought we said you would present the highlights.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important report. I will complete it in the next three minutes. The document is almost 200 pages but I summarised it in less than 20 pages. I am about to wind up.


Adoption of the report of the standing committee on human rights on the matter of ending discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity

A background about the report was presented to the Assembly as follows: at the 137th IPU Assembly in St Petersburg in October 2017, and at the 138th IPU Assembly in Geneva in March 20I8, the IPU standing committee on democracy and human rights considered a proposal by the Belgian IPU group to hold a panel discussion on the issue of ending discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. 

It was noted that at the 137th IPU Assembly at St Petersburg, the LGBT issue had been struck off the Agenda of IPU due to its lack of universal acceptance. However, at the 138th IPU Assembly, the standing committee decided, by vote, to place the item on the agenda for the next Assembly. 
At the last meeting of the 138th IPU Assembly held in Geneva in March 2018, several delegations took the floor to express their objection to the inclusion in the committee agenda of a panel on this issue. 

Delegations also asked the secretariat to provide an interpretation of the rules governing the prerogatives of the Assembly and of the standing committees when deciding their respective agenda. In light of the late hour and the absence of a quorum required for a formal decision, it was decided to adjourn the meeting and to re-examine the issue on the occasion of the 139th IPU Assembly. This is where the gist of the matter comes from.

Madam Speaker, a legal opinion on the matter, indeed, reaffirmed that the final decision to any matter discussed in standing committees of the IPU rests with the Assembly. It was noted that while standing committees normally enjoy broad independence, with regard to their own agenda and work plans, that independence is still placed under the ultimate authority of the Assembly. 

The decision on whether the Assembly should determine the agenda of the standing committee on democracy and human rights was agreed to.  Further, a vote was carried out on the question: “Do you agree that at the 140th IPU Assembly, the standing committee on democracy and human rights holds a panel debate that will not lead to a resolution entitled, “The role of Parliaments in ending discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity and ensuring respect to human rights of LGBT persons?”

Hon. Paul Akamba, a member of the Uganda delegation noted that the question was against the provisions of the statute of the IPU and did not have a universal acceptance given that the majority of African and Asian countries and some in Europe were against it and it could lead to their withdrawal from the IPU. 

He further emphasised that as provided for in the IPU Statute, the IPU should not promote issues that do not have a universal acceptance. (Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 33(2) which requires leaders of any delegation only to highlight key recommendations of the report.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable colleague proceeding well by presenting to us the detailed report, which is taking a lot of time when the rule clearly says that they are supposed to give highlights of key recommendations of the report? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report has taken 20 minutes yet we had just planned for 10 minutes to present it. You have actually read the entire report, which is not what you should have done. You were supposed to highlight what was decided not to go in to the details of who said this and that and at what point.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought we always try to make an executive summary but let me windup in two minutes.

What is very important - I would like to extend our enormous appreciation to you, the Rt hon. Speaker because one of the issues that were greatly debated and championed by our Speaker was the issue of fighting LGBT.  As a country, we are proud that the Speaker mobilised all regional groups to fight and defeat LGBT in the IPU meetings. 

Honourable members, that was a very great achievement and we hope that other factors constant, we shall re-introduce a Private Member’s Bill as far as homosexuals is concerned. So, honourable members, get prepared - at an opportune time, we shall bring the Private Member’s Bill to that effect. We are extremely grateful for your role, Madam Speaker, as we campaigned against that motion. 

Finally, I would like to also inform Members that the delegation was led by the Speaker, hon. Maureen Osoru, hon. Esther Anyakun, hon. Abdu Latif Sebaggala, hon. Francis Mwijukye, hon. Paul Akamba, hon. Rose Kabagyeni and the technical team, which team was led by the Clerk to Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. Allow me to lay the report at the Table.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The text of the resolutions have also been sent to the Prime Minister and to the relevant ministries for action. Thank you very much.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. ABIGABA CURTHBERT MIREMBE, REGARDING THE PRACTICE OF OUTSOURCING BY TELECOMMUNICATION COMPANIES

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise? These answers are long.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence. I have not had time to prepare the answer because for the last two days, we have been involved in the Bill. I request that next week, I bring a comprehensive answer.

THE SPEAKER:  Is there something on the iPad?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I beg that we handle it next week because we have been busy with the Bill. We started the other day, yesterday and today. I beg that we handle it on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The answers will be given on Tuesday. Your item will be on the Order Paper. Item eight - can we have hon. Mwine Mpaka? Just lay it on the Table; do not go into the preamble.

4.46
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, Parliament passed a resolution to ban all Pyramid and Ponzi Schemes. We went further to write to the Financial Intelligence Authority to provide Parliament with certified copies of all the 18 active Ponzi Schemes in the country. This is the report I would like to lay at the Table. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Just talk about the source, date and the subject.

MR MPAKA: Last week, on 28 November 2018, I moved a motion urging Parliament to ban Pyramid and Ponzi Schemes in this country. Parliament passed the resolution to ban all those schemes.
	
However, we realised that there are Members of Parliament protecting these Pyramids and Ponzi schemes. We went further and discovered that there is a lot of political influence from this side – a son to one of the big people from this side is actually one of the directors in these Ponzi Schemes.

It was because of those fears that we went ahead to write to the Financial Intelligence Authority to provide us with a list of these companies so that we could lay it at the Table and submit to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to actively carryout this resolution without any further political interference.

Madam Speaker, as we speak, the schemes mentioned in this  report are still recruiting more young people and many Ugandans  have lost a lot of money including Members of Parliament in this House, specifically one coin –

THE SPEAKER: The resolution was passed. What we wanted you to say is that this is the letter from Financial Intelligence Authority dated, 5 December 2018, on the Pyramid and Ponzi Schemes and signed by Mr Sydney Asubo.

MR MPAKA: This is the letter from Financial Intelligence Authority on the total number of Ponzi Schemes in this country including company names, directors and locations, signed by Mr Sydney Asubo, the Executive Director of the Financial Intelligence Authority.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is now our document; it is available for you. There are some 18 companies. You are welcome to study it and take action. 

Yesterday, we had stood over three clauses of the Bill and we would like to handle them this afternoon.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

Clause 15

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (MS ANNET NYAKECHO): Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 15 by redrafting it as follows: “Where a data processor or data controller processes or stores personal data outside Uganda, the data processor or data controller shall ensure that –

    a) The country in which the data is processed or stored has adequate measures in place for the protection of personal data at least equivalent to the protection provided for by this Act; or
    b)  The data subject has consented.”

The justification is to enhance protection for personal data wherever it is processed. 

Madam Chairperson, we operate in a global village and dealing with public and private entities. It is therefore, possible that personal data may be processed in another country.

The clause provides further protection for data subjects that in the event that an entity processes their personal data outside the country, they must ensure that the country where the personal data is being processed has the same protection as provided under the law in Uganda.

The clause is meant to further provide assurance that where a contract is given to a Ugandan company to process data, there will be extra measures within the law to protect that data if the company decides to process it outside Uganda.

The clause is also supported by international conventions such as the African Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection, which also requires that a data controller who processes data in countries that are not member states of the union ensures that the country has similar protection to those provided under the Convention.

On enforcement, it will be the duty of the Data Protection Office set up in the Act, to conduct compliance assessment periodically and confirm that companies processing data outside Uganda show that they have taken measures to assess whether the countries that are processing personal data on their behalf have data protection laws in place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we talked about processors based in Uganda, I would like the words, “based in Uganda” embedded in here. We do not want someone to sit in - can you fit in the words where a data processor or data controller based in Uganda processes personal data -

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, we can say, “Where a data processor or a data controller based in Uganda processes or stores personal data outside Uganda, the data processor or data controller shall ensure that…”

MR TUMWEBAZE: It is agreeable, Madam Chairperson.

MR JULIUS OCHEN: I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify the issue where there is not another law like the ones we have in Uganda and you are processing data in that country.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, like I said in my justification, we are currently living in a global village where information is readily available because we use the internet and anybody can access your information.

For example, assuming UNDP has a project in Uganda and it is also based in the US, they will carry your data to New York for further processing for other activities.

They may not necessarily be in Uganda but they have activities here; so, it is necessary that we have this particular amendment embedded to protect you, the data subject. 

Also, we use mobile phones which are not manufactured here but in China, the US and other countries. When you buy a new phone, before you do anything especially the smart phones, they will ask for your email address and telephone number for you to activate and use it for the purpose you have bought it for.

This information about you is not stored here but outside Uganda; so, you need protection at least equivalent to that in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 33 as follows;

(i) 	Substitute reference to 29 and 30 with 31 and 32 to read as follows; “Where an offence under sections 31 and 32 is committed by a corporation, the corporation and every officer of the corporation who knowingly and wilfully authorises or permits the contravention is liable to the offence.”

(ii) 	Insert new sub clauses (2) and (3) to provide as follows; “A court which convicts a person under sub section (1) may, in addition to the punishment under the corporation, pay a fine not exceeding 2 per cent of the corporation’s annual gross turnover.

(iii) 	A court shall take into consideration the gravity of the offence under sub section (1) and its impact in determining the fine to impose under sub section (2).”

The justification is to enhance the penalties for breaches by corporations under the Act so as to discourage breach.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you restate the second sentence about the fine?

MS NYAKECHO: “A court which convicts a person under sub section (1) may, in addition to punishment, order the corporation to pay a fine not exceeding 2 per cent of the corporation’s annual gross turnover. 

(iii) 	A court shall take into consideration the gravity of the offence under sub section (1) above and its impact in determining the fine to impose under sub section (2).”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS NAYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I beg your indulgence. We had three amendments before clause 2; they were clause 18 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will have to recommit because we only stood over 2, 15 and 33.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to recommit clause -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you recommit when we are in plenary.

Clause 2

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to amend clause 2 by 
(i) 	inserting immediately after the word “Authority” the following; “consent” means any freely given specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wish, which he or she, by a statement or clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the collection or processing of personal data relating to him or her.

(ii) 	Inserting after the word “consent” the following: “Corporation” means an entity created under a law and is separate and distinct from its owners.

Substituting after the definition of “personal data” with the following; 

“Personal data” means information about the person from which the person can be identified that is recorded in any form and includes data that relates to –

(a) 	The nationality, age or marital status of the person.
(b) 	The education level or occupation of the person.
(c) 	An identification number, symbol or other particulars assigned to a person.
(d) 	Identity data or
(e) 	Other information which is in the possession of or is likely to come into the possession of the data controller and includes an expression of opinion about the individual.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The definition of “Corporation.”

MS NYAKECHO: “Corporation” means an entity created under the law and is separate and distinct from its owners.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.03
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

5.04
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY ACT, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: The Title is settled and the Bill passes. We congratulate the minister and the chairperson for finally getting this Bill done. I hope you can let us know where we can meet later. (Laughter)

5.06
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I pass a vote of thanks to you, Madam Speaker and to the Members, for the time invested in understanding the importance of this Bill in this modern era where data is a very big resource.

I would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda for giving this law priority. I hope together, we shall be able to create awareness on the importance of securing personal data, especially in circumstances where people get excited with technology and volunteer their personal details that may be exploited to their detriment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Annet Nyakecho): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a brief statement about this. First of all, on behalf of the House, I would like to thank all the members of the ICT committee for the dedication and time they put into the process of coming up with this Bill.

I would like to especially thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance and the pressure you put on us and also for the resources because at one point we had challenges in terms of resources but you stood with us and today, we passed this Bill. 

God bless you all, honourable members of this august House. Thank you for the encouragement and also for the corrections and the support. God bless you all.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE AFRICAN EXPORT-IMPORT BANK AGREEMENT (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2018

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The African Export-Import Bank Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Ministers have come to support and the chairperson of the committee. A number of Members have seconded the Bill. Please justify.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to give the force of law in Uganda to the agreement for the establishment of the African Export-Import Bank, which was signed in Abidjan Cote d'Ivoire on 8 May 1993; and in respect of which Uganda became a member State upon the finance ministry signing the agreement together with the contracting parties.

This agreement was ratified by Uganda on 10 October 2015 in accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; the Ratification of Treaties Act Cap 204 and article 13 of the agreement. Therefore, the purpose of this Bill is to give force of the law of this agreement to allow us establish a branch here of the same bank, which will not only help our country but also the business people in terms of accessibility of credit to our businessmen and women. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the chairperson to report?

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee considered the Bill, which has been presented and justified by the minister, and I would like to straight away present before the House the observations and recommendations made by the committee.

Observations

1. 	The African Export-Import bank commonly called Afrexim Bank was established by African governments and they constitute the largest proportion of ownership of the bank. The shareholders are divided into four classes broken down hereunder and since the report is on the iPads, Members can refer to the breakdown from their iPads.

2. 	The Afrexim Bank was formed under the auspices of the African Development Bank (ADB) and the ADB has shareholding in the Afrexim Bank and a permanent seat on the board. Both institutions were formed to foster the development of the member states as well as the continent in general but there are some key differences.

	Afrexim Bank's mandate is primarily to facilitate, promote and expand intra and extra African trade whereas the ADB focuses more on national infrastructure projects. Afrexim Bank uses private sector instruments and commercial approaches in pursuing its developmental agenda.

3. 	Afrexim Bank facilities are primarily provided to the private sector. This will provide the much needed capital for private sector development. The low interest to be charged by the bank will provide competition to commercial banks, which will eventually drive interest rates down in the country. The interest rate will be determined by the Board of the Bank in accordance with the bank interest rate policy.

4. 	Domestication of the bank agreement bestows the bank with the protection, privileges and immunities set out in the agreement. The bank does not do business in countries that are not domesticated or otherwise fully implemented the agreement because the bank will lack the prerequisite protection. Therefore, Uganda needs to domesticate the agreement in order to benefit from the Bank.

5. 	Uganda has been chosen by the Afrexim Bank Board to host the regional branch. With Uganda hosting the regional branch, businesses will be in position to access credit at a cheaper cost than when the bank is situated in another country. This will facilitate the development of businesses with access to cheaper credit.

	Uganda is required to provide a fully furnished temporary office for the period of two years starting from the official opening in Kampala of the bank office. 

	A freehold piece of land in Kampala of about 8,094 to 12,000 square metres is also required to enable the bank construct a permanent branch office building. However, if the branch office is permanently closed, the title will revert to the State subject to the payments by the State of the fair compensation to the bank for the buildings, installations and all other developments made thereon. 

6. 	The Bill will grant the bank and its staff privileges, immunities, exemptions, facilities and concessions under the agreement. Any reference to inviolability of premises in the agreement or any other agreement signed between Uganda and the bank shall be construed to refer to the inviolability of the headquarters of the regional office and other premises of the bank, which the minister may, by statutory instrument, designate as inviolable in accordance with the Diplomatic Privileges Act.

7. 	The African Export-Import Agreement does not have a reservation article. It is therefore not possible for a country to choose some provisions and reject others.
Madam Speaker, this is very important. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Africa Export-Import Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018 be passed into law. I beg to move.

Madam speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the committee original report, minutes and other documents, which were tabled before the committee in consideration of the Bill. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your committee. Honourable members, to amplify what the chairperson has said, once we ratified the whole agreement, we agreed to everything. Therefore, we cannot say we do not like this or the other because this is our agreement. Any comments?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance. We have just passed a Bill on data collection and we are now bouncing back this one; can you guide on the quorum –

THE SPEAKER: Quorum to listen to a debate?

MR OCHEN: No, I am asking about the previous one –

THE SPEAKER: Please sit down.

5.16
MR OTIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee.

Madam Speaker, this agreement has a very big schedule. It needs the eye of an auditor or a specialist to go through and understand. 

However, that notwithstanding, the chairperson of the committee has told us that there is no reservation clause. Once we accept to give it the force of law in this country, we accept the whole thing in its entirety.

My fear comes with these kinds of agreements that sometimes we find pushed on us. It is not still lost in this House that we have had similar agreements that turned out not as sweet as they were presented. 

A case in point is the Re-financing Agreement of Bujagali project. It looked very sweet, we swallowed it here but we have not come to appreciate the way it was packaged to us. There are many other similar agreements –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you distinguish between treaties and conventions? This is an international agreement between countries. Can you distinguish it from the financing agreements, which are bi-lateral?

MR OKOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. My only concern is that treaties of this nature - if you look at the schedule here, which forms part of this - are similar in nature and the effects are the same. They bind us to certain positions.

I would like to appeal to the technocrats, more so the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that I hope this is not one of those bitter pills that this House or the country is going to be forced to swallow and in future, we stand to regret. I beg to submit.

5.19
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee and to urge colleagues to support this bank. As you are aware, our economy is private sector-led and this bank comes at the right time to support it. 

You also know that we have a deficit. Our imports have never balanced with the exports. In order to promote the exports, we need such a bank to support Ugandans so that we can balance our imports and exports.

Therefore, I strongly recommend that we go ahead. Let us not be afraid because in my opinion, there are no risks in this bank. Let us go ahead and support it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you listened carefully to the rationale by the chairperson that this bank is going to be both intra and extra. We have been struggling on common projects in the region; one side has got money while the other does not. One is standing on one leg and the other is not. This could be part of the struggle.

5.21
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the Bill but I have a comment. They say that we have not fully paid the subscription - it is in the table where the Government of Uganda has paid only 40 per cent of its shares.

Secondly, we are going to have a regional office. If you look at the current obligations we have with international organisations, we are mostly in arrears. I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to assure us that they are going to fully clear the subscription because we do not want to have a branch here and yet we have not paid our share. I want that assurance from the minister.

5.22
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a welcome move because if we can enjoy some of the facilities that we have been picking from the rest of the countries abroad like the loans that we have been battling with here, then that is economic independence for Africa.

My problem with this report that the chairperson has given is that it does not state the total number of shares and how many African countries there are, for ease of our understanding so that we know. If in Class A, you are talking of 58 per cent shareholding - that is both share capital and premium - then we should be able to know the total number of shares that are being floated by this bank.

Our take as Uganda at an allotment of 2,426 shares – are we striking a good deal and we will look at the value for money in terms of the dollars that they have put down here; share capital and the share premium. We should come with that very clearly.

Then on Class D of shareholding, he talks about shares held by any person currently indirectly held by investors in the bank depository listed on the stock exchange in Mauritius.

Madam Speaker, we have had situations where people in Uganda have been listed on the stock exchange maybe in Seychelles and are investing under different names. We should be able to come up with a specificity of who these kinds of people are and why necessarily the stock exchange of Mauritius where they are listed? 

This would help us so that when making this law, we would certainly know that it is not a law where just a few individuals will benefit indirectly under the disguise of Uganda having shareholding in the African Export-Import Bank.

That said, I think on the question of why we have had to pay different amounts for different shares and the answer the chairperson gave is that the market prices at the time we were paying have been changing for the shares; is this what has been for all countries? Just like my friend there stated his fear, we are fond of every now and then inflating figures when it comes to these international dealings.

Madam Speaker, you remember when we constructed Bujagali, we did it at the rate of at $3.6 million per 1 megawatt of power even when at the time, the prevailing cost of construction of power internationally was at between $1.1 million to $1.2 million per megawatt of power.

Therefore, if this is the standard that has been practiced by all countries that at the time of buying the shares, the prevailing share price has been changing, then the Chairperson should clearly explain to us so that we do not look at a situation where somebody is inflating figures to take advantage of us through the share capital and the premium. 

Thank you, honourable chairperson and I welcome the idea.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a bank which is already in existence. This is a structure of incorporation for the whole of Africa; it is not just for us. When you incorporate a company, you list the preferential shares, the ordinary shares - that is what you do and then they are allocated and you incorporate. Now I do not know how the chairperson will explain who paid more and who paid less.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I am not talking about whether the premium should be different from the share capital. My issue is that even the share capital, at a time like this - they are saying that we have been paying in different periods and years. Therefore, these shares have been appreciating and that is why they have attracted different prices -

THE SPEAKER: How will that change the agreement? It was made in 1993.

5.28
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomasimbi South County, Bukomasimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee on this Bill. However, I have a few concerns. The Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 1993 signed this treaty in Côte d’Ivoire. It is now 25 years since this agreement was signed for the African Export-Import Bank.

This country is struggling in terms of trade and this bank would be very vital to facilitate business in the country. Many things have changed since 1993. If I recall, by that time, we did not even have mobile phones but we have them now and the transfer of money has really transformed. We are now engaged in transferring money using mobile phones.

Madam Speaker, I just wanted the chairperson to tell us whether what is contained in the 1993 agreement can help us as a country given the current situation as far as this bank is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a commercial bank. It is an investment bank and it is going to operate within States - it has nothing to do with mobile money.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I was not talking about mobile money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill is for implementation of the agreement - bringing it to Uganda. I do not know why they did not ratify it until 2015 but they have ratified. Therefore, we are fully in agreement. 

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that by 1993, there were so many other countries that were interested in hosting this bank but 25 years down the road, you have not implemented. How are we going to benefit from this bank, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to put the question. I put the question that this Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE AFRICAN EXPORT-IMPORT BANK AGREEMENT (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2018

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The African Export-Import Bank Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018” and passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE AFRICAN EXPORT-IMPORT BANK AGREEMENT (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2018

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The African Export-Import Bank Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the African Export-Import Bank Agreement (Implementation) Bill, 2018 be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE AFRICAN EXPORT-IMPORT BANK AGREEMENT (IMPLEMENTATION) ACT, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. 

5.34
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I came running because I was anxiously waiting to welcome this Bill. You have been very concerned about so many protocols that we signed and unless we domesticate those protocols, they are useless to us. What is more exciting, and which I wanted to share with Members, is that through this Bill which has now been approved by Parliament, Uganda is going to host the African branch and this is a plus for us. That was my concern and that is why I came running. 

Therefore, this is of serious economic benefit to us and all these small questions are not important because it is Africans coming together in order to drive our own commercial activities using our own resources. 

Consequently, I wanted to give that input and let people know that as a person who has been in the Pan-African Parliament for quite some time, I am very proud to see this kind of thing become a reality. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for that good input and a good seal to the Bill. When are we getting the headquarters? When do we start? We want jobs – (Laughter)

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Hon. Cecilia Ogwal says today is her birthday; happy birthday to her and I wish her many years and I thank her for closing this debate. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Members for supporting this Bill. It is indeed an important Bill and we have already agreed to allocate land so that we can start immediately. However, for the time being, for a year, they will be renting and later they will start building. We are sure that when it is here – the most important thing is access to credit by our business people and the jobs that we will get. 

We would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing this on the Order Paper and for the support you have given us. All of us support this Bill. We hope to meet you at some stage in some place up there. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us hear from the honourable chairperson. 

5.37
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the minister and my colleagues to thank you for the support you have given to the committee in consideration of this Bill and other Bills. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to report that for the first time, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has cleared all their Bills. As I speak, we do not have any outstanding Bills. 

I would also like to thank the House for the support they have given us throughout this process. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson, and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let me add my thanks to you because apart from the Bills, you have done all the revenue related Bills. Thank you very much. However, honourable minister, can you encourage your colleagues to bring their Bills? 

I did not want to embarrass hon. Frank Tumwebaze, who has gone. They have talked about the African Convention on IT but it has never been there and they were quoting it here. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. Yesterday, a very important report was brought to the House and we sat here up to late. We hoped that such an important report would be given due attention, to have it discussed and disposed off. I wonder when you expect that report to be debated. I thought it would be done today. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated yesterday, the report was long but it also had so many appendices. I wanted Members to study and examine them. I, myself, have not looked at them but we shall debate it on Tuesday. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON AN OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE KARAMOJA SUB-REGION ON APPRAISAL OF THE STATE OF EDUCATION AND HEALTHCARE SERVICES DELIVERY AMONG MARGINALISED COMMUNITIES OF IK, TEPETH AND POKOT

THE SPEAKER: Was it not the one where we expected the responses from the Government? We received this report and we said it touches on many sectors and we wanted the Government to give us their responses. Isn’t it the one? Didn’t we receive this report? 

5.41
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Equal Opportunities presented this report and before debate could ensue, Members were concerned that the issues raised were very sensitive; issues on health, education, water and works.

Therefore, Members said that they needed the line ministries to be present so that they give us solutions or make Government commitments to address those challenges. It is unfortunate that I have not even seen those ministers around. I really do not know whether it is good enough for us to debate this. Who will take note of the challenges raised?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true and that is why I deferred the discussions. 

I would like to emphasise that the latest report of the Equal Opportunities Commission has again placed Karamoja, Bukedi and Busoga at the lowest in terms of poverty and equity. That is why I wanted these ministers to be here. When are you giving water to the Karamajong? When are you giving them their schools and roads? That is what we want to hear. 

They are not here so the clerk should reflect on the next Order Paper, response from the ministers of education, works, water and trade. It is not just about Lugambo; we want real answers to the very serious report of the Equal Opportunities committee. 

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. Every time this Parliament gets to discuss topical issues, there is always a problem on the side of Government to give appropriate answers to your directives and the resolutions of Parliament. 

Can we find a solution to this problem? They are not complying with our Rules of Procedure. This is what I would like clarification on. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, under the Direct Principles of State Policy of our Constitution, issues of equity and development are really key. 

The report which came here shows that there is so much lack among the Tepeth and the Ik. They need special attention so we need the ministers responsible. That is why I am telling the clerk that each minister will be reflected to answer under education, health, water, roads, power. All of them should come and answer.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much for the work done.

(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
