Wednesday, 18 December 2013

Parliament met at 2.51p.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I want to notify you that in view of the amount of work we still have on the Order Paper, the House will sit tomorrow from 10.00 O’clock until mid-night. If we do not finish the work, we shall still sit on Friday. So, I am giving you notice that for the next two days, we have to be available to finish up whatever is on the Order Paper because this weekend, the House must rise for the Christmas recess.

Secondly, I would like to amend the Order Paper to bring forward item No.6 – we shall move item No.4 slightly down so that items, No.5 and No.6 can come together, following another; and item No. 18 will become No. 8.

Also, honourable members, I am happy to announce that at the end of the Inter-Parliamentary Games, the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team retained the trophy for the third time. (Applause) So, it now belongs to us.

Our netball team also struggled vigorously but we lost by two goals. However, I must express my disappointment that most members were conspicuous by their absence throughout the tournament. One of the visiting teams had a bigger delegation than us. It seems you have no interests at all in the parliamentary sports activities. Anyway, I hope that you will improve in the future. For now, that is what I had in Communication from the Chair.

2.54
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the problems we are experiencing from South Sudan. This is because my constituency in Amuru District borders South Sudan. Many of our business people there normally prefer to go trading in Juba.

But as I talk many of them are stranded in Juba. From the calls I have been receiving, there is no transport; no vehicles are allowed to move. Also the airport has been closed and so no flights can leave or arrive at the airport. All the commodities that Ugandans had taken there for sale have been looted by the soldiers in South Sudan.
Madam Speaker, I now pray to the Government of Uganda to find a way of letting these people return to Uganda safely.

Another matter of national importance that I want to rise concerns the police. Currently, in Amuru District, when police officers arrest a suspect, they ask that suspect to buy fuel for the police vehicle. If you are travelling from Atiak Sub County to Amuru District Headquarters, you pay Shs 80,000 for the fuel for the police vehicle.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out whether the police are no longer provided with fuel to transport suspects from the sub county to the district headquarters. Those are the two issues of national importance I wanted to raise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs. I do not know whether the Minister of Defence has got anything to say about the plight of our people in South Sudan.

2.55
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the hon. Gilbert Olanya for raising this very important issue. Let me just make three points on this issue.

First, it is regrettable for what happened to our neighbours in South Sudan in the attempts made to unconstitutionally overthrow the Government of South Sudan. Secondly, I would like to say that Government of Uganda is closely following up this situation and as of this morning, the developments were that the airport should have re-opened. But also the flow of traffic along the road, from what we were told, was going to start.

In the meantime, we have advised our people in South Sudan to take measures including as much as possible, to keep in their houses. But with these developments where movement both in the air and on ground, we expect that those who would want to first come back home will be here so soon.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable minster. Madam Speaker, by last evening, there were two people who were reported dead. While the relatives had already dug up the graves, they had no way of evacuating these bodies from South Sudan though the minister is already talking about the reopening of the borders. But also, what information do you have about the loss of lives and properties regardless of those who are alive but still there? What is going to happen to the bodies of people who have died from there?

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, honourable member. There is a committee based at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Obviously as the situation settles down in Juba, we are likely to get more details including probably more deaths.

So, my request is that when you come across such information, give the details to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs about so and so who is confirmed dead and the body is in location X. This will help in finding assistance to be extended to them. But even us as MPs, we can contact hon. OkelloOryem directly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome most warmly the Uganda National Netball Team - the She-Cranes. They are up here in the gallery. We congratulate them upon winning the Six Nations Cup after struggling really hard to travel to Singapore from where they defeated everybody and came back victorious. (Applause)

Also join me in welcoming a group of pastors and their wives from Oyam North, represented by hon. ChrispusAyena and hon. Santa Alum. They are on this side. You are welcome. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FINANCE STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE TOGETHER WITH REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.54
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Local Governments Accounts Committee and I want to say that our chairperson is on his way to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Please lay the papers. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the District Local Governments Finance Statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General. The statements are for the following district local governments: Sironko, Gulu, Oyam, Pader, Otuke, Dokolo, Kitgum, Bulambuli, Koboko and Arua.

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30th June together with the reports and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following town councils: Luweero, Namayumba, Patong, Kalong, Apach, Agago, Nagongera, and Bugiri. 

Further, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the financial report for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for Mukono and Gulu municipal councils. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: You can, it was not very hard. (Laughter) Thank you very much, honourable member for performing that role. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for urgent perusal and report back within the provisions of the Constitution.

But, honourable members, I would like to get a status report, maybe when we return from the recess, about the loan for the 14 municipalities. I have been going to some of them but seeing nothing happening. Mbale is still as dirty as ever. There is nothing happening in Jinja – in May we were in Moroto. It is important for us to know the status of the implementation of that loan because we passed it several months ago yet there is nothing on the ground - I mean those 14 municipalities.

Secondly, honourable members, tomorrow come with your dancing shoes. After Parliament sitting, we shall have some kyamucation; we are going to have the end of year party. So we are requesting that you don’t park on the ground floor tomorrow because that is where we will be dancing from. So, you park in the North Wing; but come with the dancing shoes so that after the sitting we go to dance – [Member: “What about our partners?”]- Yes, bring them.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE NATIONAL NETBALL TEAM (THE SHE-CRANES) FOR WINNING A TROPHY FOR UGANDA AT THE SIXTH NATIONS TOURNAMENT CAP ON 7 DECEMBER 2013 IN SINGAPORE

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Uganda National Netball Team – the She Cranes for wining Gold medals and trophies for Uganda at the Sixth National Tournament Cap in Singapore on 7 December 2013. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of State for Trade, Minister of State for Karamoja, Commissioner JaliaBintu and also hon. Santa Alum who is one of the players.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, the motion reads thus: 
“WHEREAS the Constitution of Uganda 1995, under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, XVII, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

APPRECIATING that the She-Cranes also won for Uganda the netball gold medal at All African Games in 2011 in Mozambique and were second at the African National Cup in Malawi in 2012 and hence earning the team an invitation to the Sixth National Tournament in Singapore, and this remarkable achievement has enabled Uganda to be ranked among the elite netball teams in the world;

AWARE that on Saturday 7 December 2013, through an excellent team performance, the She-Cranes won the Sixth National Cup after trouncing the hosts, Singapore by 52-29 goals in the final, thereby winning the cup title for Uganda;

FURTHER AWARE that the Sixth National week-long tournament was composed of world-class ranked netball teams like the United States of America, Singapore, Papua New Guinea Island and Sri Lanka, the She-Cranes defied all odds to win the cup, thereby making Uganda to be recognised as a country of world-class excellence among the international community of sporting nations because of this achievement;

FURTHER AWARE that this triumphant victory presents a rare and unique opportunity and platform for national unity, patriotism, national consensus for future development and for the advancement of promotion of physical education and sports in Uganda for the citizens’ wellbeing, health and productivity especially among the youth;

COGNIZANT that it is now a practice of Government and Parliament to appropriately and timely honour and recognise all those Ugandans – young and old, male and female – who have deservedly excelled in various fields of human endeavour, including sports;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Ninth Parliament, sitting today in Kampala at Parliament House that:
    1. Parliament collectively congratulates and pays deserving glowing tribute to the Uganda national netball team the She-Cranes for the tremendous feat of achievement for the country and the people of Uganda, which feat ought to automatically qualify them for consideration as national heroes.

    2. Parliament urges and encourages all Ugandans with potential talents in sports, especially the youths, to emulate the example set by the She-Cranes as an accomplished team through hard work and determination.


    3. Parliament of Uganda support increasing the annual budget to the sports subsector of the Ministry of Education and Sports to facilitate development of physical education in sports countrywide through schools’ talent development programmes; enhance sports competitions; support to national teams; development of appropriate facilities and human technical and managerial capacity.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to justify my motion.  The She-Cranes almost missed this opportunity of going to Singapore because of limited resources. Thank God for the last time support from the Ministry of Education though the National Council of Sports and the President’s Office gave a big boost through the voice of the Speaker. And I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your effort to get the team the money. (Applause)

The team left at the last hour even without having enough training and they arrived late when it was supposed to be playing with USA, which game was a walkover for the USA. But despite all that they managed to beat the rest of the teams, drew with Papua New Guinea and met again with Singapore at the finals, where they trounced Singapore 52-29 goals despite not having done any training.

Honourable members, Uganda last fielded a national netball team outside Africa about 34 years ago. In fact, they were referred to, by those teams that were there, as unknown but after the National Cup finals, people were struggling to have a look at the team, the coach and some asking for where Uganda was on the world map.

A lot of recognition has been given to the Uganda National Football team and the athletics team. However, the She-Cranes have been winning trophies in East Africa – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion being moved is a very important one for all of us and the resolutions therein. It would be important for us to follow almost page by page, especially on the resolution that we would be making. But unfortunately, we do not have a copy – at least on my side and yet I am an interested party. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no more excuse because you got Ipads; it is in your Ipads. (Laughter) Hon. Minister, please proceed.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, a lot of recognition has been given to the Uganda national football team and athletics team. However, the She-Cranes have been winning trophies in East Africa and the wider region without being given enough recognition. And it is high time we started recognising them. It is high time that if there was need, a special recognition budget be passed to facilitate this team and other sports disciplines.

Madam Speaker, because of their love for this country, the She-Cranes had to endure, in the African National Cup, a 2,399 kilometre-road trip to Malawi because my ministry had limited resources to buy 15 air-tickets and also pay allowances to the team. The option was to go by road and use the little resources for transport and allowances for the entire team. You can see for yourselves how much love this team has for this country.

In 2013 African Netball Championship in Malawi, Uganda She-Cranes won the third position – that is bronze – where Uganda, Malawi, South Africa, Namibia, Zambia and Swaziland had competed. 

In 2011 All Africa Games in Maputo, the She-Cranes won and came with trophies and gold medals. And the teams which competed were Mozambique, South Africa, Kenya, Uganda, Botswana, Ghana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Tanzania. 

In 2009 International Cup held in Tanzania where Malawi, South Africa, Namibia participated, Uganda beat South Africa and brought home a trophy and medals.

In 2011 Mapinduzi Cup in Zanzibar, Uganda brought the gold medals and trophy while the teams that participated were Zanzibar, Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda. You can see that in all these, the She-Cranes have been doing wonders for us.

Madam Speaker, I once again salute the She-Cranes and encourage all Members to contribute something as a sign of appreciation to our team. This will not be the first time; let us do it for the She-Cranes. Thank you very much.

3.17
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to second the motion in paying tribute to the She-Cranes who brought us the victory, the gold and trophy which is standing there. Congratulation, the She-Cranes! (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the She-Cranes as a national team is as old as the independent Republic of Uganda. And as the minister has elaborated, the She-Cranes has been winning in tournaments they have been participating in in the last 10 years.

The victory of the She-Cranes and the other sports teams in the country means a lot to the Government of Uganda and the country; this puts us on the world map. It proves that we can manage to compete favourably in sports.

The She-Cranes started winning since 2008 but I want to point out that in 2012, the She-Cranes did not participate in All Africa Championship and this was partly because they did not have the elected leadership. And they failed to conduct their elections partly because of lack of funding – which the minister has talked about.

Madam Speaker, when Ministry of Education and Sports are budgeting, sports is not given all the attention that they need. I want to urge the government, especially when we are budgeting in the coming financial year, we know the She-Cranes won and we know the She-Cranes are going to participate in the elimination matches come next year in Sydney in Australia; and we have been rest assured that the She-Cranes are going to win and then they will qualify for the finals but if we do not budget for them, if we do not plan for the She-Cranes, then we are likely not to participate the way they ended up turning up late and missing one match recently. 

So, I want to urge the minister and the government that we should make sure we prepare our teams. We should prepare for all these games before time. We have a well stipulated schedule and we can manage to plan for them accordingly.

Madam Speaker, generally Uganda has been doing very well in netball in the country. In the East Africa Inter-University Netball Tournament Uganda has been in the lead and in the last inter-university tournament, Nkumba University took the trophy. (Applause) Recently, in the East Africa Secondary School Netball Tournament Uganda won and the trophy was taken by St Mary’s Kitende Secondary School. And recently- just last weekend- during the East Africa Inter-Parliamentary Sports Tournament the netball team performed tremendously well where you were the WD and this indicates to the whole world and to the country that if we can invest in netball then we are likely to have so many of our Ugandans performing better, but also to try and address so many of these diseases which are affecting our people like Diabetes, Pressure, and obesity is now a common disease. But if we have our young people taking part in sports then we are likely to address some of these other diseases which would have been prevented.

Madam Speaker, at primary level I am reliably informed that netball is played up to the national level although at the East Africa level they have not yet introduced it. But I want to point out that there are so many challenges affecting this specific game. Netball being an indoor game, when it rains it means that the game will not take place. 

Recently, during the inter-parliamentary sports tournament, we nearly missed playing just because Uganda does not have an indoor court for all the six games which are played indoors. The Lugogo Indoor Stadium which is supposed to host some of these games actually does not have the netball court but we had it improvised and made sure that we mark it because netball is a game which needs spacious ground.

What does this mean and what does this imply to us as legislators? We need to plan for all these games: netball, volleyball, basketball, badminton to name but a few. At least if the ministry can plan for each district - if a district is the smallest unit then we can move out to our regional level. If we can plan to have at least a pitch for all these other games, netballs ad all these indoor games, then it will help us especially in developing the talent and the skills within our young people.

Madam Speaker, another challenge which has been encountered especially at primary level - because I believe the primary level is the basis and it is the grooming ground for all these games at the national level- A net ball costs Shs 30,000 and a pair of the goalposts for netball costs Shs 300,000. When we are appropriating funds and during the budgeting, under the UPE funds these two items are not budgeted for but you would look at the cost as not all that exorbitant. If they do not have these balls then they will not be able to play. 

So, I want to urge the minister, whereas I support you and we are appreciating and commending the She-Cranes, we need to plan for this game right from the primary level. Let us put in the Ministry of Education budget at least each school, at least every term, the balls can be purchased quarterly but they can have the goalposts until they are old. If we can budget that in every quarter, every term, a school should at least get a net ball and a foot ball that will help us. That is my humble prayer to the government and to the minister.

Another challenge which is being faced at primary level is that the teachers need to be trained in netball coaching. The coach of the She-Cranes who is at the same time the coach for the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team - that is one coach but all these districts have primary schools and secondary schools and they need to be coached. The teachers need to be coached in netball. So if we can plan appropriately that at least at the regional level we need to have these coaches who can be visiting the schools and training the teachers in these skills of netball coaching, it would help us to a great extent. 

Madam Speaker, the minister talked about the She-Cranes travelling to Malawi by road and it took them so many days. They reached when they were tired but I want to applaud them because they managed to win. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Actually you forgot to say that when they arrived their feet were swollen from sitting.

MS BINTU: Yes, Madam Speaker. So, amidst travelling by road of course we would have gone ahead to get for them the ticket. I know your office and the President tried but it did not work out because it was too late. I want to thank them because they are nationalistic. They could not wait. When they realised they were running out of time they moved by road. 

But, Madam Speaker, the worst of it is that even within the country they do not have a small van - not even a 30-seater van or a 14-seater van. The ministry can afford to buy a 30-seater coaster bus or even a 14-seater van. Why can’t they avail them at least that coaster? They came walking up to here! They could not converge in one place so that they get transport. 

So, Madam Speaker, I want to urge the minister that we can budget for some of these things, which we can handle once and for all and know that at least it will take like five years before they can come back to us or the ministry to ask for a bus. I want to seek the indulgence of this House that before the She-Cranes can go and play next year, a bus should be availed to them.

Madam Speaker, that –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to hon. Jalia is that even talking at the moment, there is a primary school called Budadiri Girls Primary School in my constituency which won the national scouts competition and they are going to represent Uganda as a country in Burundi on 27th of this month. Currently, they are struggling to raise transport to go by road and represent Uganda as a country. I do not see or I do not know now when they go to represent Uganda in national competitions and win will it again also be a source of pride for the country when the Ministry of Education and Sports is sitting to watch? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Member. You are actually emphasising the point which I am raising. Madam Speaker, the She- Cranes used to have an office. They were being housed in Lugogo Indoor Stadium and when Lugogo Indoor Stadium underwent renovation, the She-Cranes had to step aside so that the renovations could be completed. But as we speak, if you want to consult the Cranes, there is no where you can get them, even the She-Cranes; there is nowhere you can get them. After the completion and renovation of Lugogo Indoor Stadium, they were not allowed to get in – (Interjections) – yes and these are facts. 

Madam Speaker, the She-Cranes have brought us pride; they are putting Uganda on the map but through hardships. We need to do a lot to help the She-Cranes. They need an office in case you want to communicate to them; in case you want to send a letter to them, they should really be found somewhere in a habitable place. They don’t have an office and I would want the minister - the mover of the motion - to help us. This is something which can be resolved because there are offices at Lugogo Indoor Stadium and there are offices at Namboole. They can be given an office where they can converge and discuss and share experiences and be able to manage the issues concerning netball.

I want to propose that the Ministry of Education and Sports should prepare and plan in advance especially for the forthcoming netball games in Sydney so that you don’t also get dragged left and right. 

We appreciate you, Madam Speaker, and we want to thank you and thank His Excellency the President, for responding urgently and at the right time when actually the She-Cranes had delayed  to report on this other last game. But we want to ask the ministry to plan early enough. We now know that they are going to participate in the elimination exercise. We want the budget to be availed early enough so that they can train and are able to participate and put up a good show in Sydney. It is a proposal. 

Secondly, I want to congratulate you - I know there will be a motion tomorrow and I want to congratulate you and congratulate the Parliament of Uganda and the Government of Uganda for supporting the East African Parliamentary Sports Tournament. We shall be able to lay more information on Table tomorrow when the motion is moved, and I want to thank coach Mugerwa for training the She-Cranes and for putting in a lot of effort to make sure that Uganda is put on the map. Bravo, She-Cranes! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot of work today. Let me just hear from Santa, two minutes. 

3.32
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Right away, I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for really standing with the women. Women in our society many times have been marginalised. The gold that the She-Cranes has brought to us is an eye-opener to the country Uganda and when I heard the minister in charge of sports trying to tell us to look around - hon. Minister, I expected you to really ask us to help you in the budget process so that at least the budget which is in line with sports should really be looked into carefully. 

Any talents in sports can really attract development. For example in Brazil, they have very many players they have invested in a lot and their investment comes back to the country when their players are bought; in turn, they earn a lot of money. There are players who even earn much more than the Members of Parliament and when they come back into their countries, they do a lot of investment. 

Recently, Kiprotich won us another Gold Medal and as a country, we are going to build a national stadium which will not only benefit him but will benefit generations and generations to come. So, I want the minister to tell us what reward her ministry has for the She-Cranes? 

Hon. Jalia Bintu has asked for their transport and I would like to ask on behalf of the women that do we have any sports academy for women? As women, we have special needs and I feel that the government should really do something to support –(Member timed out.)

3.34
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank you very much for acting so fast because this motion would not actually be on now if you had not acted so fast to save the She-Cranes from not travelling. So, I want to join my colleagues and also ask my other colleagues to thank you very much for that intervention.

Madam Speaker, it is important that the hon. Minister has seen the importance of netball. We have been talking here since the Eighth Parliament; members have been requesting the Ministry of Education and Sports to put some specific interventions that would make netball also visible. The She-Cranes have not actually been hailed for today only; even in the last Parliament, I remember they performed so well and members have been expressing these same concerns. 

My biggest worry is we will finish this debate today and things will end here. I want to request that if it were possible, so many directorates have been created in this country – i.e. why we don’t create a directorate in charge of sports so that we handle specific interests that we need especially sports. I know and I take note that the Ministry of Education has got enough responsibilities; they handle a lot of other subsectors within the ministry but when we have a separate directorate or the equivalent of an authority, then issues of sports would be handled in a specific way –(Member timed out_)

3.36
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion and congratulate the She-Cranes and congratulate Uganda upon winning gold in Singapore. In the Acts of the Apostles 20:35, the Bible says that there is more blessing in giving than receiving. And in Luke chapter 17, Jesus healed 10 men but only one came back to says: “Thank you.” This Parliament has demonstrated drastically that it is there to support sports. We supported the national team, the Uganda cranes. This time, we have the She-Cranes. Why don’t we, as Parliament, walk the talk, act practically and support these young ladies who are our sisters, who are our daughters with some token of appreciation just to say, “Thank you” like that man who came back to Jesus to thank Him for healing him? 

I therefore want to propose and appeal to hon. Members of Parliament while borrowing a leaf from the Bible. Why don’t we, just for the sake of these young ladies who marketed this country internationally, forego only Shs 100,000 as a token of appreciation to motivate these young ladies such that they feel happy that even our representatives in this Parliament supported us at the time we marketed our nation. This is my humble appeal and if it is supported, I would therefore move that the motion with the prayers be amended and this be included that each Member of Parliament makes a contribution of Shs 100,000, deduction at source, to support our national team the She-Cranes as a token of appreciation from Members of Parliament.

3.39
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Bududa, Manjiya County): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I came to Parliament, this is the first time I am seeing She-Cranes and I have to appreciate what they have done. I do not know about the system of training these days, but if you look at my age, I am very young because of sports. If you see my mother running in the field, you cannot tell that she is my mother; she used to belong to She-Cranes; that is why up to now she is still a youth. So now for us when we look at people of this kind and we joke, you are dramatizing them like Dramadri. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for what you did. I heard that you came in at the last moment to enable them reach the far they reached. But does the Ministry of Education separate the budget for Uganda Cranes from that of the She-Cranes? Why don’t you plan for a team of this kind –(Interjections)– wait a minute. I understand there are even courses in one of the schools in Uganda for sports. Sporting may not go very well with writing and reading of books. But I asked a minister in the Ministry of Education, Since you have been giving away PHDs, why don’t you give some PHDs to a team which gives us fame in the world like the She-Cranes – (Member timed out_)

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Ms Barbra Oundo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleague the minister in seconding the motion to pay tribute to the She-cranes. I beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to give me one more minutes. This team is here and they have made Uganda proud and the women of Uganda proud. 

I want to request for one more minute to put their names on record. I will read them name by name and we shall recognise you as you stand up. Madam Speaker, in this team, we have:
Rachael Nanyonga, HadijaNakabuye, Peace Proscovia, Halima Nakachwa – some of them are students- Esther Awayo – she is a prisons warder and a student at MUBS- Caroline Nyakwono, Martha Soyigi, Lillian Agiyo, Beatrice Zawedde, Jessica Achan, Florence Nanyonga, Alice Nanteza. We have the team officials: Madam AnnetKisomose, Mugerwa Fred, Anek Suzan, JovorineUchanda – thank you very much, that is the assistant team manager. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, having had those names on record, I want to say a big thank you to this team and I want to emphasise that the victory from their hard work has become a marketing tool free of charge for this country. It is not just a matter of promoting sports across the young women of this country, but they have also promoted the tourism industry in Uganda. 

The minister of sports said, after the victory was pronounced, everyone was scrambling to know where Uganda is. This is going to help us, not only to look for money but She-cranes has become a partner in development; we thank you so much for that effort. 

Madam Speaker, without doubt, I can say confidently that this team can keep us at the world map. And on behalf of the women in Cabinet, we want to pledge to this team and we pledge to you, Madam Speaker, that we shall support their sector minister to ensure that your activities are made a little more easily. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we want to congratulate them more but we have a lot of work. I just want to say three things. Hon. Minister, I think it is time that the orphan status of the netballers ended. They have an orphan status and I think it should end; it seems they do not belong to anybody; they struggle on their own. So can you please own them properly and support them? 

Secondly, I want you to identify just four or five corporates to adopt them; five corporations to adopt them as their team so that they can be supported. They should know that each year, they must support the She-cranes.

Thirdly, the other day we were at State House for the thanksgiving prayer. The President was happy about a verse in the Bible which says, those who do not work should not be paid. They have worked, so they should be paid – (Applause) – yes they have worked for this country. If a Pajero can be given to one person, why not the 35; why not a coaster to them; why should they walk to Parliament? I think that one coaster is not too much to ask for the people who have brought so much honour to this country.

So, honourable minister, please, you know where to go for that – you can ask your neighbour for those other things –(Laughter). So, with the amendment made by hon. Obua, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to the She-cranes.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SUB SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 25 Members had contributed to this report. I think now we can receive the responses from the minister if she is ready –(Interjections)– what, didn’t you contribute the other day? Okay, hon. Atwooki.

3.47
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a very good report and the explanations they made in the report. There is one concern that I have. I do not know when Uganda will get good negotiators. Every agreement that we make looks like Uganda is on the losing side. 

Can I therefore propose that either we decide to have good negotiators as a country and make good agreements – some of these agreements that we are going to have, there should be an option of review or renegotiation when things improve or change. 

In this case, we should have had an option of reviewing the agreements that were made between Government and Umeme. The committee made a very good exposition on one distributor Umeme but there are other distributors. The other day the RDC of Arua was complaining of Warnaco – and I know my brother, hon. Wadri will also complain about Wenreco. For us in Kibaale, we have Ferdsult. The other day hon. Baryomunsi was complaining of power distribution in Kanungu. So I would have wished that this report had brought out other distributors. I do not know when that will be so that when Government is to review those agreements, it is not looking at only one distributor. I so submit.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, in the report on page 70, the committee brought out a very good finding – because Ugandans have been complaining of high tariffs and the agency responsible for this is the Electricity Regulatory Agency. And the committee observed that: “The appointment of the current board was marred by irregularities. And it is evident while appointing the current ERA board, in his capacity as former Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Hillary Onek, exhibited conflict of interest.” Then I imagine that the current problem of tariffs could be because of this problem of having a board which was improperly constituted.

However, in their recommendation, the committee left us “in gear”; they did not tell us what we should do with the ERA board and the person who had conflict of interest while appointing them.

Also on page 48, they bring out the issue of eminent persons, saying that they overruled the minister. Madam Speaker, as we conclude this debate, I would have wished hon. Migereko to clear the air since it is said he was overruled. How was he overruled? Let him tell us and we see how to go about it.

Finally, it is high time these pre-paid meters are rolled out throughout the country. Some of us who are in areas where they have to bring bills and then you argue with the person who brought it because it is debatable – Can we have these pre-paid meters rolled out countrywide so that we can stop having these bills, which are sometimes inexplicable?

3.52
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee that did a wonderful job and gave us an “encyclopaedia” referring to Umeme and energy. But I wish to make few stingy comments. I consulted with the member of Parliament who I replaced – hon. John Kigyagi – and he was always interested in the energy sector plus agriculture. He asked me one question, “By the time Umeme was taking up distribution of power in this country which other company was willing to take the risks?” I had no answer. He told me that I should not behave like a man who marries a very beautiful girl and when she grows old he looks for a younger one. So he said that regardless of Umeme’s mistakes, we should put the blame on the contract negotiators because they did not think about Uganda but themselves. 

And, Madam Speaker, that is why we have to say that when you see most Ugandans wearing the national flag – a symbol that they love their country – but this is just a phenotype because inside themselves they are thinking otherwise.

I totally agree with hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki that the prepaid meters are the way to go because I am informed that bills are always inflated for the sake of mitigating the losses, and to cater for some people who steal power.

I am also informed that there are some organisations that get money from the government but do not pay for the power. That is why people came up with the Escrow Account – to remove money because some people did not clear their bills and yet Parliament appropriates money for those organisations. I wish to interest the Minister of Energy, without causing any chaos in this country, to look at these departments that consume power and do not pay their bills despite Parliament giving them money. And we know them, by the way. I do not know why this committee could not tell us these people because now should I name them, then some people will say I am becoming rebellious - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo. The information I want to give you is that: As revealed by the Auditor-General in his annual audit books of accounts of several government ministries, for reasons best known to them they decide not to pay for utilities because there is an agreement that once a ministry does not provide money for utilities like Umeme’s services, after some time, there is an account where Government puts money for Umeme to pick. So this has sent ministries to sleep – they actually misuse the resources that are allocated for paying utilities.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, based on what hon. Wadri is saying and for the sake of our country, I wanted to propose and move a motion that –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. I have checked and hon. Ssempijja did not contribute on this one. (Laughter)

3.56
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I am really a very disciplined Member of Parliament and cannot be untruthful. I wanted to inform the minister here that we recently met processors in Masaka and they complained about Umeme and their charges. I also met the manager but he could not convince me how they are charging these processors.

A processor who uses coffee hullers for about eight hours, four days a week is charged about Shs 7 million. This is too much and you cannot imagine someone using that much power. I suggest that the minister saves time and meets high consumers of power and see their challenges and address them. Otherwise, we cannot rely on Umeme. I do not think there is any way we can follow up what they are doing; I think and some people are saying they are charging in excess so as to recover their losses outside the country. 

One time they asked us to buy shares and I do not know where it ended. We met them and some people were suggesting that Umeme had debts elsewhere and were raising money to clear them.

So the hon. Minister has to meet these processors who are power consumers and see their challenges – you can even meet them together with Umeme people so that they can explain how they charge our people. That is my prayer and I rest my case. Thank you very much.

3.59
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the report. I rise to support the recommendations in the report. No person in this House can disassociate himself or herself from the atrocities that we have faced at the hands of Umeme. They are variable and various; we cannot name instances because they are several.

For example, in Tororo Municipality - I have raised this on the Floor of this Parliament before. I have gone to the Ministry of Energy and I have gone to Umeme: we have health centres in the municipality; Umeme writes you an assessment from the roadside to the health centre, of Shs145 million. The local government does not provide the money. You have a maternity ward - actually we have two health centres with maternity wards that are not functional because we do not have power. And I can go on enumerating severally. When you raise it to Umeme they say, “We cannot handle it under our corporate social responsibility. The Ministry of Local Government does not have the funds. 

We really do not understand because as a child I remember UEB would have easily done this and for the betterment of Uganda. Now, this is a company that is profit-oriented and we really do not know how we are going to help our people that we represent here today to access power because there are certain services that are not deliverable without this power. He has talked of coffee processors, we have rice and maize processors within my constituency and these people have resorted to diesel, which is also very expensive, because of the unreliability of Umeme and they tell you they do not have sufficient power so they have a ban on extension of power. 

Madam Speaker, the reasons that they give you are innumerable. The recommendations given in that report, I agree, might not entirely be feasible but as a Parliament I think we need to take a stand where our people will benefit. I did read in the media - I do not know whether the minister would like to substantiate - in her response where she said that there is a cabinet position that Umeme must stay. Now, while Parliament is investing and debating on a matter, the minister comes out with such a statement! Therefore what we are doing here and the whole process here is negated.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek the indulgence of the minister and honourable colleagues in this House. How can we sort out the matter? The problem is there and we cannot run away from that problem. So, I beg that the minister here explains to this House how we are going to find an amicable solution to that problem rather than running away from the problem. I thank you.

4.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I will seek your indulgence on this matter.

First of all, before I can make my comments, I have come here with my bills from my house in Kampala and in Mbale. The bills I have come with are for a residential house. There are always the first units which are charged at Shs 100 and then after that Shs 524.50; and there is what we call a service charge. If you look through - I have given you copies- you will discover that my house in Kampala is given 15 units in one month and in the same month of November the one in the village is given 14 units - the first 100. That means in Kampala they gave me one more unit and in the village they gave me less by one; which means if all Ugandans lost one unit, and if there are two million Ugandans, multiplied by Shs 524, it means that that month alone we paid over Shs 10 billion to Umeme for one unit each of us lost. 

The surcharge: in Kampala they give me Shs 3,360 and in Busamaga, in the village, they give me Shs 4,134. Now if it is true that it is Shs 3,340 and now you have added another Shs 1,000, it means that whoever paid, lost Shs1,000; and when you multiply that by two million that is another Shs 2 billion which went away to Umeme. 

The reason why I am raising this is that there are discrepancies in first billing and if you do not read your bill, some money is taken away without notice and that is what we want to deal with as far as the company is concerned.

Madam Speaker, you recall when we had the MTN service charge of Shs 18,000. We complained that what was the purpose of a service charge when we were paying for airtime? We removed it. This is basically money they externalise for work not done. So, what is a service charge? Again they pick money from the bill, Shs 3,360 up to Shs 4,000 per month as a service charge. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this so that I can develop my reasoning on why Umeme would love to stay around, and when they tell them to go they will not want to go. I have a letter here dated 16 June 2006. This letter was written by the Electricity Regulatory Authority and of course by the MD. It is attached to your reports at the back. They say that the total distribution losses at present are estimated at between 34 and 38 percent. They said that now since the total loss is close to the numbers presently reported by Umeme Ltd they split it into two and said technical losses will be 15.5 percent and commercial losses will be 17.5 percent. If you total that you get 33 percent. But they increased it to 35 percent before going to 38 percent. That means they increased and they gave Umeme first an additional two percent loss- that is ERA- then the ministry also added three percent to make 38 percent. What happens to the loss? When the loss is incurred by Umeme it is factored into our bills so that you are the one who pays. And so when you are paying the bill you are paying towards this loss you are seeing.

Madam Speaker, I have here a document which all of you Members have which was given by a one Mr Hillary Onek who says, “These people are rushing to get the concession to 40 years from-” what page is this? It is attached there. If you read it – page 6. “In order to circumvent the inefficiencies in the contract signed with Umeme, the company has moved quickly to lobby for the extension of the concessional agreements to 40 years under the pretext of listing on the stock exchange.” They wanted 40 years. If something is making losses why would you ask for a longer period? You would ask for a shorter period!

Having said that, the whole thing is terrible from day one - One, who were the negotiators? Those who negotiated for us with Umeme are the first culprits. For your information, there was a gentleman who was a director in charge of privatisation of utilities called Nyakiringi. As soon as he finished Umeme he was offered a job in South Africa immediately because he had given them a good deal. 

And what happened when we did that? We made four companies: We made Uganda Electricity Generation Company; Uganda Electricity Distribution Company; Uganda Electricity Transmission and then we have Umeme. So there are four companies. That means those are four MDs, four principal accountants, four directors in charge of human resource and all those re costs. In Umeme if you go to URA there is a gentleman- I wish the Prime Minister was here. We gave him a document of which he is aware. One man is being paid Shs 250 million per month. That means he gets Shs 3 billion per year. So, whenever he gets money he is happy you who is consuming power you are the one who is paying. If you look at all these costs which are there, that is why the electricity costs are so high. And the moment electricity is very costly development will go down. And that is why they are saying people are stealing power- it is because it is very expensive to pay for. What would be the benefit if this power was cheap? I would go and open a maize meal and employ about 10 people because the maize meal would work. 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. There is some information that Parliament, in accordance with this report, should interest itself in and this information is based in Ntungamo District where three villages have been connected for the last three years and have been exempted from paying electricity bills. I am saying this to inform the Leader of the Opposition because it is very likely that certain people are not paying for their electricity bills and other people are bearing the burden of paying their electricity bills. If Parliament interested itself in these facts, I think we can make a fact finding mission because if the first year was given and the people would not pay, the second year was given –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I am extremely sorry that I am interrupting the submission of my friend. I happen to come from Ntungamo from Kajara County and to the best of my knowledge and recollection, I am not aware of any place in Kajara for example that is receiving power free of charge for the period he has mentioned. Is it in order for the hon. Member to generalise and talk about Ntungamo without substantiating the areas which are getting power without paying?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Ntungamo has a number of constituencies, I think they are four, including a municipality; can you tell us whether it is in the municipality, in Kajara, in Ruhama or where? We want to know so that we can follow it up. You know, these general allegations are not fair. Tell us the villages and the constituencies and we take action. 

DR LULUME: Madam Speaker, I was very categorical in my statement and I said that Parliament should interest itself in this finding in Ruhama, Ntungamo District. So, if at all the Member thinks that he has never heard anybody say that they are not paying bills; it is possible for people not to come to you. Why should they come to you? It is because they are going away scot-free. Those who are complaining are saying so. So, why doesn’t Parliament take this seriously and interest itself in it to address the injustice?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think Parliament would like to address it but don’t send Parliament on wild goose chase. You state that in the villages in Nyakatooke sub-county is where they are consuming free power so that we can go there. But if there are nine sub-counties, do you want me to send Parliament to go to every parish and check? That is not fair. Tell us the villages and the sub-county.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What I was trying to talk about is the cost which the consumers of power incur. I was saying that the reason we are being retarded in development is that the cost of power is too high and this has been brought about by having four companies with a lot of mobile-led expenditures. This makes it too expensive for us while Umeme and the group are externalising all the money they are making in Uganda. I have made computations so that we can come up to understand what I am trying to say. 

Madam Speaker, I took an example that in my home in the village, that is in Mbale, they gave me 14, while in Kampala they gave me 15. I am sure if all of you look at your bills, you will see this discrepancy. Then I said, if that is true, what do we lose plus VAT? That means that for the additional unit, I will pay Shs 619 plus VAT. If we were 2,000 of us, that is Shs 1.23 billion. That means in a year, Umeme takes Shs 14.8 billion for only reducing by a unit.

I have seen here again a bill; they have given me 18.5 in Kampala while in the village they have given me 14. That means we do not have the right rate of the units. If you look again at the surcharge, you want to take an average of Shs 3,360 per month. For Shs 2,000,000 that would be Shs 6.8 billion for one year, that would be Shs 81.5 billion. In one year only, the money which these people take away because of only this inconsistency in the service charge is about Shs 95 billion. Let us make it half way, it becomes Shs 45 billion. If it is true, but I want to just make an assumption, as I had read in the papers also that members of Parliament were being given Shs 3 million. If they give 200 of us, that is Shs 600 million and they will take 95 billion - I am just saying if it is true. So, you can imagine the loss we have! 

So, whoever would want to support Umeme wants this country to die. The earlier we cut costs which we call short costs in accounts, and I do not know what some economists call it, the better for us.

Madam Speaker, I also want to look at the loss. If the technical loss was 15.5 percent, commercial loss was 17.5 percent then you came to 33 percent, now you move it to 35 percent. That means you have added them two percent, then you add them another three to make it 38 percent. That means the people of Uganda paid an addition of five percent to that. Now what does this translate to? For those who know computation, we want to make an assumption that your bill is about Shs 50,000 per month. Of that, it includes the loss of 38 percent. What you would have paid would have been the Shs 50,000 times 62 percent but you are paying 10 percent because of the loss. So, if you discounted that, your effective rate of interest, what you would have paid as your bill for Shs 50,000, would have been Shs 28,000. 

So, every month the loss which is put across is taken by Umeme, if they don’t claim. Somebody was telling me that they don’t claim it. I have looked for their accounts, I called the managing director to give me the accounts, I do not know how many of you have looked at the accounts. You have not but from inside information - I have this and I can see from Hillary’s computation; he has put a table at the back where he is showing the 2009 accounts and 2008. In 2009, they made Shs 51 billion; in 2008 they made Shs 1.6 billion; that is operating loss. Now if you put back the loss they are making, it means they will not pay taxes because the loss will offset the profits and yet they have already externalised some money in form of service charges and whatever. Madam Speaker, I was doing this rudimentary and it is true that it has taken place. So, what do we do?

One, is that we must deal with the group which started the negotiations –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have got two minutes to conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you will need to give me more minutes because you need to know this. We must deal with the people who started the negotiations and that is from the World Bank guys, the Ministry of Energy guys and the Ministry of Finance. We must deal with the people in the privatisation unit. They told us that they were going to privatise so that electricity might become cheap, but it has now gone up!

They signed the contract in dollars. That means as the exchange rate changes – if the dollar becomes more expensive, that loss passed over to the consumer in the electricity bill. You know very well that water is locally sourced; how can you have made a contract for the people of Uganda in dollars. Whoever signed that contract in dollars should be held liable. 

Furthermore, these local partners who signed on behalf of UMEME – recently I went to a bank. I saw a young man getting out of a huge car. I went to check on the internet for the value of his vehicle and it is not less than $150,000 before taxes. This young man was about 28 or 30 years. So I inquired about him and they said he is a prominent lawyer –(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I want to give you some information because you are talking about the contract. When Uganda wanted a distributor, UMEME was not yet in existence; Umeme was formed in order to respond to that advert. Two companies formed a consortium. One of them was Globleq. When we looked at the documents, we found that Globleq had been registered in Bermuda. The other one was ESKOM which was initially registered in South Africa. Those two formed a consortium forming Umeme. 

So we went to the registrar of companies to find out who signed on behalf of the consortium and we found it was Ezekiel Tuma signing for one and Shonubi Musoke signed for the other one. We did not read the powers of attorney but those are the two names that appeared on the articles of association. 

But the point of interest I want to make to you is, when they went for negotiations in Washington, the Ministry of Finance hired transaction advisor to take on the role of the Attorney-General. Who is this transaction advisor? It was Ezekiel Tuma and Shonubi –(Interjections)– that is all the information I had for you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when we talk here, they say we are tough for nothing. This is why I was bringing this in; a young lawyer has a car that cost $150,000. I divided that by his age and discovered that every year since he was born, he has been earning 15,000 dollars, which cannot be true. 

So, Madam Speaker, when people say they are successful lawyers know they are succeeding on our blood. Check the background of prominent businessmen in Uganda; their fathers never owned bicycles yet they call themselves successful businessmen. But all they have done is literary robbing the people of Uganda! 

So, I want us to check these two companies which signed the agreements: Shonubi the transaction advisor and why the Ministry of Finance could do such a thing. Who are the people from Ministry of Finance who were involved in such a thing? 

Madam Speaker, a man changes the rate from 33 percent to 35 percent and to 38 percent – who is he? We must stand with the man who wrote the letter. We must find this secretary to treasury who behaved like he had no calculator to know that it was 33 and not 35. We want to know who moved the rate from 33 to 38. 

Madam Speaker, I must declare my interest, some of the people who are involved are my relatives and others are friends. But the moment you appear on the wrong side of history, you must be dealt with. I want us to deal with these matters without fear or favour. Power is very expensive in Uganda because of this –(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you Leader of the Opposition for giving me way. I appreciate the information and it has opened our minds deeply into the problems that Uganda is facing as far as electricity is concerned. The clarification I want from you is, in your view, given the fact that you normally give advice to Government, do you think it is possible – knowing that Government has entered into this big loss and given the fact that UMEME is aware that they signed a bad deal with Government – for Government and UMEME to go back on a round table to negotiate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: First of all, they renegotiated. In fact, Umeme has not fulfilled its obligations. Aren’t you aware that we are borrowing money to build power lines? Why are we borrowing, that responsibility belongs to UMEME. The Ninth Parliament is called a hot Parliament. But why do you borrow when you have UMEME which is mandated to do that work? I tell you, the earlier we throw out UMEME and their team, the better for all of us – (Interruption) 

MR MULONGO: Thank you honourable member for giving way. By design, the agreement did not provide for re-negotiation. In any case, the element of review was limited to the licence but the whole agreement has no provision for re-negotiation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see how some Ugandans tie the hands of other Ugandans because they have given them a kickback; they tied the entire nation. In the rest of the world, the electricity sector is the cheapest and is run by Government; they know a country can only develop with sufficient electricity. So we should forget about the idea of renegotiating with Umeme. By the way, some of these companies are in ministry of finance; you can imagine – sometimes we suck people and they go home happily - but we should extend it further when dealing with some of those people and compel them to share part of the personal loss. Otherwise, people will say, “just suck me”, and they happily go home. 

Now, those who extended the contract should be held liable, because hon. Hilary had raised issues. He said, it is bad for us to extent this contract until we do a, b, c and d. You could call Hilary a bad man, but he was really a patriotic Ugandan at that time; why did they extend? (Applause) These culprits who extended at short notice should be held liable.

Finally, the committee did very well and their recommendations are very good; they only need us to add more culprits because the committee could have not noticed them at that time. We should adopt the report in full apart from making a few additions. Otherwise, I thank the committee for its wonderful job despite what it went through. I ask Parliament to clap for them for doing a good job for us. (Applause) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I say that there is no need for re-negotiation; the earlier we cancel the Umeme deal the better for the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Minister, please respond now; you have listened to 29 submissions and you can summarise them according to heads.

4.30
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members of the ad hoc committee for their work in reviewing the performance of the power sector and the recommendations that they made for its improvement. Likewise, I would like to thank colleagues for the comments and reactions you have made in this debate on the report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to the comments and reactions on this report and the recommendations from the report. The power sector is a complex one and at the same time plays a pivotal role in the economic and social development of this country. The first major power generation facility, which is the Owen Falls power station, now called Nalubaale, was commissioned in 1954 and reached full capacity of 150MW in 1959. Due to the challenges of 1970s, the effective generation capacity of this power plant had dropped to only 60MW by 1986. Efforts were then made to rehabilitate and upgrade it to 180MW in the 1990s.

However, the overall performance of the sector was dismal: For instance, in 1994, the revenue collection by UEB amounted to only 25 percent of the built energy and by 1997, the arrears had increased to Shs 60 billion, even though Government had written off Shs 11 billion in arrears. This, therefore, necessitated the reforms in the sector to create an enabling environment for capital injection and expansion of the network.

Madam Speaker, in June 1999, cabinet approved the power sector restructuring and privatisation strategy with the objective of making the power sector financially viable; increase the sector efficiency; improve the sector’s commercial performance; meet the growing demand for electricity and increase coverage; improve the reliability and quality of supply; attract private capital and entrepreneurs and take advantage of export opportunities. The reforms which were done through a consultative process, involving all key stakeholders, involved the unbundling of UEB into successor companies – that is the generation company, the transmission company, the distribution company and privatising the generation and distribution businesses via 20-year term concessions.

It also involved the establishment of an Electricity Regulatory Authority to regulate the power sector because of the liberalisation. And the Rural Electrification Agency was created to accelerate rural electrification. All these reforms were endorsed by Parliament through the enactment of the Electricity Act, 1999. 

How has the sector performed since the reforms? On the generation front, the generation company took over the assets of UEB at Nalubaale and Kiira and in 2003 the Nalubaale and Kiira power stations were concessioned to Eskom for a period of 20 years and UEDCL takes the role of monitoring the operations of the concession. The total generation capacity on the grid was then 307MW. Since then, 13 new generation plants have come on board. (Interjection) Let me make my presentation and if you want a clarification I will do it at the end. (Interjection) Please let me make my presentation. I said since then 13 new additional generation plants have come on board from independent private developers responding to the reforms –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister to give a presentation without us having copies. I thought she was answering what we were discussing here but now she is reading a statement and telling us to leave her make a presentation. Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, do you have a statement or you are responding to the issues raised by the Members?

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, there was a report that was presented and we had a debate. This is the second time we have had additional questions arising. So, I am responding to the comments that were made during the last debate and this is capturing what questions were raised on the Floor. It is only fair that colleagues allow me to respond because I will also respond to the comments you have just made right now. So give me a chance.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If the minister says that she is responding to the issues raised by the House, let her help us by pointing out those issues and respond to each accordingly. That way we shall understand that what she is presenting is not just a speech. (Applause)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, if you recall, many of the questions Members raised on the Floor were talking about the same issue. So what I am doing is to combine them and give a response. I have listened very attentively to all of you and I am now responding to your questions.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, hon. Minister, you could say, “On this question, this is my response and on the other, this is….”

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I went through all the questions and some of them were common and so I summarised them. So colleagues, allow me to respond to them and you will appreciate. 

So, I was saying that since then 13 new additional generation plants have come on board from independent private developers responding to the reforms. And in the year 2005, after the long drought, thermo plants were procured as emergency power generation.

Following the commissioning of Bujagali Hydropower Plant, those thermo plants were de-commissioned, removing the high cost subsidy requirement from the national treasury. As I talk now, the total generation capacity installed is 850MW and this capacity consists of large hydros, heavy fuel oil thermal, small hydros and generation; and this gives us a renewable energy composition of about 82 percent in the generation mix. In addition, we also have the off-grid which has a generation capacity amounting to about 6MW.

Now, moving forward from this year to 2018, the demand for electricity is growing – estimated at about 10 percent per annum and it is projected that it will grow from the current 500 megawatts to over 800 megawatts in 2018. And in order for us to meet this demand, small renewable energy projects are in the pipeline. We have Isimba Hydropower Project of 180 megawatts and Karuma of 600 megawatts which are expected to be commissioned in 2016 and 2018 respectively. Should no additional generation come on board before these two dams, it will definitely lead us to another situation of supply shortage. And so, with our development partners, we have come with a global energy transfer incident tariff which provides for an incentive for independent power producers to come up with a small renewable project that will be able to give us around 150 megawatts to bridge the gap of our energy needs in the next two to three years.

Madam Speaker, when I look at the transmission network, the transmission company is the system operator. It buys power in bulk from the generating companies and it sells it to the distribution companies. So, in terms of the transmission network we have increased from 1,130 kilometres of the 132 KV network in the year 2005 to 1,430 kilometres in 2013. In addition, we have introduced a 220 KV line which was introduced in 2012 to address the increasing requirements for capacity to transmit power and this line is 150 kilometres. 

When we look at the distribution component, Umeme took over the distribution component in the year 2005- 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, you look at the report and answer the questions raised on page 15 because that is the area of investigation. You go to 1,2,3,4,5. You answer those six areas. On performance of the sector, power sector, restructuring and reform agreement between Government and the electricity producers and suppliers, power losses, tariffs, subsidies, rebates, investments, power generation, procurement on construction of hydro and thermal, policy, legal and institution. Those are the areas. 

MS MULONI: Yes, Madam Speaker. What I am actually responding to is the question which members brought on the Floor here. They said: since Umeme took over, what has it done? Can you tell us? And this is what I am telling you –(Interjections)– no I am not. I am the sector minister. You have asked questions and you know Umeme cannot come here to answer –(Interjections)– no but you asked that what has Umeme done since it took over? Madam Speaker, Members here asked what Umeme has done and that is what I am explaining.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this reminds me of something now, before I make my point of procedure. We have a very good journalist in Uganda called Andrew Mwenda who said Members of Parliament do not understand. I went and got the Independent Magazineand for the last few months, Umeme is only advertising in the Independent. And when you advertise you put money. The circulation of the Independent cannot be more than 10,000 copies. Now, instead of giving him money directly they say, “We shall give it in form of adverts.” That is why he comes up and says MPs are ignorant.

So, Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that the minister is talking about- she is saying that MPs are very ignorant and if they are not ignorant then the Chairperson and the team that made a report. You should come here and tell us the report holds something or nothing and that is what we are looking for. So, is it procedurally right for the minister to tell us about the history of Umeme, of UEB when we were around when UEB was operating as if we do not know what UEB has been? As if she is the spokesperson of Umeme! Is she procedurally right, Madam Speaker?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate that the hon. Minister is trying to talk about transmission and expansion of the distribution of the network. But while she is stating that she is answering what Umeme has done. She has been answering what Government of Uganda has actually invested in the expansion of the network. In the report we have clearly stated that when Umeme came in, Government of Uganda put $11 million in the investment of substations and poles and Umeme took over those investments from Government. Up to now they have not even indicated to Government what are those that are worth of $11 million that belongs to Government! That is Government property. Umeme was supposed to come with $5 million as an investment but instead Government of Uganda borrowed $5 million to give Umeme as capital to start the investment. There are so many. In the middle of it, Government borrowed 36 billion for expansion of the distribution in Jinja, Kampala and other areas. 

So, surely, for the hon. Minister to start talking about investment of Umeme - what we know about investment of Umeme is that by 2011 they claimed to have invested $130 million. Those are facts that are not contested. But at the same time, what we found out was that in the same year 2011, Umeme declared in their books of accounts, $64 million, while they were claiming from Government that they had invested $130 million in 2011. They declared in their books of accounts $64 million and when they verified through ERA - by that time ERA could only verify $28 million. So, really, to start talking about what we have already clearly articulated in the report in respect to the investment of Umeme - And by 2010 what Umeme shareholding had put was $130 million. So, surely I find difficulties in seeing where the hon. Minister is going. 

I would really love if the minister would say, “On the question raised by hon. Amooti Otada, my answer is this. On the question raised by hon. Ntabazi this is the answer.” But the hon. Minister is really not giving us a head way in the actual answer. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you already informed us of the government programmes in your policy statement. So let us concentrate on the report. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually focusing on the report. If I can recall, I have recorded all the questions that you raised here. When we started this debate hon. Betty Amongi raised issues on the tariffs, losses and the investment which she is emphasising right now. And she said, “The charges in the service are highest in the world. Umeme has not achieved anything in lowering the tariff.” I captured all the questions and what I have done is to summarise, because all of them have a common answer. Each one of you is asking, Umeme has invested this and another one is saying Umeme has not invested this much. 

I am telling you what the regulator has confirmed. What the distribution company has confirmed as to what Umeme has invested. So, I would request that you allow me. I have looked at the questions and I have extracted –(Interruption)

MR MUKULA:  Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for giving way. The matter of Umeme is a very important one. About 29 Members of Parliament have so far debated this report. I think it is incumbent upon my colleague to capture the key issues that have been raised, as you have guided and ruled. I would urge the hon. Minister to follow your guidance and respond to the issues raised by the individual Members of Parliament as it were not to make a parliamentary or sectoral statement. I thank you. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I agree with hon. Mukula and I think the Member from Soroti who said there are some specific issues that were raised by Members but in fact the report is very specific and has raised some recommendations and made some observations. So, while we agree that the minister had the liberty to choose how to respond, but given the circumstances, I think the hon. Minister could focus on some of the issues that were raised in the report, and then try to guide the House on what you think about them and then we move forward because there are specific recommendations; there are specific observations that actually tie into your presentation and most of the background information was given in the report. So, it will be just a matter of reminding Members to those that were raised in the background but I think going into specific issues and observations or recommendations in the report would save time of this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there are areas in this report where you take issue, then point them out specifically; that I take issue on point a, b, c and then go to the recommendations and say, “on this one, I answer like this” or “on this I have no answer”; or “I agree with this and I don’t agree on this.” I think we should simplify it.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, if you are proposing that we go recommendation by recommendation, I am ready for that. With this one, I was only highlighting issues that Members brought on the Floor of Parliament but I have ready responses for each of those recommendations. I was responding to the areas that Members brought out on this Floor of Parliament after reading that report. I am ready for that.

THE SPEAKER: It is better we go to the recommendations. 

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think one of the challenges that we do have is that as much as we are waiting for the ministers’ statement, we do not have copies. I think it is important that we have copies so that we can move with her other than sitting and waiting for her to get the right answers yet we do not know whether they are in there or not. (Interjections) The iPads are not working, for your information. That is the truth, there is no internet. I am an IT student and I know there is no internet on the iPads, so, please I wish we would get copies so that we can move with her, I think that would help all of us.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think that is the minister’s answers. Do you have a written text?

MS MULONI: No, Madam Speaker. We all got copies of the ad hoc committee report and I have my responses to the recommendations from the side of the Executive. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have 300 copies?

MS MULONI: No.

THE SPEAKER: Have you sent them your system to be put in the iPads?

MS MULONI: No, I haven’t, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can they send them to our iPads now?

MS MULONI: I do not know.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, the practise of debating a report from a committee is known and the key decisions taken after the report also known. We debated this report; it has got recommendations and what is needed is the way forward. Even if they bring text copies, my analysis is that when you take the SWOT analysis of Government and also the report, you will find that two people are at fault because with a public/private partnership, these are –

THE SPEAKER: Are you debating?

MR KAKOOZA: This is a preamble-

THE SPEAKER: No, the debate was concluded and the minister is now responding.

MR KAKOOZA: I am trying to create a way forward, Madam Speaker. Even if they send text to our iPad, the practise with reports is known; and the decision to take on that report must be adopted here but what I am trying to say is that these are two people at fault: It was Umeme and the government. The objectives they wanted have not been achieved; even Umeme has not achieved. It is now incumbent upon Government and Umeme to come and tell us that the report has made a, b, c, d; Government wants to do a, b, c, d and we take a decision but otherwise even if we gets text from the sector ministry, the report is talking a different thing. 

The most important thing, we have to internalise this information and make a decision because by the time these people joined together to negotiate, Government had its objectives and even Umeme had its own objectives as a public/private partnership. If those objectives are not reached, it is incumbent upon Government now with the report recommendations to give us a way forward. 

THE SPEAKER: We wanted to know from the minister whether she is satisfied that the objectives were met but we haven’t got that. Let us hear from the Prime Minister. 

4.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report of Umeme is obviously a very important report. It raises very strong and fundamental questions and I think those who are raising the point that the responses should not appear to be ad hoc, and should be given in writing for them to study them so that we can discuss comprehensively knowing the responses are making a good point. I therefore propose that we allow the minister to go and put in writing her responses to all the commendations so that we are systematic in the discussions in the debate on this report. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, whereas I have no problem with the proposal of the Prime Minister, we set up a committee to dig down on this issue. The committee was able to land on so much documentary evidence, which they even laid on Table here. The Prime Minister is proposing that the minister is going to make a summary response mostly objecting or agreeing to the committee recommendations. 

May I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, to improve the recommendation of the Prime Minister that if that is the decision the House is going to take, in her response, the minister is going to attach certified copies of documentary evidence to back her argument. Otherwise, just making statements in passing against the committee recommendations will put us in a very difficult position and will require us to look at committee’s documentary evidence against the theoretical statement of the minister and making decisions will be hard. So, in order to really come to a conclusion -

THE SPEAKER: Certified by who? By the Cabinet?

MR EKANYA: No, the ministry because you see, sometimes when you bring here a document which is not certified, we say that it is a fake document. So, even if the documents are not certified, can the minister in her response attach documentary evidence? For example, the argument that money was declared and the argument on money that government put. We need documentary evidence instead of the minister saying a, b, c, d. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not want to agree or disagree because that would be debating and as the chairman, I am honoured to have worked with great people and we have submitted a successful report before you. I want to seek clarification from hon. Ekanya when he proposes that the documents must be certified. Certification of documents like the one we tendered in, I mean, we were in all respect nearly a tribunal in all respect we received documents from Government 100 percent. Has there been any doubt from the government side that the documents we tendered in could be false? If we want to give this report like the 29 other hon. Members have debated, Madam Speaker, I beg that you guide the House  appropriately so that the issue of documents – in fact, if the minister brings others documents - there are so many other documents that we did not attach - then we shall have no ending. Reporting must come to an end at some point. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now introducing a new rule that ministers must now certify documents before they come here. I think that would be very difficult for the ministers, I think they would now hide instead of coming. 

So the minister will answer to the report and also answer to the submissions of the Members. Where you agree you say, “I agree”, where you take issue you say it. And where you have proposals, you tell us so that when we come to speak we can have a meeting point. Okay, you will report on the 4th of February when we resume. And please send them in writing. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are really a kind Speaker for giving people holiday at a time when we need to sort out problems. While you are giving the minister a holiday, the people who pay the bills are going to suffer. And 40 percent of the bills we get is completely air! That is why Members are feeling bad; we wanted to stop the “air” today so that we can do better. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate, but we only have two working days left before we break for Christmas. I do not know whether the minister will be ready in one day to come back with answers – she will come on 4th February because we are going to recess. Next item, please.  

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the other report first – Let us receive the report from electricity. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE SPEAKER: Let us receive that report then we shall go back to UNESCO. 

5.02
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I would like to present a report on the investigation into the oil and gas sector by the Parliament ad hoc committee in respect of the regularisation of the oil sector and other matters incidental thereto. 

Before I proceed, I would like to lay on Table the following documents: 
    1. A copy of the report of the committee. I beg to lay. 

    2. A copy of the minutes of the proceedings of the investigations that the committee undertook. I beg to lay.

    3. Madam Speaker, there are some attachments that could not be photocopied because of their volume namely: annexure three, six, eight and nine. I beg to lay. 

    4. I beg to lay a copy of the Constitutional Application No.53 of 2011 arising out of Constitutional Petition No. 47 of 2011 between the Parliamentary Commission and Tuyinobusingye Severeno and the Attorney General as a respondent. I beg to lay.

    5. I beg to lay also the CD containing the recordings of all the proceedings that the committee undertook so that if any honourable member would like to listen in, they could access it.

    6. I beg to lay the statements of account from Bank of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do know that annexures form part of a report. The chairman for the ad hoc committee has just laid on Table annexures. I do not figure out how we will be able to follow the report specifically in areas where reference is made to annexures. That is one procedural area. The second procedural area is that even for some of the annexures that are contained in the report - I see some of them written in Arabic; reading from right to left and turning the pages from right to left. 

So, the procedural point I would like to raise is that, if we must understand this report, there is need for something to be done in respect of what is written in Arabic and in respect of the annexures that we cannot readily access while the report is being read to us. I pray for your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Where are the words written in Arabic?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, we got some documents from United Arab Emirates, but there is an explanation. When you look at annexure three - in fact, part of the annexures is in the main report, but of course the others are details which may not be so necessary. But we had everything put together because when we interfaced with the DPP who provided some of those documents, they had sought an interpretation from United Arab Emirates. But they all pointed to the fact that they did not have answers to what our side had raised through our Mission in United Arab Emirates. So really they may not be very useful much as they are attached.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we have a law in this country regarding interpretations and translations. We also have a certified institution where if there are documents that are in languages not official, you take those documents for transaction and certification. Therefore, is it procedurally okay for hon. Kafabusa Werihke, who is my good neighbour, to take a document that does not conform to the laws of this country?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, allow me beg the indulgence of my colleagues – let the report first get presented. Actually, these are some of the issues that could be raised. Perhaps the report might explain some of these issues. So, permit me present the report – I just noticed that some of the issues you are raising are already in the report, if you could only hold on – 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, why don’t you leave let him present the report? You can take issues later.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, while we have some attachments, others are there. But still even the ones we have don’t have translations. And I am very sure about 108 percent that hon. Kafabusa Werikhe does not know Arabic. So, I don’t know how he interpreted this. How could he attach something for which he did not have a translation?

So, is it procedurally okay for us to continue with such attachments whose translations are not attached? But also remember one of the objections we wanted to raise is that while we have had this report for some time, it still has attachments in Arabic. How do we proceed, Madam Speaker?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, if we went through the report, Members will realise that some of those attachments have been explained in plain English.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening attentively to the interactions that are going on. Yes, points of procedure and guidance have been raised, which demand the Chair to respond. But I am surprised – the moment the previous speaker sits, the chairman of the committee stands up immediately. Is he going to give us the ruling? I wish he could be patient for the Speaker to make a ruling. Thank you.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, as a matter of procedure, I think it is the case that attachments are part of the report. Therefore, if the attachments have no value because they cannot be read and understood, it is just like picking any piece of paper and attaching it onto the report. This is a simple thing. I don’t know why my brother, who is also my great friend, finds it too hard to have these documents translated.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen a set of documents, which contains a little English namely; names like Hillary Onek, Tullow, Heritage but the rest of the wording is in Arabic. But I also see something - Richard Buteera and the rest are in Arabic though with his name at the bottom. So, let us get an official translation because I see – but if we are to receive, we have to receive all this.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, really for hon. Wafula Ogutu, to suggest that I can’t raise a point of procedure for any reason must be an attempt to recreate our Rules of Procedure. So, I just want to raise a point that normally, we receive the report first before we make comments on it.

Let him complete the process of presenting the report so that it becomes a document of Parliament or a record of Parliament. Thereafter, we can raise such points as in the report that we received, “We have issues that we don’t understand because of languages.” From that point, we can task them to bring the translations of those documents if by reading through the report he cannot actually give an answer. 

I am saying this because my understanding of what the chairperson of the committee is saying is that yes, there is no direct translation but the reasons for all that are in the report itself. So, how can you refuse him to present the report? Because I don’t see any problem with him giving the explanation; we may accept or object to it. And in case we don’t accept it, then we will say so and so ask him to finish up what we think would have been better done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the first time we are receiving a report that includes Arabic in the history of this Parliament. So, it is not something that we are used to handling. But let him present because – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, our rules are clear that a report will be laid on Table, presented, debated and adopted or not. The report we have, whose copies were handed to us – unless he is saying he is going to just lay it on Table. But if he is going to read it – on reading there are attachments in a language that only hon. Ssebagala understands –(Laughter)– but not my Muko, who is the chairperson of the committee.

So, Madam Speaker, will it be procedurally okay for us to receive a report that violates – because in Parliament there are only two languages: English and Swahili. I know that the Prime Minister, who is my brother, is an interested party and for him, this report should have been presented yesterday. But as Parliament, we must follow the rules carefully that the report must be either in English or Swahili. So, is he procedurally right to continue with the report that is already defective?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us defer this for a minute while we sort out how to handle Arabic in English. So let us move to UNESCO while we sort out Arabic.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence in what I want to raise. You recall when we came here and we reported that the Prime Minister and I, were holding some negotiations to see to it that we have a better country for all of us. And we have been away for about three weeks. So, we have been holding a dialogue and we wanted to report. And that is the reason why when we tried to read the rules, we wanted to report to the whole country about the outcome. 

It is okay UNESCO can go on but the country – Yes, Madam Speaker, you have been telling us to talk and so we need to report to you of the outcome. And by the way, we have been accused of not wanting to hold dialogue. So it would be advantageous to everyone to hear what we have been talking about.

THE SPEAKER: No, Prime Minister and hon. Nandala, we shall put you on the Order Paper so that you can formally report to the House and the country about your dialogue; you cannot just smuggle it in. It must come in formally so that the country gets to know that you have been talking. Let us hear from the Chairperson of the Education Committee.

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

5.25
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a report of the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012. How I wish I was able to use this iPad but unfortunately the report is not there. I will, therefore, beg that you allow me to proceed the old way. Hon. Ekanya is asking why, but I have just said that the report is not posted on our website. 

Before I proceed any further, I want to lay on Table the proceedings of the Committee on Education and Sports on the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012. I beg to lay. 

As a matter of introduction, the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012 was read for the first time on 7 August 2012 and referred to the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports. The committee has, in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure, scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings to the House. 

The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012 provides for the establishment of the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO (UNATCOM). The commission will be established as a body corporate with perpetual succession and official seal for the discharge of its functions.

The Objects of the Bill are:
    (a) to establish a National Commission for UNESCO for Uganda as a body corporate;
    (b) to streamline its administration and functions; and
    (c) to outline the responsibilities of the government ministries, departments, agencies, civil society organisations and individuals interested in the UNESCO’s activities.

Background

UNESCO is one of the specialised agencies in the UN system. It was established in 1946 in response to the ruthless destruction of life and environment experienced during World War II, with a specific goal of laying a foundation for peace in the world. 

In this regard, UNESCO’s aspirations have remained as the attainment of peace through engagement in its fields of competence, namely; education, science, culture, communication and information.

In order to ensure permanent presence of UNESCO in member states – (Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I wish to raise a point of procedure under Rule 119. This rule clearly states that: “Subject to this rule, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister or other member in charge of the Bill shall move that the ‘Bill now be read a second time....’”

Now, I have not seen any minister; I have not seen the Leader of Government Business making that statement that the Bill now be read for the second time. It is then afterwards that the chairperson now comes in to present the report. But as of now, I am not sure – there could have been changes that the chairperson – maybe he is also a minister in charge of the sector.

Madam Speaker, I just seek guidance such that we capture the right information and follow the right procedure. This is because while we speak on the Floor, we are also making history and we cannot change that without first acknowledging our rules. So that is why I am raising this matter so that you guide us.

THE SPEAKER: Please read the Bill again.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded by three of your colleagues. What is the reason for your second reading?

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, the objective of the Bill is to establish a national commission – (Interjection) – Yes, that is what I have said.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do not listen to the heckling. (Laughter)

DR BATARINGAYA: And also to streamline its administration and functions; and to outline the responsibilities of the government ministries, departments, agencies, civil society organisations and individuals interested in the UNESCO’s activities. These are the justification for the – (Interjection) - Yes, they are objectives and at the same time – (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is very clear that the person to moved for the reading of this Bill was not ready and, therefore, I find that it is a waste of our valuable time to see a minister fumbling and he does not know what to say and what to read and how to guide the House. I am therefore asking you humbly to let these people go and sort themselves out then they come when they are orderly and prepared and they can guide us appropriately. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Minister, please move that the Bill in its full title be read for a second time. No, hon. Members, I also have my targets. I want these Bills out of the way before Christmas and my committee is ready. I should not disappoint the committees; they have been working and burning the midnight oil.

DR BATARINGAYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I beg to move that the Uganda National Commission for UNSECO Bill, 2012 be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: It was seconded already by the Minister for Lands, the Minister for Information and the Minister for Energy.

5.32
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the good guidance. I also want to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for the good historical and traditional memory of the way Parliament operates. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I will proceed on background that UNESCO is one of the specialised agencies in the UN system. It was established in 1946 in response to the ruthless destruction of life and the environment experienced during the World War II, with a specific goal of laying a foundation for peace in the world. 

In this regard, UNESCO’s aspirations have remained the attainment of peace through engagement in skills of competence namely; education, science, culture, communication and information. 

In order to ensure permanent presence of UNESCO in member states and also to contribute to UNESCO’S efforts to promote cooperation in the field of intellectual activities, UNESCO embedded in Article VII of its constitution, the establishment of national commissions. The article states: “Each member state shall make such arrangements as suits its particular conditions for the purpose of associating its principle bodies interested in educational, scientific and cultural matters with the work of the organisation, by formulating a national commission with broad representation of the government and such bodies.”

It is in pursuit of this constitutional provision that Uganda, which is a member state of UNESCO, wishes to establish a legal framework for a national commission. By virtue of her membership to the United Nations, Uganda became eligible to the membership of UNESCO and indeed became a member of UNESCO on 9 November 1962. 

In 1963, Uganda, pursuant to Article VII of the UNESCO constitution, put in place a national commission as a quasi-autonomous institution in the then Ministry of Education. The commission operated as such until 2006 when it was formally designated as a department and specified as one of the institutions under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Part II of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Uganda National Commission of UNESCO and clause 3 establishes the commission as a body corporate. 

The UNATCOM was established to perform the core functions of the National Commission for UNESCO. However, the UNATCOM as it exists today falls short of the aspirations of Article IV of the Charter of the National Commissions for UNESCO. 

The Bill is aimed at establishing the UNATCOM to structure its administration, functions and responsibilities for partners of UNATCOM.

Observations

The committee observed the following: 
    1. The establishment of the Uganda National Commission as an autonomous entity is long overdue because the recommendation for its establishment was made in 1992. The lack of a legal framework is hampering the effective operation of the commission. This would be resolved by enactment of the law.

    2. The Education Policy Review Commission Report, “Education for National Integration and Development” of April 1992, recommended, and the government accepted the recommendation in its entirety, that the establishment of the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO should be regularised with the necessary legal provisions and its secretariat should be strengthened.

    3. Recommendation No.196 of the Government White Paper 1992 provides the basis for the establishment of the national commission and for its operations.

    4. In September 2013, the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO marked 50 years in existence. This therefore makes the enactment of this law befitting to UNATCOM and to the people of Uganda. Furthermore, its enactment will make Uganda compliant to UNESCO’S requirements.

Madam Speaker, it is therefore based on that that the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report. We thank the committee. It has the minimum of one third of the signatures required. You are free to debate. 

5.35
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for this report and I would like to appeal to the House that we needed this law yesterday. 

But I have issues that maybe we shall have to consider when we are at committee stage. One of the issues that we need to take into consideration is that UNESCO guidelines for establishing a commission are specific, and clear that the membership of commission must be broad and represent those other bodies. Therefore, when we talk about being broad in a multiparty setting and taking the interests of other experts in the field, when we are looking at that clause it should not only be left the way the Bill is limiting it to the structure that has been proposed in the Bill. It must take care of the gender issues, workers’ issues, the issues of the young people and other stakeholders.

Secondly, presently the representation and participation in UNESCO activities has been very small and it has been handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Sometimes you find that our representative to UNESCO is also the Ugandan ambassador to so many countries. And in some high level meetings, you find that junior officials go to represent the Government of Uganda and that affects the benefits that this country would have got from UNESCO like other countries have got by having so many cultural sites supported, so many educational museums established, and so forth. 

Therefore, I hope that once we have this law in place, the representation and participation in regional and international meetings of UNESCO will shift from the current structure where ambassador Napeyok and other junior officials of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and education participate. 

Also another point to note is that the resources that our participation in UNESCO would have derived we have not benefitted from and our reports to UNESCO have been falling short. If you go to the internet and you see the type of report that the Government of Uganda has been presenting on UNESCO activities in Uganda, it is lacking compared to those of other countries. 

I therefore hope that with this, our quality of report to the UNESCO meetings will also improve. And I hope, Madam Speaker, we are operating in a decentralised state. I want to thank you for the Busoga Tourism; I hope now the next programme once we have this Bill - we shallhave the cultural and educational promotional activities in different parts of the country so that the people of this country can really understand the linkage between education and culture. 

I beg to move that we expeditiously pass this Bill but at committee stage, I will bring an amendment to take consideration of some of those issues that are proposed. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, yesterday we had the bodies of two former Members of Parliament here and if you quantify the money Parliament and Government spent yesterday in mourning those colleagues - and there is no preparation for the future generation and this country to raise money from monuments and museums of such heroes. When we were at the burial of the late Sam Njuba, hon. Mathew Rukikaire said that hon. Sam Njuba was one of the three people who brought the first arms from Libya that helped President Museveni to capture power. We needed a museum under UNESCO where the young people tomorrow will know that even if hon. Sam Njuba was being tear-gassed, he made a contribution. So, I hope this Bill will have such a provision where you have memorial sites for education and educating young people. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that, this Bill has a lot of financial implications. I have done research in the budget because I was looking through and I thought there was income to be raised from elsewhere. It is talking about allowances, salaries and whatever. Where is the money going to come from, because I do not see the budget line which will take care of this UNESCO Bill? Whether the certificate was laid in 2012, did you continue to budget for it in 2013/14? It is not there!

THE SPEAKER: I think there must have been a Certificate of Financial Implication before it went to the committee. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start by saying that, first of all, UNESCO exists and under the Ministry of Education, it is at the moment a department. Therefore, there is a budget for it. 

The other bit of it also really is that we should not really be so much cagey or uncomfortable when something involves a budget because we are streamlining something, and we want better service delivery. Just like hon. Ekanya said, we cannot have all those items we are talking about without a budget. But this is just to regularise and streamline the department and make it a body corporate. It has been running on a budget for so many years.  

THE SPEAKER: It has been hidden, what this Bill is doing I think is to give it its own identity. 

5.43
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, the point raised by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is a very important one. No Bill goes through Cabinet without a financial implication certificate. I would be most obliged if the minister laid the certificate whether it is budget neutral or that it is on-going, it should still be laid on the Floor of Parliament. It is a procedural matter and I would urge the sector minister to follow the procedure so that we can be able to get this done. It is a tidy way of getting it done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now reversing the procedure. Under the Budget Act, when you bring the Bill for the first reading, that is when it comes with a certificate. But if you are introducing the second reading that they should also produce certificates, I think that is not fair. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012
5.45
Clause 1

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Madam Chairperson, Clause 1, the committee recommends that we delete the words, “and different days may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions of this Act.” The justification is that the Act should come into commencement as a whole. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: We normally leave Clause 2 until the end, in case there are other changes in between. Let us go to Clause 3.

Clause 3

MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that in Clause 3, we merge sub-clause (2) with sub-clause (3) and redraft the provision to read as follows: “(2) The commission shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue or be sued in its corporate name and in doing so, enjoy or suffer anything that may be done, enjoyed or suffered by a body corporate.” The justification is to clarify and avoid unnecessary repetition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I want to seek from the chairperson is: is he saying that this commission is independent of Government but it is like a government department and the lawyer is the Attorney-General? Are you trying to create something like the Beachside? You want to make something which has been a department into a commission. Should it be completely independent of Government and yet when you look through the Bill, all the facilities it is going to get are from Government?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: More clarification because I think that we should not be moving it anywhere else. Clause 3 should be deleted because all Government agencies and entities are required by Article 119(4) (b) and (5) of the Constitution to seek the approval and advice of the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General before they contract or enter into any contract. So, it is not necessary here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not understand the rationale for removing sub-clause (3). Why don’t you want them to say, “I can hold property, I can dispose of it”?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing this to be a body corporate and the way we have redrafted it caters for all this, and only that from the clarification provided by the Leader of the Opposition, he asked whether we want to establish some beach side. I do not know what he meant because I do not know what beach side is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But supposing one day someone wakes up and says that you are not allowed to hold property, what will happen? 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I think when we refer back to the amendment, we are saying we merge (2) and (3) and say, “The commission shall be a body corporate” and a body corporate can own property, can be sued or it can sued in its own name. So, I do not know whether there is any ambiguity here but according to the committee – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are not making the law for the Members of Parliament, you are making it for the people of Uganda; do you assume that everybody knows that a body corporate can own property? These laws are for Ugandans not for us.  For me, I have no problem with the sub clause, because it is clear. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, if we agree that it is a body corporate, then it means that it will have to get people who are knowledgeable in that field. If it can sue or be sued, then it must have a lawyer. Two, it must have a human resource and accounts department. I have no objection with that but I need to be convinced that you do not need the services of the Attorney-General, that you can do everything on your own, that you do not need item No.3. Are you telling us that this should be completely independent of the Attorney-General?

When we went to court as Parliament, this man called the Attorney-General said he was our lawyer and when he got to court, he agreed with them without our consent. Disciplining him is not easy because the law says the Attorney-General is the lawyer for this institution. So, I want you to help me understand that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, I want to know, what harm does it do to have this provision?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I agree with you that even for the avoidance of doubt, there is no harm in retaining sub-clause (3) – (Interjections) – you can argue that it is redundant and so on, but for the pointers it gives out, it becomes clear even to the reader and to that person who administers the Act to know the areas and then interpolate to others that may actually be subsumed in those ones spelt out in the Act. So it is important in my opinion; it does no harm. 

As far as the service of the lawyers from the Attorney-General’s Office is concerned, that is a tricky area. You may recall the problem we had with NFA and the debate that ensured. Principally, these parastatals can go to court without the representation of the Attorney-General because they are bodies corporate. However, in all contractual matters, more often than not they use monies appropriated by Parliament from the Consolidated Fund. To that extent, when they are entering into contracts, those contracts should always be cleared by the Attorney-General and they normally come to us without exception. 

For representation, we always urge them, - and we have standing instructions – “please engage the services of the Attorney-General’s Chambers beforehand.” Do not reach halfway, sometimes the case is muddled up, and then you run to the Attorney-General’s Chambers for help. So in summary, that is my position. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General has made it even better. He says Parliament appropriates and makes them to go and buy a building on Kampala Road. Now, when they are going to sell it, you are saying that the Attorney-General should not know? I was reminded by the Vice Chair of PAC, hon. Mwiru – you remember Uganda Investment Authority, they had a battle on Kampala Road. They sold the building at a very cheap rate because they wanted commission; now they are renting. That was because the Attorney-General was not involved. 

So, Madam Chairperson, if these people are going to get money from our budget, then any transaction they do must be in conformity with the laws of Uganda as a department of Government. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the supreme law is the Constitution and Article 119 is very clear. I do not know whether you want to restate Article 119 in this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chair, do you have strong reasons for deleting sub clause (3)?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, since the learned Attorney- General has said that for avoidance of doubt, we need sub clause (3), I therefore propose that we maintain it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is what we are going to do, Madam Chairperson, we can say, “Subject to the Constitution of Uganda…” The reason we should bring in the Constitution of Uganda is that this thing is 100 per cent ours. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no harm in adding that so that whoever is working must operate within the existing law. 

MR OPOLOT: It is okay, although I thought the laws of Uganda were obvious. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Clause 4 as stated is not very clear to me and the object of the commission should be like that of UNESCO because this is a UNESCO commission. Therefore, it should have objects which are specific and measurable. So my proposal is that we say:
    a) Attaining quality education for all and lifelong learning. That is measurable.
    b) Mobilising science knowledge and policy for sustainable development.
    c) Addressing emerging social and ethical challenges. 
    d) Fostering intercultural dialogue and the culture of peace. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But where are those amendments?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I am proposing amendment to the whole thing because what is put there is – (Interjections) – we take UNESCO because this is a UNESCO commission. The things we have put there are not very clear and are not measurable. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to ask hon. Wafula to consider the possibility that the detailed objectives of UNESCO are embedded in the other operating documents, guidelines and policies not necessarily in the Bill. I just thought you could probably consider that as you make this proposal so that the law is not expected to amend the other frameworks that are already in place. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, let me supplement on hon. Alaso’s contribution. We are talking about the broader perspective of this and not the specific where you talk of smart objectives. So if you are talking of the general object of the commission, you do not have to go into specific listing of the objects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee wishes to make the following proposals in regard to Clause 5: a) that we delete sub clause 1 (b). The justification is that it should be merged with sub clause (e).

b) 	redraft sub clause (1) (e ) to read as follows: “To advise government ministries, departments or agencies, civil society organisations and individuals on the resolutions, recommendations and any other matter adopted by the organ of UNESCO and follow up on their implementation.” The justification is to widen the scope of the provision. 

c) 	We propose to amend the provisions of sub clause (1) (f) by inserting the word, “Government” immediately before the words “United Nations” and also insert the word “any” immediately before the word “other.” But we further propose the addition of the words “or development partners” at the end of the provision. 

	So, the redrafted provision should read as follows: “(f) to participate in the planning and execution of activities entrusted to UNESCO, which are undertaken with the assistance of the government, United Nations Agencies, and any other international organisations or development partners.” The justification is to widen the scope of the provision and to bring on board Government as a primary stakeholder.

d) 	We propose the insertion of a new provision immediately after paragraph (j) to read as follows: “(k) collect relevant data relating to UNESCO fields of competence for the purpose of its wide distribution.” The justification is, the data is important for the day-to-day running of the commission.

e) 	In sub clause (1) (j), we propose the deletion of the word “collaborate.” The justification is that the word is redundant. 

f) 	We propose an amendment on sub clause (1) (k) by inserting the words “by statutory instrument” at the end of the provision. The justification is that the minister should issue these directives through a statutory instrument.

g) 	In sub clause (2) (i), we propose the deletion of the words “and corporate” appearing in line two. And in (2) (ii), we propose the substitution of the word “shall” with the word “may”; and in (iii), we suggest that we delete the words “the greatest extent possible and consistent with this Act” and redraft the provision to read as follows: “The Commissioner may consult and co-operate with government ministries, departments and agencies, civil society organisations and individuals carrying out duties, aims and objectives related to those of the commission.” The justification is: for clarity and to give the commission powers to consult only when necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still do not know why you are proposing the deletion of (b). It is different from (e), which is about resolutions and recommendations. Suppose they want to advise the government on appointments at the UNESCO? Why do you want to take this power away? It is not just about the recommendations; there may be other issues that – anyway, I don’t know what the minister is thinking but that is my feeling about that.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to have (b) catered for under (e).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but (e) is it about recommendations and resolutions adopted by the UNESCO and follow up? But they could want to advise Government about other things. There might be other things, which they might advise Government on, which may not be necessarily resolutions and not recommendations. Why do you want to close the door?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, we can drop that proposal.

MR EKANYA: I have not seen the reporting mechanism of this commission to Parliament and the district councils yet we need to – (interjections) – Yes, because we are talking about national heritage. Some of the sites like the Tororo Rock and those in Busoga are sites under the Land Act, which are heritages and protected by the districts and respective local governments. They also need to get funding for their activities. Every district has some of these cultural sites but they are disappearing because we do not have a commission reporting to both Parliament and the local authorities.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, also following the spirit of the information sought by my colleague, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, we have established cultural and traditional institutions in this country but they are not being mentioned as to whether they should be party to this kind of provision. We are just talking about agencies, departments – there are established cultural institutions! Can we have them also included starting with inzuya Masaba?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I really do not know how the district can be clearly mentioned in the law. But –

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you could insert something like local governments.

MR OPOLOT: If that is the case, then we can add on “local governments, cultural institutions” – Madam Chair, can I request hon. Geoffrey Ekanya to share with me his amendment?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you draft the amendment; can you state where you want it to appear and in what form?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, I would like to insert paragraph (i) to read as follows: “To monitor and evaluate the progress of UNESCO programmes in Uganda and reporting to UNESCO head offices.” The justification is: of course, UNESCO will be interested in what we will be doing but we also want to ensure value for money as we invest in these programmes.

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Chair, I have no objection on what is being proposed by the chairperson.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, after paragraph (k), I would like to propose the introduction of a clause, which states that, “In performance of these functions, the commission shall produce annual reports to Parliament, local governments and cultural institutions.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean an annual report to Parliament?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you putting it in the same category as the Uganda Human Rights Commission, IGG, etcetera. Is that what you are talking about?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Madam Chair, because there is always that annual UNESCO Conference where the Government of Uganda goes to make a report on the progress on compliance with the charter. So, it is just prudent that that report is received and understood by those levels. Otherwise, sometimes what happens is that officials sit at their desks and make reports yet on the ground the situation is different. 

So, Parliament should perform its residual oversight role on the nature of the report that is submitted to the UN body. Also, since this is about educational, cultural and scientific issues, the local governments are very paramount; the cultural institutions are very paramount to get copies of this report because culture and science are related and you find most of these forests and cultural sites – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Information from the Attorney-General

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I do not know whether the concerns of hon. Ekanya are not taken care of by Clause 33 of the Bill, which talks about annual report. Why don’t you look at it first; do you have the Bill? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Attorney-General, what hon. Ekanya is looking for – if I can read his mind – is, for example, Inzuya Masaba in Bugisu; you do an activity of UNESCO in Bugisu so who should know first? It is that local government and the cultural institution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we may add the local governments and cultural institutions but the parliamentary reporting is here under Clause 33(3). What we need to incorporate is the local governments and the cultural institutions.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I agree with that; let us incorporate the local governments and cultural institutions but Parliament is catered for under Clause 33.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you will have to prepare an amendment and bring it under Clause 33.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the amendment by hon. Oguttu?

MR OPOLOT: We concede to it also.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we insert a new sub clause (2) to read: “The minister may consult with any other related sector minister in formulating the policy guidelines.” The Justification is to take into consideration the broader mandate of UNESCO Commission.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I suppose that this proposal is redundant because this is a government Bill and you would expect a minister, in advising and policy formulation, to consult other government departments and all other relevant institutions and agencies. So I do not think this is necessary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, first of all, the person who is supposed to initiate the policy should be the organisation where it is taking place. I have seen the representation there shows four ministries, so I do not think it is necessary because you really bog down the institution. So let us leave it out and I agree with hon. Tashobya that it is quite redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, on Clause 7, the committee proposed that:
(i) 	Transfer sub clause (3)(e) to appear immediately before sub clause (5). The justification: The position of secretary-general does not form part of the membership of the commission. 

(ii) 	In sub clause (3)(f)(i)(ii) and (iii), replace “appointed” with “nominated”. The justification: It is the mandate of the minister to appoint; the organisation just nominates.

(iii) 	Insert a new provision immediately after sub clause 3(d) to read: “(iv) A representative of persons with disabilities nominated by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities.” The justification: To cater for persons with disabilities as one of the special interest groups. 
(iv)	 Insert a new provision immediately before sub clause (5) to read: “(4) There shall be a secretary-general who shall be an ex-officio member of the commission.” The justification: To cater for the position of secretary-general transferred from sub clause (3)(e).

(v) 	Insert a new sub-clause at the end of the provision to read, “(8) At least one third of the members of the board shall be women.” The justification: For affirmative action and to conform to Articles 32 and 33 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not understood when you talk about moving (e); is it that the secretary-general is not part of the commission?

MR OPOLOT: Yes. In the Bill, the secretary-general is listed as though he were part of the composition of members of the commission. However, as an exofficio, he should not be listed among these. If they say, “There shall be five…” and among the five you have listed the secretary-general, who is an exofficio, then you are depriving the commission of one member. That is why we are saying that we move (e) away from there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. You think if we leave it there we will disadvantage another body?

MR OPOLOT: Members of the commission have been listed and among them is the secretary-general, who is an exofficio member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the secretary to the board is the executive director or the boss of the institution. So we can say, “The secretary to the board will be the secretary-general and the board members are the following…” The purpose of the secretary is just to take minutes and they stop at that. The secretary cannot participate in voting; he can only maybe give advice.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think it is proper.The practice is that the secretary of an institution is actually an exofficio member of that commission. So, I do not see anything wrong with this formulation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do they become 10 if he remains there?

MR OPOLOT: No, but if you counted the number of members, you would find that there is one position being occupied by the secretary-general.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, clause 7(5) reads as follows: “The Secretary-General shall act as secretary to the board and shall perform such functions in relation to the board as the board may direct.” So, if he is the secretary then he is an exofficio member of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have now understood; they want to move that provision nearer to (5), which deals with the functions of the Secretary-General.

MS ALICE ALASO: Madam Chair, there are two things here:one is to provide for clarity that at that board level, there will be five people; and then there is the secretary to the board, who is the secretary-general separately. That is the clarity that the committee is seeking to provide for and that is what runs in all these Bills we have been processing. 

In any case, the commission will have other staff – the technical staff – and the secretary-general is actually part of the technical people who run the commission. So, we would like to create that clarity in the drafting. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I was saying that we move it to where it is talking about the secretary-general. Both provisions relating to the secretary-general should be together. That is what the committee is seeking.

MR OPOLOT: Yes, Madam Chair, that is what we proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They want to move paragraph (e) to come between sub clause (4) and (5). 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am glad hon. Alaso pointed out that this has been the practice for long. Indeed, in my opinion, that is how it should be.The most important thing is the composition. We are talking about who is going to compose the board. There are those members who have a voting right and there are those members who are there by virtue of their office- the exofficio members. They have the right to participate, to guide the process, but do not have the right to vote.So, he is a member and we cannot actually leave him out of here. 

The only clarification as far as that exofficio member is concerned is contained in the other provisions, which are being cited, and also clause 14. Clause 14 is very clear on the appointment of the secretary-general –“There shall be a Secretary-General of the commission who shall be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment…” and many other provisions relating to the secretary-general. As far as clause 7 is concerned, we are talking about members. There are those who are members with a voting right and there are those who are exofficio members without a voting right; they deliberate but do not take a position. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, then there is no problem. We take the committee’s proposal that clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have no objection and even the presentation here had no problem because they refer to the exofficio. The problem I have under clause 7(3) is on the representative of the ministry. We should really do it better. I would propose that we say, the Permanent Secretary of that ministry or his or her nominee. The reason is that the person who will appoint will be the Permanent Secretary. 

So, much as we are dealing with the numbers and saying that the Secretary-General is an exofficio- that is okay and I have no objection - in addition,those coming from respective ministries should be the heads of those institutions or their nominees. The justification is: to avoid searching for which person to send there. If you say a representative, somebody may have a complication and may not reach there or the minister can easily take power and say, “I am the one sending somebody” and yet this should not concern the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How often does the commission sit? You might engage the Permanent Secretary for just UNESCO work and no other work. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair,I will give you an example. The Secretary to the Treasury is a board member of the Uganda Revenue Authority Board and it says, “The Secretary to the Treasury or his or her nominee”. This is because the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury may attend the meeting in person or may nominate somebody. 

I am bringing this up because it should be the Permanent Secretary’s responsibility to nominate the person to go. That is why we are saying that. Otherwise, if you leave it like this, it will be a big problem. A minister like hon. Kamanda Bataringaya can decide to send himself there or he can go and pick someone who is his friend and send him or her down there but the responsibility should be to the Permanent Secretary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this appointment is a senior one because it is approved by the Cabinet. It is more elaborate than the others we have been looking at.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I do not know whether the LOP wants to change the way we have been legislating because we have been using the words “representative of the ministry”,bearing in mind that it shall be somebody nominated by the PS. You cannot be an impostor. There must be a person in charge of the ministry and we have always thought that it is the PS who nominates people.Maybe it is to elaborate further, but that is how we have been doing this - the representative of the ministry of tourism or something.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They cannot just come there; they have to be taken to Cabinet first. That is what the law says.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Yes, board members are nominated by Cabinet.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, to be sincere, when you look through this law, it is a good law on some of the issues which have been really at the centre of my mind; for example, the tenure of the board members which we know, the tenure of the secretary-general, the functions and how they should manage.It is a good law. 

The only thing we are trying to sayis that we need to go on improving because this does not followthe other laws, even the one we passed recently. In that case, why don’t we improve? Why don’t we specify the person responsible in the law? Even if I say “Permanent Secretary”, it is not an individual; it is the office. So, whoever will be there will be the one to perform this function.A Permanent Secretary will never leave a ministry; and I cantell you that is true whether you want it or not, unless we change the functions of a Permanent Secretary. The office of a Permanent Secretary will be there until further notice.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, maybe the Leader of the Opposition will help me here. When you say, “a representative of the ministry responsible for education”, whose mandate is it? I do not know whether I am taking it for granted but I would think that it is automatic that if hon. Bataringaya is not a representative of Ministry of Tourism, there is no way he can take himself there. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you. The information I want to give is late originally, we used to recommendthe PS and then when we were legislating, Parliament complained that some Permanent Secretaries impose themselves on every board. The man is on 17 boards and he has no option because the law says so. So, the man wants to collect all the allowances from all the boards by himself. That is the problem. Otherwise, if we were liberal we would say “representative” and then he would be forced to cede some powers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a safety net in that these are Cabinet appointees. The minister cannot appoint without the support of the Cabinet. So, to me that is a safety net.

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Chair, when we say “a representative of a ministry”, like Ministry of Education, it is the PS who proposes from among the officers who is going to be responsible and he or she proposes the name of that officer. Every ministry does that. It goes to Cabinet for approval, as you have said; Cabinet approves the members who are supposed to constitute this board. That is what happens.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question-

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I have a further amendment. I wish to insert clause 7(f) (iv), if this does not offend any provision of the Constitution- the Attorney-General will advise. I wish to suggest that a representative of cultural institutions sits on this commission. It is they who understand cultural institutions and who value these institutions more than these educated people. So, they should be represented. The traditional leaders’ forum could appoint someone to represent them on this commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That would make them 10.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I appreciate the submission by hon. Wafula but I would also like to think that the activities and business of cultural institutions are handled under the ministry responsible for culture. I, therefore, think it would suffice to maintain the ministry where the cultural institutions fall. 

MR RUHINDI: The chairperson puts it well. In any case, if you were to insert cultural institutions, coming up with a representative of cultural institutions would be problematic. As far as government matters are concerned, in matters of culture there is a responsible ministry and it is spelt out clearly in the membership of this board. Going beyond that would be opening Pandora’s Box.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, that is not a very good argument because we have a ministry in charge of culture and also the youth; so, why then bring the youth if you have the ministry in charge of culture here? There are civil servants and technical people who work in the cultural institutions and they have a forum of cultural leaders and they could choose one. They could even rotate over the years, if it is about which tribe or which kingdom is represented.People from cultural institutions will bring a lot of value to this commission. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, hon. WafulaOguttu is referring to a forum of cultural leaders and I am not yet aware of any such forum. I therefore wonder how such leaders would be nominated, especially given the current situation where there is confusion over cultural leaders in the different cultural institutions. These days we have several cultural leaders under the same cultural institution. So, I really want to urge colleagues that we maintain that the cultural leaders or the institutions be catered for under the ministry responsible for culture. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the highlands there are two cultural leaders, in Masabaland. So, I do not know what to do. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right. In Masabaland, Government recently created another one for us, but we should not fear because of this confusion. We are making a law, which will sell. We shall reach a certain point and we shall stabilise. So, what will happen when we stabilise? 

I stood up because one time we had an expert who came to advise Uganda on cassava but he never knew what cassava was. Here we are talking about UNESCO and at the end we say “cultural organisation”. I can tell you, even my amuran here doesnot know culture very wellbut there are people who know. That is why I wanted to say that we should consider somebody from the cultural institutions, but since it has passed –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 as amended do stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes the following amendments in clause 8:

a) 	Amend sub clause (2) by substituting “three years” with “four years”. The justification: for harmonisation with existing laws. 

b) 	Amend sub clause (4) by deleting the words from the beginning of the provision up to the word “where”, appearing on line three.Also, transfer the remaining provision to appear immediately after sub clause (6). Justification: for clarity and proper flow of the provision. 

c) 	Delete sub clause (5). The justification is that this is usually an administrative arrangement. 

d)	Insert a new provision immediately after sub clause (6) to read as follows:“(7) Where the office of an appointed member becomes vacant, the Minister may, in consultation with the nominating body,appoint another person qualified to perform the functions of that office for the remaining period.” 
	Justification: to cater for the provision as transferred from sub clause (4) and to mandate the minster to consult the nominating body before appointment. 

e) 	Delete sub clause (6) appearing on page 10. The justification is that the provision is misplaced, but even if it were to be placed in its proper position under clause 7 the provision as it is can easily be subjected to abuse by the nominating authority.

f)	Amend sub clause (7) by inserting the words “under which he or she was nominated” immediately after the words “upon ceasing to hold that office”. The justification: for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, is it four or three years?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, to me that is how we should move; three years are quite enough. I am sure even my brother, Kibirige, will agree. In URA, board members are in office for three years, and the reasons are simple. By the way, in co-operatives it is two years. The only problem is that co-operatives have no term limits but we must also insert term limits there. Every two years in a primary society, they must elect.

The justification is simple - transfer of knowledge; you could become dangerous to the institution or you could be too good.So, this for me is a good law. We should first insist on three years. Madam Chairperson, let us test this on UNESCO; it is very big. Let us test three years here and even in the subsequent ones.

The other point that I was trying to raise here is that you cannot say that when the member from the Ministry of Tourism dies, the minister in charge of the law appoints somebody from his ministry to act. No; the responsibility should be for that minister to tell the other one, “You donot have a member here, kindly send us another member to serve the remaining period.” So, there is no reason to say that you have to appoint somebody, pending the secondment of another member from the responsible ministry-that cannot work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do we retain the three years? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we should retain the three years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question-

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, before we pronounce ourselves on this entire clause, we do not need to lose the important submission on sub clause (4). I had not really paid attention to it until I listened to the Leader of the Opposition.Given that the minister in the Bill would refer to, in this case, the Minister of Education, reading that clauseit would then appear like even if somebody resigned from the Ministry of Gender, it would be the Minister of Education. If that is true, then we really donot need to lose that important argument. We probably need to consider redrafting this. Maybe we first get guidance; I guess the Attorney-General will help us on sub clause (4) so that we have a common understanding. 

I also think that the committee might actually do well retaining sub clause (5). Mr Chairman, if you really donot mind much, since you said it was for clarity you can retain sub clause (5) also for clarity. Madam Chair, if the Attorney-General could help me on sub clause (4) and if the chair could consider dropping the proposal to delete sub clause (5). 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we are avoiding sub clause (5) because if someone is incapacitated, would it be right for the minister to appoint someone to act in that person’s place? We have already specified the membership of the board and, therefore, one can only be replaced.What do you do for the rest of the period if somebody is incapacitated? Why not say you are filling up the gap if you have declared that the person is no longer capable –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chair, are you saying that this law does not tell us the circumstances under which somebody can lose their board membership? If there is indiscipline orissues of unsound mind – (Interjections) –If that is not there, then we have to include it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is there, then why is he worried?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there on page 9 under sub clause (6). 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 8(4), which the Leader of the Opposition has a problem with, I thought that in the case of incapacitation or illness of a board member one would still go to (4). You would have to get a person from where this same person originated. I think that would pose no problem, in my view. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, sub clause (4)was being split; one part moved down to sub clause (6) on reasons for termination. It was just split and moved to another area. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed – (Interjections) – On the years, I think we have agreed that we retain the three years. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I like the interest my amuran, the Leader of the Opposition, has in this.

On clause 9, the committee recommends the following:

a) 	Delete the word, “annual” appearing in paragraph (c). The justification: to cater for a wider scope of the functions of the board. 

b) 	Delete the word, “generally” appearing in paragraph (f). The justification: for proper wording of legislation and to avoid ambiguity. 

c) 	Insert another function of the board immediately after paragraph (f) to read as follows: “(h) to consider and approve plans of the Commission.” The justification is that this should be one of the cardinal functions of the board. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee may need to consider the location of the proposed amendment under c – “(h) to consider and approve plans of the Commission.” I am not a drafting expert but this coming below (g) looks a bit awkward, since it is specific and not a general function as (g) spells it out.

Maybe (g) should come after this (h). Having (h) in the present form come after (g) does not flow well; it should come somewhere above (c) probably, in my view. We could consider relocating this. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the honourable member’s submission that the new paragraph should come before (g) and, therefore, the current (g) should become (h). 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this is small. The amendment to 9(c) proposes the deletion of the word “annual”, but it is important because it is reflected against clause 33 which talks about an annual report. If we set targets, they must be pegged to what they are going to report on. So, it is better to retain it. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, our amendment is premised on the fact that the board will not only look at the annual targets; some could be monthly or quarterly according to the duration of the strategic plan. So they have to look at all the categories of the targets in the performance of the commission. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, given the fact that the board sits few times in a year, it would not be prudent for them to look at other targets other than annual targets. Once they sit at the beginning of the year, they set targets and they wait to come back at the end of the year to see how the organisation has performed. They are not day-to-day members – (Interjections) –The word “annual” should be there.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Mine is for a slightly different reason. When you say “annual”, then you make it a statutory requirement that must be done and that marries in with what the Attorney-General was talking about in clause 33. This does not exclude the board from looking at any other reports and setting targets but since this one is statutory, it means it is mandatory. So the word “annual” should be retained. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 10, the committee proposes to amend sub clause (1) by inserting the words “at least once” immediately after the word “meet”. The justification is: for clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, on clause 14 the committee proposes as follows: 
a) 	Amend sub clause (2) by substituting “three years” with “five years”. Justification: to cater for the transition period from one board to another. 

b) 	Insert a new provision in sub clause (3) to read as follows: “(e) advising the board on any relevant matter relating to the functions of the board.” The justification is: to cater for any eventuality; and this should be a cardinal role of the Secretary-General.

c) 	Amend sub clause (5) by inserting the words “of not less than two thirds of members” immediately after the word, “recommendation”. Justification: to involve the majority of board members in decision making. 

d) 	Insert a new paragraph in sub clause (5) to read as follows: “(d) being convicted of a criminal offence.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first, the five years is wrong. To start with, the board will be appointed and then the board will appoint thesecretary-general. Even if it is for one day – they can be appointed today and the following day they appoint the secretary-general. There will always be a difference with the secretary-general. So, that should not worry us. The time for the secretary-general should remain three years because once the board is in place, it will advertise and look for a secretary-general. 

The only thing that I see missing is the qualifications of the secretary-general. I think that is all the committee should interest itselfin, other than the tenure. Even Permanent Secretaries have contracts for three years. Most contracts are actually for three years.When you are appointed on a contractual basis, you serve a three-year period that is renewed maybe once or twice, depending on the situation.So, that is why I said this is a good law as far as tenure of offices is concerned.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, what was your rationale for the four years?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the four years were in the initial amendment we had made on the tenure of the board. So, because we maintained what originally was in the Bill, I would like to concede on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, we retain the three years; that is what he is saying. Is there any problem with the three years? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just want to invite the chairperson and the honourable Leader of the Opposition to think about this. From the experience that some of us may have, three years as a chief executive officer of an institution is a fairly short time. This is because when you come in, it takes time to –(Interjections)– I do not think everybody who comes to head an organisation has the experience and the knowledge of that organisation – (Interjections) – Madam Chair, can I be protected from some hecklers behind me here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, please donot heckle.

MR TASHOBYA: From my own experience, I suppose it is good for an institution and even fair for a person being recruited to know that there will be time for transition to learn the institution. As one stabilizes, again they get into the process of lobbying and looking for another contract. So, I would like to think that if we cannot give five years, we could consider four years. In my opinion, three years is really a fairly short time. I propose four years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do you want a situation where the ex officio and the board all go at the same time? That means there will be no overlap. Who will welcome the others and help them in learning the institution? Why don’t we settle for four years, maybe?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, it is I who proposed the three years. To begin with, I am sure the minister is going to appoint the board, maybe in the next three weeks. I am just giving an example. After that, the board will appoint the CEO of the organisation after advertising. So, there will always be a difference in time because the day the board is appointed is not the same time it will recruit the CEO. It will take some time, may be two weeks or so. So, there will be a difference in period.

Also, Madam Chair, anybody who has done contracts at an advanced level will agree with me that this is a big job and cannot go beyond three years.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, at least I have ever served on a board for two consecutive terms. It would be very bad if the tenure of the CEO elapses at the same time with that of the board. Continuity will not be achieved.So, we are staggering these terms so that in the event that the tenure of the board elapses, at least there will be a technical officer to guide the next board.Since we approved three years for the board, it would be prudent to at least have four years for the CEO.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually I want to encourage the Leader of Opposition to agree and we settle for four years. It will help us to have a “tiding over” period, otherwise you know you can destabilize the institution when everybody is not there. So, let us have the CEO for four years; they can either welcome the others or see them off. Yes, let us settle for four years.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I would like to agree with your plea to the Leader of the Opposition.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, I propose the insertion of (5) (d).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first deal with 14 (2). Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 (2) be amended by inserting the word “four”. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to your amendment, hon. Wafula Oguttu.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Sub clause (5) (d) should read as follows: “having been convicted of a criminal offence.” If somebody is convicted of a criminal offence, they should be dismissed. I am saying this because very often we get people who have been convicted coming back to their jobs.

MR OPOLOT: It is already there. The committee had proposed it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there. I now put the question that clause 14 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee recommends that we amendclause 15 (2) by substituting “three years” with “four years” to harmonise the term with that of the – (Interjections) – Madam Chair, I request for protection against hon. Geoffrey Ekanya because he is taking me back. In clause 15(2), we propose the substitution of “three years” with “four years”. It is a consequential amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have another amendment. In the Bill it says,“There will be a Deputy Secretary-General to the Commission who shall be appointed”. I want to propose that we rephrase that to read as follows: “There shall be a Deputy Secretary-General who will deputise the Secretary-General.” I am saying this because the moment we leave it this way, we are creating wars. Everybody will say that they are bosses in their own capacities. So, it should be made clear that the deputy will deputise the secretary-general. I have already provided the justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will have two bosses appointed by the minister?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I am getting confused. When we say that the deputy secretary-general will deputise the secretary-general, aren’t we repeating ourselves? Can’t we mention something under the duties?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who will appoint the deputy secretary-general, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, again there is another mistake here; they are saying that the Deputy Secretary-General will be appointed by the minister. I proposed that it should read, “There shall be a Deputy Secretary-General to the Commission who will deputise the Secretary-General.” If that is agreed on, then we can move on.

We are saying this because even if the minister appoints, the person will come knowing well that they are second in command to the secretary-general, so that there are no parallel power centres. As much as the other person would be appointed, they would be subordinate to the secretary-general.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Won’t 15 (3) serve that purpose? It says,“The Deputy Secretary-General shall, in the performance of his or her duties, be responsible to the Secretary-General.” Wouldn’t that serve that purpose?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We can then say, “The Deputy Secretary-General will deputise the Secretary-General and shall perform…” – what we are trying to do –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when you say, “be responsible to the Secretary-General”, it means I must answer to the Secretary-General.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, answering is different –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the person to whom I report; I donot report anywhere else.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, you can reportthere, but you are aware that I was also appointed by the minister; I can be responsible to you, but the powers are different. We are equal because the same instrument, which appointed you, is the same which appointed me. So, maybe we can include the word, “deputise”.

MR RUHINDI: It is better to re-cast clause 3 to say, “The Deputy Secretary-General shall deputise for the Secretary-General” and we stop there. That is much clearer because “deputising” has a different connotation from “being responsible to”. Deputising means that in your absence, the other person takes charge but “being responsible to” means an umbrella of many activities and at the end of the day, you are answerable to a particular person. I borrowed a leaf from my own provision that governs me, Article 119Aof the Constitution; it says, “The Deputy Attorney-General shall deputise for the Attorney-General.”

MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I wouldnot want to go into the argument by the Deputy Attorney-General, but my view is that this is a fairly small institution. In my own experience, if you have one person reporting to one person, it means that one of them is likely to be idle. Of course, in the case of the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General, the ministry is very big and involves a lot of responsibilities.

I do not think we even need this section.The details on who takes charge in the absence of the Secretary-General should be left to the board, to provide for deputising. I do not think we need a statutory provision for a deputy secretary-general for a small institution. It could be a recipe for confusion and disagreement within that small organisation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to delete sub clause (3)?

MR TASHOBYA: It should be deleted. The functions of deputising and assistance of the secretary-general should be left to the board.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I am even getting more lost because now my problems are compounded. Initially, I thought the present framing in sub clause (3) would be good. If I took the Attorney-General’s proposal, I thought that beyond deputising, all those other small things including deputising, would be covered under “being responsible to the secretary-general”.

Secondly, I also thought, and I think even now, that UNESCO operates with a human resource manual that stipulates the duties of the officers therein. So I thought that this commission, once it is in place, will provide in their human resource manual the various duties and responsibilities. Even during the recruitment exercise they will say, “We are recruiting a deputy secretary-general to do a, b, c and d.” So, I did not seeso much confusion arising. I am, therefore, inclined to think retrogressively – backward almost – that this particular framing is still the one I want to support.

MR BAKER SSALI: Madam Chair, I concur with hon. Tashobya about deleting this section.First of all, by bringing in a deputy to the secretary-general, it means that since the board sits once in a year, he may not be necessary. Secondly, you will be bringing in another exofficio and the number will rise from nine to 10.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I encourage you to retain all the three provisions. If you remove sub clause (3), I can start reporting to the minister and ignore the secretary-general because I have no obligation to report to the secretary-general.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I have a different view altogether.We are talking of not having a deputy secretary-general but I wonder how many of us do understand the work the commission is going to do. The commission has a number of fields of competences – science, ICT and all that – and I believe all those will be directorates. So before we think of not having a deputy secretary-general – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I do not think anybody is saying that; what we are arguing about is how to phrase the reporting system and the responsibility. Nobody is saying that we should not have.

MR KWEMARA: Okay. Then I agree.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My worry is that if we do not say something about where he reports, he can simply say that his letter was also signed by the minister and he starts reporting directly to the minister.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would support hon. Tashobya but now that you are encouraging we – (Laughter- -then we will go by the Attorney-General’s recommendation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So we amend sub clause (3) to say, “The Deputy Secretary-General shall deputise the Secretary-General.” Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as, amended agreed to.

Clause 16

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we amend clause 16, sub clause (1), by deleting the words “on the advice of the Secretary-General”. Our justification is that recruitment of staff is the mandate of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He should not propose. I think the board should advertise and carry out its own recruitment exercise. Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as, amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes the amendment of clause 17 by inserting the words “and in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.” 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I think we should delete clause 17; that is just a consultant. How can you ask the minister for a one-day consultancy?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will younot need a consultant in culture, education, science at some stage? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: It depends on the period. I do not think we make laws asking the minister to approve the hiring of a consultant. I propose that we delete clause 17.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the Minister? What was the rationale for that?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, that is my problem. Maybe the Minister had good reasons. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Minister what his rationale was for including the consultant. We shall stand over this clause. I want the Minister to tell us why he wants a consultant. Let us go to clause 18.

Clause 17, stood over.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 21 also has consultants; we shall stand over.

Clause 21, stood over

Clause 22

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment to the provision by inserting the words “and in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance and the Minister responsible for public service” immediately after the word “Minister”. The justification is: to involve the core ministries in determining the salary structure of employees.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, did we also stand over clause 18?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we passed that one.

MR MWIRU: Clause 18 seems to give protection to members not to be liable for- I thought it had been stood over that is why-

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stood over clause 17 and clause 21. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I seek your indulgence. I did not stand up because I thought you had stood over clause 18 as well. When you read clause 18, it has a connotation to clause 37; we are insulating them from any liability yet under clause 37 we are even giving them powers to manage property, dispose it off and do anything. Actually, I had a problem with it. 

MR RUHINDI: I think hon. Mwiru has not internalised the provision carefully because it is qualified - those are acts or omissions either committed or omitted to be done in good faith. The expression “in good faith” is very important and key, and it is a question of evidence. If you do not do this, in the public service no one will do anything. 

Clause 23

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR OPOLOT: We are proposing to insert a new provision after subclause (1)(b)to read, “(c) earnings from investments.” The justification is that earnings from investments will form part of the funds of the commission.

Also, delete subclause (2). The justification is that the provision violates Article 154(1)(b) of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Mulongo first and then hon. Ekanya.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, thank you for protecting me from my neighbour who wants to take care of my constituency when I am still here. I just want to get clarification from the chairperson.We can say, “earnings from investments”, granted, but was it part of the allotted functions that the commission can undertake investments? I do not have the Bill with me but I just want to be sure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is one of those we saved.The committee had wanted to delete but we said they are able to acquire property - moveable, immovable etcetera. So they have the capacity to invest. 

MR EKANYA: Recently, when we were passing the Finance Bill- the Uganda Revenue Authority had taken on the role of the collection of all these fees and income that goes to institutions that are established by an Act of Parliament. So, I just want to find out from you, chairperson, what the relationship within that clause is. Can the commission collect fees or information directly or will it go to the Consolidated Fund?

MR OPOLOT: It does not seem to be very clear. Are you trying to say that the proposed law says that if a commission has bought a building and it is earning, then it is Uganda Revenue Authority to collect it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to substitute the words “sound financial principles” with the words, “the laws on the management of public finance and accountability.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I do not know how I will restrain hon. Wafula. He is ahead of me. Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amend subclause (2) by deleting the “last three words”. The justification is: to avoid unnecessary repetition.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: On clause 26, I wish to insert the words “in consultation with the Accountant-General”- “The board, in consultation with the Accountant-General, shall open and maintain accounts.” 

Justification: We have had experiences where some of these agencies of Government open up very many accounts and hide money.This is also irregular because this is very wide power to the board to open accounts and deposit money from taxpayers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is a reasonable-

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, the issue of opening accounts and maintaining those accounts should be in the regulations and not in the Bill. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chair. To the best of my knowledge, there is a procedure on how a government department opens a bank account, and I know that the Accountant-General is one of the people that will be sanctioned. So, it will be irregular for anybody who does that without going through that procedure.We donot need to put it here again because there is already a laid down procedure on how a government agency can open an account.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, how did the old KCC open 156 accounts? 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is an administrative order from the Accountant-General with effect from the end of this year that all government agencies and institutions must open their accounts within the central bank. They have been directed to close all the accounts in other ministries. Again, if any institution is going to open an account, it must get written authority from the Accountant-General. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what he is saying. Honourablemembers, the issue of the accounts is very serious. When the Nigerian finance minister, Ngozi, first came into office, she found I think 120 accounts in the mineral sector. So she closed them. When she left, they opened themagain. So, she has been closing. It is a very serious matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I come with experience. What hon. Mawanda is saying is that every Accountant-General will come with his or her own regulation; some will ignore them and others will allow them. 

Project accounts were not even in the Bank of Uganda; they were in commercial banks and that is where institutions were making a kill. So, he is saying that they are moving them to the central bank, but an administrative order can easily be rejected. So, we want to make a law. These people are going to get money from Government and the donors –(Interjection)–Yes, so we shouldnot say “may” but “shall”.

We have said that it is a body corporate, so they will say that as a body corporate they are not under the central government and they can open their accounts and sue and be sued. So, we are trying to protect this.We have given them powers to be a body corporate, so we should tighten them on money - all accounts should be opened with the authority of the Accountant-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, in view of what we have been experiencing, I think there is no harm in stating it in the law, so that everybody is clear that unless I have that certificate from the Accountant-General, I cannot open that account. 

The other amendment was grammatical, to correct the English.Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, under clause 27, the committee recommends that we amend sub clause (1) by deleting the word “given”. The justification is that the word “given” is redundant. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, in fact clause 27 violates Article 155 of the Constitution. It is only Parliament to give powers to borrow. Government has been violating the Constitution by borrowing from commercial banks and our focus has always been only on approving external borrowing. If we now let this pass, then tomorrow we cannot even question that. So, we need to reword this. 

They should have the opportunity to borrow but it should be in the annual budget, the work plan, and Parliament should givethem the power. Madam Chairperson, domestic debt is very huge and that is why there is scarcity of liquidity. Government is not paying and everybody -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is for meeting obligations like rent, etcetera. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I am not very sure. I need to be guided. Do all bodies corporate first seek approval of Parliament before they borrow? I need to be guided by those who are more competent about the management of such bodies.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.My colleague, the chairperson, is a member of the Public Accounts Committee. You have seen how some universities have gone ahead to borrow and they actually donot make it part of their budget.Because they have powers to borrow, some universities have been borrowing even as part of the revenue for the financial year. 

What we are saying is that if they are to borrow and the Ministry of Finance would have to pass it through Parliament, it would form part of the appropriation to be voted for by Parliament. We would know what the disposed budget is and we would know that part of this money is going to befrom a loan from the bank.However, if we leave it open, even after appropriation this entity cango to the bank - after all, the Act allows them - and the board can resolve that they go and borrow money for any other purpose. 

This is why we want to limit them so that when they are borrowing, we make it in consonance with the Constitution, so that any borrowing has to pass through the ministry and Parliament.So, even if it is borrowing, it is voted by Parliament, just like the loan requests that are brought to Parliament and the loans form part of the sectors’ budget; we just show that this money is going to come from this source. They are not going to borrow outside their budget; they only borrow to finance their budget for a particular financial year. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We also need to differentiate between the forms of borrowing because some agencies which collect NTR at times ask for permission from the Ministry of Finance to retain part of the NTR to be able to meet certain obligations.That is some form of borrowing. 

So, if an agency is going to ask for permission, will it have to come again for some little money to meet an emergency? Will they have to come to Parliament to be able to be authorised to retain that kind of money?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I am also a bit confused about the matter of borrowing.If we talk about borrowing or getting loans from banks, can we again say through appropriation?This is because you first go to the bank and get assured that you will get the money; so, when do you come to Parliament? Secondly, there is some short-term borrowing of six months, one year, three months to meet your obligations or emergencies. That borrowing is there.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We appropriate funds here for specific items and votes. So, why are you borrowing money outside the budget?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not cripple the institution because we get salary here as individuals but we also borrow money. So if you are going to tie the hands – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let us make it clear. One, if you make a proposal, and I know my brother David Bahati will agree, finance prepares the budget and the budget is approved by whatever process you have gone through.It clearly shows the salary for the organisation will be amount X, it will show the expenses etc. 

Now, where will this money be got from – from the sale of coffee or from Government? In this case, if it is Government which is going to give the money, it must approve that it will give them Shs 1,000,000, but their expenditure is Shs 1,200,000. So, you have been authorised to go and borrow the difference of Shs 200,000. The process is very simple. This is under the ministry of education – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourableminister, under what circumstances would UNESCO borrow money to meet its obligations?

DR BATARINGAYA: It is normally short term, not long term. They cannot even borrow money for construction. It is just in case there is some deficit. I will give an example. 

We have bodies like universities; the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act empowers the councils to borrow. Even for our secondary schools, you have seen the board of governors; when there is a problem, they go and negotiate with the bank and get some little money to enable them feed the students. That is short term, and they pay back.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I seek clarification, Mr Minister. You currently have a department doing the work of UNESCO; which bank do they borrow from to run their activities? You said there is something like UNESCO already in your ministry, which bank do they borrow from to carry out their activities?

DR BATARINGAYA: Of course, if they have to do it, they have to go to these commercial banks in Uganda.  Currently, they are under vote 013. 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourablemembers, the source of the Nile was declared a UNESCO heritage site. Supposing UNESCO wanted to do certain things at the source of the Nile in the middle of the year in order to enhance it, what would happen? Would they still have to come here? 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The UNESCO commission is going to have a strategic plan; it is going to develop a work plan and a budget. What that means is that when they plan that this financial yearthey shall undertake these activities, they will say, “according to our work plan, we need Shs 100 billion.” If they have Shs 90 billion, how do they get the balance? Since the Act allows them to borrow, they can borrow to finance the deficit on their budget and show that part of the money will be borrowed. How do they pay back? They can say that part of the NTR which they raise will be used to pay back the borrowed money. 

I say so, Madam Chairperson, because a certain university - I will not mention it for purposes of this record - misconstrued this section.Even after money was appropriated to them, they just continued borrowing and using it in the university, claiming that the Act allows them to borrow. So we are saying, they should be allowed to meet their budget –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member holding the Floor and the Attorney-General can help us as lawyers. When the Constitution talks about approval of Parliament in borrowing, does that refer to external borrowing, operational borrowing, getting things on credit – what exactly does the Constitution say?

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, even before the Attorney-General comes in, I just want to know what is worrying us. You get to know that this university has borrowed and the next thing is that the people who lent the money actually want to take away the university’s land. This is a public university and this forms part of a public debt. So if we do not approve their borrowing here and they get stuck with repayment, we are expected to draw from the Consolidated Fund to repay. 

If they borrow and we have not sanctioned the borrowing, then we will risk having institutions either wound up or mortgaged. I think the principle of allowing them borrow is not in contention; it is the procedure of how they will borrow.That is why we are saying it should be with approval. That is the only point of contention. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the provisions of the Constitution are clear. Under Article 159 it says, “Power of Government to borrow or lend
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source.

(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament…” – like the one we are making. 


Clause 8 says, “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe”.So if by operation of an Act of Parliament you authorise an institution to borrow, it can be sustained under Article 159.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister in charge of UNESCO is required to consult with the Minister of Finance; there are two ministers involved in this borrowing. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the Local Government Act says local governments can borrow with the approval of the Minister of Local Government. I do not want to mention the district, but some of the local governments borrow money that is not in their annual work plan or schedule of activities and that is why we have been having supplementaries. They can do internal reallocation in case they need money. 

So I want to pledge with you, Madam Chairperson, that Parliament should not give this power to this institution to borrow money. If they want to borrow money, they can come for supplementary, they can create contingency and so forth. Otherwise, there is a huge domestic debt. 

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We need to separate two issues. Having the law does not necessarily mean you will not have people breach it. So, even if we propose that we subject the commission to come to Parliament to protect them, it may not even work. They may be subjected to come to Parliament and they still breach the law. To me, we are straightjacketing the commission; let us have some form of flexibility. I believe these procedures are already enough. 

Now, I want us to look at another scenario; assuming these people are supposed to attend a UNESCO conference maybe in Paris and the appropriation we made has not yet materialised, do they still have to come to Parliament for approval so that they can travel? That is a very small thing, which they can do to enable their work go on and they sort it out later. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this afternoon we were congratulating the SheCranes.They left without money; we had to send money after.They had to go to Singapore with no money. So let us not cripple this institution. We might kill this baby.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate hon. Kwemara’s view, but he is operating under the assumption that these entities have no strategic plan or work plan. We are agreeable to borrowing in order to help support the budget of the institution. In one of the universities, they simply claimed that the law allows them to borrow, but we say that is only as far as fencing their budget is concerned. They borrowed money that was not even related to their strategic plan or work plan. You can only borrow within the mandate of fulfilling your budget. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: isn’t the existence of two ministers in this borrowing sufficient? 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, we are making very dangerous assumptions.The first is that these people will borrow without planning or that they will borrow to execute functions that are not necessarily mandated to them. Who said that is a fact? The fact is that we have two responsible ministers who will demand that they justify why they want to borrow. So, the point we are labouring to make is that we should not make it too strict and suffocate the operations of the commission. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you cannot anticipate everything that UNESCO is going to do; you are going to –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right, but you know why we included the Accountant-General; we could have left it open to them to open accounts anywhere they wanted. The reason is that this commission is more or less dependent on Government of Uganda.

Let me give you this example. Before I joined co-operatives, I never knew that the Commissioner of Co-operatives had powers to advise the board to sell or borrow. So he advised the people in Bugisu to sell all the prime plots in town and they sold. Do you know what they used the money for - holding meetings, traveling up and down, holding parties and it was spent like that – (Interjections) –Do you mean Bugisu is not in Uganda? These are the most intelligent people but they did that. So, Madam Chair – (Interruptions)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Can I help here, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Ssebunya.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If the matter is to consult or just have that money appropriated, then we can put a rider to say “to meet their budgetary provision.” That would help.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why do you assume it is only budgetary problems? They may have emergencies for which they would require money. Honourable members, you really want to cripple this institution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, it should read as follows: “The board shall, with the approval of…” If you use the word “may”, it means they can or cannot go there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, then let us use the word “shall” so that they must go to the ministers. I now put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have now put a condition. They cannot borrow without – It is now “shall”.Donot narrow their obligations because they donot know what their needs will be. I now put the question that clause 27, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee recommends that we amend sub clause (1) of clause 29 by deleting the words “within three months”; also, by inserting at the end of the provision the words, “in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act.”The justification is: for clarity and precision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you want the three months? Why don’t you want it to prepare and submit before the financial year?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, clause 29 (1)reads as follows: “The Secretary-General shall, within three months before the commencement of each financial year, cause to be prepared and submitted to the Board for its approval estimates of the income and expenditure of the Commission.” 

The reason we are proposing the deletion of three months is because the budget process usually begins earlier than three months from the close of the financial year.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, we have already passed that clause. The Attorney-General didnot read that Article 159 conclusively. There is another clause under Article 159 and it is categorical. You borrow but the money must be paid from the Consolidated Fund account. You borrow money which must be paid back and Parliament sets terms and conditions –(Interjection)-Yes, because that one is related to what we passed. 

So, the advice of the Attorney-General was piecemeal and we have already taken a decision that violates the Constitution. Clause (8) says that Parliament must set the terms and conditions. The terms and conditions should have been, borrow and the money should be put in the Consolidated Fund account and declared.This is because at end of it, it must be repaid after appropriation by Parliament. 

So, if this institution just borrows money for a trip to send Ekanya abroad and that money is not reflected anywhere in the Consolidated Fund account but the next day we appropriate to pay, there will be a conflict.So, can I ask the Attorney-General to categorically study Article 159 to help us take a proper decision?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are still on the three months. Why do you want to delete the three months?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I would like to request that we critically read that. It says, “Within three months before the commencement of each financial year, the Secretary-General shall…” You are saying within three months but we would like this done even before because the budget process begins earlier than that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean the budget process of the UNSECO commission or of the whole country?

MR OPOLOT: This is money which is supposed to be appropriated by Parliament and you know that the budget process begins earlier than three months to the beginning of the financial year. So, if you bring this three months to the beginning of the financial year, you are bound to distort or miss out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but are you moving ahead of us? Are you legislating by anticipation? What is the existing law? When are estimates prepared?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I am even proposing that we delete the entire clause- (Interjections) - because my colleague, hon. Wangolo, has just voted for this entity to borrow and spend that way they want;so that means they donot even need to submit any estimates. What we were saying before was that if they have a budget and they were borrowing to finance the budget, they would know what would come from the central Government and from elsewhere. But if they can borrow and spend, then we donot even need this clause. That is my proposed amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think your amendment is in bad faith. (Laughter) Yes, because you are assuming that they will be borrowing everyday yet they may borrow once in 10 years.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, clause 29 as it is is a standard clause, which gives timelines for accounts. It is a standard clause that can be retained as it appears in the draft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amend clause 31 by substituting the words “accepted accounting principles” with the words “the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.”The justification is that the provision lacks clarity as it stands and can easily be subjected to abuse.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chair, accounts are prepared according to international standards, so we shouldnot tag the nature of accounts only to the Public Finance and Accountability Act. It should be generally accepted accounting principles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we already approved a similar provision. Are those principles in the Public Finance and Accountability Act different from the usual ones? Are they different?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we are making a mistake. Did you talkof the Public Finance and Accountability Act?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, accounts are prepared according to accounting standards. What we are saying here is that the preparation should conform to generally accepted accounting standards. When you bring in only the Public Finance and Accountability Act, then you are only talking about cash. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I agree with the two contributors that the Public Finance and Accountability Act is limited while the generally accepted accounting standards are much broader than the Act. So, I also propose that we restrict it to the generally accepted standards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, does that mean we may have to revisit the other provisions we already passed?

MR BAHATI: Yes, Madam Chair.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, it should read: “will cause to be prepared an annual financial statement in accordance to the generally accepted accounting standards.”  That is all.The moment we say “generally accepted accounting standards”, it says under IS 19, if you depart from the generally accepted standards, you just state the reasons why you have departed.

MR KWEMARA: I need help here. We are talking about principles and standards, which one do we take -principles, standards or both?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is “accepted accounts principles” not enough? (Interjection) Okay, we leave it as it is.I put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to

Clause 32

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we amendsub clause (3) by replacing the words “and any” with the words “or an”. Justification: grammatical correction and for clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read the sentence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, “…by the Auditor-General or an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General”. So, you remove “and any”. The reason is this: The auditor he appoints will auditon his behalf and so it will be the Auditor-General to report. If we go with what you are saying,we shall be trying to put a leeway. So, Madam Chair, I suggest that we delete the words “and any”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know where you are; please read the sentence again because you said you were amending sub clause (3).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I am saying in sub clause (3), it should read, “The Auditor-General or…” Remove “and any”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee recommends that clause 33 be amended as follows:
a) 	Amend sub clause (2) by deleting the words “and the report of the Auditor-General on those statements” appearing at the end of the provision.   

b) 	Redraft sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The Commission shall submit to the Minister the audited financial statements of the Commission together with the report referred to in section (1).” Justification: For clarity and to correct a procedural anomaly; it is not the duty of the board to submit the report of the Auditor-General. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that the commission has no access to the report of the Auditor-General?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, my brother is making a mistake.The responsibility of the board is to prepare accounts. Management is the one that keeps records and prepares. So, the one who signs the accounts is the board chairpersonand it is his responsibility to submit to the minister.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, we know that the Auditor-General reports to Parliament.His reports come here, so is it the -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The commission cannot possess those reports. The Auditor-General’s report cannot go to the commission; it comes to us. So they cannot submit it the minister until it has come through us and then we have the treasury memorandum from the ministry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are right. I think we have been making mistakes by saying that the boards submit reports to the ministers. That was wrong. The right thing is that as soon as the Auditor-General audits, because he is auditing on our behalf, he does not need to report to the minister.The moment he does that, it means he reports to the minister.We should correct that here; the board shall – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is clause 33(2) that we need to address -“The Commission shall submit to the Minister, together with the report referred to, the audited financial statements of the Commission and the report of the Auditor-General…” No, they cannot; the report comes to us and not the commission and so they cannot submit it anywhere.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, that is why we are saying that we are amending sub clause (2) by deleting the words “and the report of the Auditor-General on those statements” appearing at the end of the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since we are talking like this, we should also put the Auditor-General here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the commission cannot have access to the Auditor-General’s report because he reports to us. That is why they are deleting this; it was an error in the Bill. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I thought clause 33 is about annual reports and not the financial reports, which are in clause 32. These are operational reports about heritage sites and reports to the UN and so forth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you want us to delete it?

MR EKANYA: We should remove the Auditor-General from these annual reports because they are operational reports.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is exactly what the committee is saying. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amendclause 34 sub clause (3) by inserting the word “and” immediately after the word “corporate” and punctuate the provision by inserting a comma after the word, “official seal”. Justification: grammatical correction and for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amendclause 35 by inserting immediately after the word “post” the words “or through electronic modes of communication.”Justification: There are now other recognised modes of communication through which notice or documents can be served.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amendclause 36 by inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “(2) A statutory instrument made under this section shall be laid before Parliament.” Justification: For information to Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, when does the instrument become operational? I think before it becomes operational, it should be laid before Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you will have to add another sub clause that says that the instrument will come into effect upon being laid before Parliament or something like that.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, we have had a problem with this condition before because we have argued here also that sometimes we could be on recess and yet the regulations have to come into effect. So, we did earlier agree that what is important is to have it laid before Parliament for information but not to condition it for its operation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes the following amendments under clause 37: 
a) 	Amend sub clause (2) by replacing the word “Ministry” with “Minister”. Justification: It is the minister who approves.

b) 	Delete “and in his or her opinion” appearing in sub clause (2). The justification is that the Minister should always act in relation to the provisions of the Act.

c) 	Amend sub clause (3) by inserting the words, “of this Act” immediately after the word “commencement” appearing in line three. Justification: For clarity. 
d) 	Delete sub-clause (4). The justification is: to avoid retrospective application of the law.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I would like to propose that immediately after “all property” we insert “except for land”.The justification being that land is governed under Article 239 of the Constitution and all land is vested in the Uganda Land Commission. What an entity like that can do is to register itself on the encumbrance page as the user entity. 

If we do not do that and land is held under this entity, it can bedisposed of because the board will have the power to dispose of the land just like we had with the Uganda Investment Authority. They disposed of their property and they went and rented premises and when we were dealing with it under COSASE, we realised that they did nothing wrong. The board had the powers,they sat, made a resolution and they disposed it off. Actually, we found nothing wrong with what they did because they had the powers to do so. 

Here we are saying that if we do not exclude land, it will be unconstitutional because it would conflictwith Article 239, which vests any land in Uganda in Uganda Land Commission. From the way it is, it is provided that all property which belongs to the commission at the commencement of this Act was vested in the Government for use.If you transfer all of it, including land, to this entity, it will have the powers to dispose of it; whereas if it is vested in the Uganda Land Commission, they can be registered as a user entity on the part of encumbrance and the title would be with the Uganda Land Commission for custody. 

That is why I propose that we say, “all property except for land, which before the commencement of this Act…” This would mean that we are excluding the land because land is governed under Article 239 and is supposed to be held by the Uganda Land Commission. What the UNESCO commission can only do is to have itself registered as the user entity on the encumbrance page. Thank you.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you understood it, Attorney-General?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I believe even other assets. Motor vehicles are also the responsibility of Ministry of Works. So, I think there should be another- Land is good, but other items must be vested in the Secretary to the Treasury. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers,“subject to all interests, liabilities, charges, obligations and trusts affecting their property”; doesn’t that cover what you are talking about? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, what I am saying is that apparently, in most of the Auditor-General’s reports, he is picking audit queries on land.All these entities which own land in their own right are sitting in their board meetings and disposing of the land and yet the spirit of Article 239 was that land is held in trust for Ugandans.

If a user entity, for instance, wants the land to belong to them, they are registered on the encumbrance page. I can give an example of Kyambogo University. What they did was that they subdivided two plots of Kyambogo University land and they just saw people coming to enclose part of the land. 

Article 239 of the Constitution says, “Functions of the Uganda Land Commission. The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament.”

We are accepting that we can transfer all other properties, but when it comes to land, because it is supposed to be held by Uganda Land Commission by virtue of Article 239, we accept that this be transferred to  the other party. The Uganda Land Commission should hold land but the UNESCO commission can be registered on the encumbrance page as the user entity, so that for any transaction with that land, UNESCO must give consent. In case we do not do that, we shall have the scenario like that of Kyambogo where they had their title but they just woke up in the morning when two plots had been severed. Then they were arguing that the registered proprietor under the RCA has powers even to cause a subdivision on the land.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think that is harmless. Chair, do you really have a serious objection to protecting land?

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I have no objection although the examples given by my honourable colleague are outright cases of fraud. However, I have no objection here.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, clause 37(3) mentions debt, liabilities - Why should we put debts and liabilities here? I thought it was automatic; any debt or liability that any succession institution inherits is automatic. The same applies to No.4 - any legal proceeding. You cannot legislate against legal proceedings. So, Mr Chairman, why do you think (3) and (4) are necessary?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you should ask the Minister. This Bill belongs to the Minister not to the Chairperson. 

MR EKANYA: Okay, hon. Minister, why should we put all contracts here? Supposing today as we are sitting here, people are signing contracts without the approval of the Attorney-General and we are saying “all contracts”? Right now people are incurring debts and we are saying “all debts”. 

There are normal procedures of transferring and inheriting liabilities of succession institutions under the Succession Act and under the Administrator-General’s procedures. Why do we need it here? Maybe the Attorney-General can advise the Minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If there is a contract for rent, for example, where do you want it to go? If there is a subsisting agreement for a tenancy of five years, where do you want it to go?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, under normal government procedure, even if the Government of President Museveni is overthrown, it does not require the Constitution to indicate that the Government that will be headed by hon. Ekanya will inherit those debts. That is normal practice worldwide. 

Any successive institution that inherits the successor takes over liabilities and assets, provided they conform to the laws. As we may be sitting here, some people may be signing contracts which have not been approved by the Attorney-General because all contracts must be approved by the Attorney-General. 

Now we are talking of a legal proceeding; you cannot legislate against a legal proceeding in court. Why should we put it here? It says, “any legal proceeding by or government in relation to any act of commission under the ministry responsible for education”; whether you put it here or you do not put it, this is a redundant clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, it is not as simple as that. Hon. Ekanya, I know your district has not been divided but where districts have been subdivided, the assets go to the new district and the liabilities remain with the old district. That is what happens. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if we are dividing assets, we should divide even liabilities. So, what hon. Ekanya is bringing up is vital. First, this has been a department in the Ministry of Education; it may have some domestic arrears and it should go with its own share of the domestic arrears. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is what the provision is saying. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, what is hon. Ekanya saying?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya wants them to be free of obligation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, they should move with their arrears. Hon. Ekanya, you are making a mistake. They should go with their obligations. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes the following amendments to clause 38:
a) 	Insert a new sub-clause at the beginning of the provision to read as follows: “(1) The minister may, in consultation with the Board, transfer employees of the ministry responsible for education who are currently directly responsible for the day-to-day activities of UNESCO to the Commission at the commencement of this Act.” The justification is: to cater for the transfer of employees.

b) 	Amend –(Interruptions)– Madam Chair, hon. Wafula is intimidating me. Amend the current subclause (1) by substituting the words “similar or better terms to those enjoyed by those employees before the transfer” with the words, “terms determined by the Board.” The justification is that the Act grants powers of determining the terms of service to the board.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, that is suicidal. I do not know what the committee is suggesting. What I would prefer is what was written in the Bill; it is sufficient -“The employees of the ministry responsible for education whose services are transferred to the commission at the commencement of that commission shall be engaged on a similar or better terms of those enjoyed by…”The board has to be left to employ the people in the new commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable members, when we were considering the Higher Education Bill, we rejected any attempt to institutionalise people in those positions and this is what this Bill is trying to do. Why don’t we have a new –

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I need to be guided because these are staff under the department of UNESCO. How do we handle their staff?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, again I come with experience. When we were forming Uganda Revenue Authority, staff who were taken to Uganda Revenue Authority had to do interviews; the board interviewed them. The reason was simple: there were bad habits and people could carry on with their bad habits.Some of the conditions included declaring your assets, having a good record and being capable of working, not just for the sake of it. Otherwise, you can take on inefficiencies if you go by this; in short, you are converting the department into a commission and all the inefficiencies, all the bad manners will go to the commission. Even then, these employees must be subjected to interviews first of all by the board. 

I want say here that what you are doing, my chairman, is wrong. I want to propose that the employees of the ministry responsible for education who want to transfer their services will be subjected to an interview by the board.Those who qualify will go and those who donot qualify can be retained by the ministry or retrenched.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are in the ministry; they are already employed by the ministry. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are paid by the ministry. If you do this, from what I see, this law is for the guy sitting on the bench across there. (Laughter)

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, since we have done this before, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We also need to amend then the existing one and say,“employees of the ministry responsible who are transferred to the commission shall – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, “employees of the ministry responsible for education who want to join the commission shall be subjected to interviews by the board…” – (Interjections) – “…terms and conditions of the board.”

MR OPOLOT: Yes, “of the board” because that actually presupposes even interviews. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, otherwise this will be very dangerous. Secondly, if you do that, then (2) doesnot exist because when you go there, you have to decide that you are retiring so that they pay you your gratuity or that you were a pensioner so that you join the pension scheme. So, this doesnot apply. So, the moment you change the upper one, then (2) and (3) donot apply. Madam Chairperson, that is why people like me or hate me because I tell the truth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But (3) is important because if your pension rights are not mentioned, they can disappear. We can do away with (2) but (3) is important to secure the pension rights.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the moment you leave service, you may be a pensioner or may be subject to gratuity if you have not attained the pension time. So, this is not needed. There is already a standing regulation that the moment you leave service at a certain age, these are your rights. The other new board can decide to determine how they will always be remunerating their people at retirement. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, should we only say,“clause 38(1) as amended”?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we have seen petitions in this Parliament about pension and gratuity - UEB and many others. They have not been paid up to now. So, we must put some rider on pensions. They are talking about pension rights under the Pensions Act. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, when these people retire, they will be under public service. So, automatically, there is a law which applies to them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you formulate 38(1) so that we finish? Yes, Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: At first I was being convinced by the approach taken, that these employees already employed for purposes of UNESCO be considered or vetted before redeployment; that is principally correct and I donot think I would object to that.However, the minister may have to be very mindful of the implications because it could actually amount to a restructuring.It could tantamount to laying off people who would have to be paid their packages, for instance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but they are employees of the ministry in the first place. It is if they want to leave that they will opt out. If they are leaving the ministry and going to UNESCO, for example, they will be subjected to an interview because they have left the ministry willingly to go somewhere else. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have what we call a restructuring process. The moment your office is abolished, you are compensated and you leave. That is why we say interviews are very vital; sometimes you sieve and bring the good items or sometimes you bring the wrong items. 

I am sure the ones who drafted the law know very well that the department is going away; it is becoming a commission. So, those who will pass will go on. Those who will fail, if there is no gap to absorb them in the ministry, automatically will be out. You cannot give the minister powers to say that he has to tell people to go there; what will the purpose of the board be? Someone will come and say, “I came under the minister’s instructions; I am above the board”.That person will become very unruly. So, even the most competent ones must be subjected to interviews otherwise –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, just in short, we are not contradicting each other. He said in case one does not succeed or does not get reengaged in the ministry, then they are compensated. What I was saying is that the minister should be mindful of that aspect, in case there is need for any compensation to be paid. That is all –(Interjections)– no, not in the law. He has to be mindful because it has financial implications. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please formulate 38(1) because we need to finish.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, public service will take care of retrenchment. Retrenchment happens every day; do not get worried. It is not his money. 

It should read, “The employees of the ministry responsible for education who want to join the Commission shall be subjected to terms and conditions as prescribed by the board.”

MR MULONGO: I know my colleague speaks very nice English but instead of saying “who want to join” we would say, “who would wish to transfer their services”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, “who wish to join the Commission”. 

THE CHARIPERSON: Yes, “who wish to join the Commission will be subjected to the recruitment processes of the board.” Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amendthe Schedule as follows:

a) 	Amend sub clause 1(1) by substituting the words, “three times in a year” with the words, “at least once every three months”. This is a consequential amendment and for clarity. 

b) 	Redraft sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The chairperson mayat any time convene a special meeting of the Board if requested to do so in writing by at least five members of the Board.” The justification is: to grant the board some level of autonomy. 

c) 	Redraft sub clause (3) to read as follows: “Meetings of the Board shall be convened by a twoweeks’ notice in writing except that a shorter notice may be given for a special meeting.” Justification: for clarity. 

d) 	Amend clause 5 by deleting all the words appearing after the word “member” on line three. The justification: to avoid endorsing an illegality. 

e) 	Amend clause 6, sub clause (1) by deleting the words “which falls”, appearing on line three. The justification is: to correct a grammatical error and for proper wording of the legislation. 

f) 	Insert a new provision immediately after sub clause (3)(b) to read as follows: “The failure of any member of the board to disclose an interest in any contract or proposed contract or any matter before the board shall render the decision void and that member shall be relieved of his or her duties as a member of the board.” The justification is: to provide for penalties for non-disclosure. 

g) 	Add the following at the crossreference: “The Budget Act, 2006”and “Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003”.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, under regulation or rule 5 of the Schedule - validity of proceedings not affected by vacancy –the committee is proposing to delete everything after the word “member”. The expression reads, “or by reason that a person not entitled took part in its proceedings”.Their argument is that this would be endorsing an illegality. 

If I were to follow their reasoning, they could also have deleted, “or by any defect in the appointment or qualification of a member”. Now that they retained that one, I do not see the reason why they are deleting that last part. 

My view, Madam Chairperson, is that this is not a question of illegality.This is protecting the third parties who would have engaged with the board on the basis of the proceedings of the board.The illegalities within can be handled on their own merit but the third parties will have been protected. I think that is the essence and the usefulness of the whole clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is actually protecting the proceedings of the board.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the issue of a defect in the appointment of a member can be beyond the influence of the board. But the fact that a person not entitled took part in its proceedings, really –

It is like if you allowed a stranger to come and participate in this House; you have the control over who comes into this House but if someone who happened to miss senior six or its equivalent came here and participated for some days, or months or years, we cannot annul the proceedings of this House. However, if someone known not to be party to this House came and participated, they can be questioned. That is why we are proposing such an amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But supposing you invite an expert witness to participate in the proceedings; what do you do?

MR OPOLOT: That person at that level would be entitled to participate because there must be a provision allowing such a person to participate. The problem we have in Uganda is that someone will bring in his or her people to take decisions on behalf of the board and they walk away after making such decisions yet the law says you cannot annul such a decision. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Schedule 1(1), the committee has proposed three months.I thought we should have, at the end, “discharge of business three times a year” as opposed to once every three months.It should be at least three times a year rather than once every three months. Supposing you do not meet in three months, that means you would have violated this Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If they meet once every three months, that would mean they would meet four times in a year. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, supposing in the entire year you only sit around December, when the year is about to end, and you sit on 14th, 16thand 18thDecember because you want to meet this requirement? We must be careful with this issue of sitting three times a year. We should space them and maybe say you must sit quarterly – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can then say, “at least once every four months”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes; otherwise, this can be very dangerous.People can decide to sit towards Christmas time because they want some money for Christmas. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you meant they should sit three times, then you can say “once every four months”.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, once every four months.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I do not know how we are moving on this schedule, but I had a comment on the new provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 1 of Schedule one and it has been amended by hon. Werikhe. Is that okay, honourable chair? They sit once every four months?

MR OPOLOT: We said once every three months, so there is no problem with that. I think he is actually repeating what we already said.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, three times in a year is not the same.Once every three months means you have got to meet four times in a year, which is different from three times in a year. So, you decide. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we are amending sub clause 1(1) by substituting the word “three times in a year” with the word“at least every three months.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, now they will sit four times in a year.

MR OPOLOT: At least four times in a year, if you put it that way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes; they must now sit four times in a year. Is that your amendment?

MR OPOLOT: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, again there is a problem with that provision. The moment we say, “at least” it means they can even sit many times. So, we can say that they will sit once every quarter –(Interjections)– Please, listen to me. What this means is that they will meet every quarter, but there might be special meetings. We should say that the board shall sit once every quarter but they could sit for more times if there appears to be urgent business to handle.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is already provided for under sub clause (2). So, you decide; do you want them to sit once every quarter or not?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, they should sit once every quarter and that should be mandatory. We should make those four sittings mandatory and the others special sittings.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. If I wished to borrow the expressions by hon. Nandala-Mafabi about experience being brought on board – We have served on various boards and it is wrong for us to restrict the meetings to once a quarter, for example. We should allow flexibility. There could be circumstances that would demand that the board meets a couple of times even in a given quarter. So, when we use the expression “at least once”, it gives them a window to be able to meet, if it is necessary, more than once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So, do we take the proposal by the chairperson of the committee of at least once every three months? But also take note of the fact that the special meetings have been catered for under sub clause (2). Does anyone have anything on sub clause (3) or (4)? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have something on sub clause (4).

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is about the chairperson presiding –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, but also in the absence of both the chairperson and the deputy, the members present may appoint a member – Madam Chair, when you look at page 8, clause 7 (7) says that the members of the board shall elect one person from among their number who shall be the vice chair of the board.

What I am saying is that the moment there is a vice chair, you cannot again say that when they get to the meeting, they again elect another person, for example hon. Simon Mulongo because he looks good, to chair the meeting; you cannot do that when there is a vice chair.So, what we should say here is that the vice chair shall always chair the meetings in the absence of the chairperson and that in the absence of the two, the members present will have the leeway to elect a chairperson of the meeting from among themselves.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “And in the absence of either the chair and the vice chair” - if you could add that, it would solve the problem. That is when they would be eligible to appoint a chair of the meeting from amongst themselves; only if both are absent. We have agreed on that. Is there anything on 2 and 3 on quorum and notice of meeting?

MR BAHATI: I would like to seek clarification. The chairperson is suggesting that (3) (b) should readas follows: “The failure ofany member of the Board to disclose an interest in any contract or proposed contract or any matter before the board shall render the decision void and that member shall be relieved of his or her duties as a member of the Board.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are still on 3.

MR BAHATI: That is (3) (b).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have something on 2, the quorum. 

MR BAHATI: Oh! Sorry, Ithink I went ahead of time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I knew you were dozing a bit. Madam Chair, it says here that the quorum of the board should be two-thirds of the members. If we take on that, it is going to be mathematically complicated.If a third of Parliament can take a decision, why should we restrict these people?We can saythat the quorum of the meeting should be maybe a half; two-thirds is so high. 

You will realise that the people supposed to attend these meetings are representatives of ministries and you know that many of these people are allergic to travelling. So, when all of them are out of the country, the meeting will never take place. It is for that reason that I now propose that the quorum be half of the members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, do you have a problem with that? You are saying the half should comprise people with voting powers. Let us add that.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, we are referring to members of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, suppose one of them is the Secretary-General?

MR OPOLOT: Okay, the ex officio?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR OPOLOT: Okay, then that is fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, let us add that phrase on voting powers before we go to 3. Is there anything in 3, 4, and 5? Hon. Bahati, you had an interest in 6.

MR BAHATI: I just wanted to know whether it is possible to qualify this interest we talked about here. If a member had an interest in any contract or proposed contract or any matter before the board, is it legally right? Maybe we could qualify it because somebody could have good interests.Does this mean that all interest is usually in bad faith? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you disclose it.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, most of the provisions I have seen on this matter will refer to pecuniary interests.Interest, the way it is, is very broad. Certainly, if you are discussing something, you naturally have an interest in it in one way or another. So, the use of the word “pecuniary” is okay.

MR MULONGO: I would like some clarification, Madam Chair. I could have a candidate who is my wife but I am also a member of the board; that is not pecuniary. So, if we just restrict this to pecuniary interest then we will have a problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we should say “pecuniary or other interests”, so that we can cover both the money and hon. Wafula’s wife. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, on this it is true that there should be pecuniary interest. However, such processes are very interesting. I will give an example of interviews.You could have five board members interviewing candidates and giving marks before getting averages. Now, one of these gentlemen could declarethat it is his wife coming in next. That person will of course be required to go out and yes, he goes out but because he wants his wife to qualify, he could have been giving fewer marks to the other candidates to pave way for her.

What I am trying to say here is that if a board has a pecuniary or any other interest, they should not participate in the whole exercise because if they do, a negotiation can take place. Hon. Simon Mulongo has a wife, hon. Werikhe has a cousin sister and they agree that “I will jump out when my wife is about to come in, but you know what to do and you will go out when your cousin comes in and I will see what to do”. 

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the Bill already provides that a member who makes a disclosure under sub paragraph (1) shall not: (a) be present during any deliberations of the board with respect to that matter; (b) take part in any decision of the board with respect to that matter. So, I would like to think that the concern of the honourable Leader of the Opposition is already catered for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Ok, honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 6, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On cross-referencing, they have included the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act but they have left out the PPDA Act and yet you mentioned it. You should have also included the Penal Code because you are talking about crimes. So what do you mean by cross-referencing one and leaving out others? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you going to capture all of them – the Leadership Codeand so forth? Are you going to capture all the possibilities in the law? 

Clause 17

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we wanted to know why you wanted consultants under clauses 17 and 21. We stood over those clauses; why do you want consultants in the commission?

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Chair, we had been working with consultants and we thought we could capture it in this law. However, since this is procurement, it may be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we can delete it? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we also stood overclause 21.We delete the word “consultants” because it is no longer there.I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 2, the interpretation.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to define the following words:
a) “Civil Society Organisation” as used in the Bill means an aggregate of non-governmental organisations, institutions and individuals in a society whose activities are independent of the government.

b) “UNESCO Fellowship holder” means a person sponsored for a UNESCOdesignated workshop, course or activity in line with the UNESCO area of competency.

c) “Government” means the Government of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It should be “competence” not “competency”, under b. Honourable members, that is interpretation. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I agree with you that the word should be “competence”. 

However, why do we have to include the definition of “government”? Colleagues, I think when you lookat the Interpretation Act, you should also always refer to the Constitution.This is because something which is already interpreted in the Constitution need not be interpreted in every Act.In the Constitution, it is clear that “government” means Government of Uganda, so it is just redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourablemembers, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposes.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, on clause 7, the committee inserted a vital clause, which is sub clause (8): “At least one-third of the members of the board shall be women.” These days even men are becoming endangered, so we should say, “either gender” instead of just women. (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we have not changed the Constitution. Affirmative action is actually in the interest of - 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, I understand that.I know that there is affirmative action; this is affirmative action as well. It is possible that all members of the board will be women. So, in such a scenario, then we can have at least one-third of them being men.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think “either gender” is a bit neutral.

MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO: Madam Chair, my colleague’s suggestion seems to brush the women aside yet the Constitution is very clear that women must have one-third representation at all levels. In this case, we have not been emancipated yet. I support the previous one.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, it is just a question of understanding. I said “either gender” means in case the women are more, then the one-third will be men but if the men are more, then the one-third will go to women. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, that is the best way to put it. By the way, the current drafting is what hon. Wafula is bringing out. Where there has been affirmative action for women, the women have taken over and now there are no men. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Wafula’s formulation is okay – one-third of either gender.

MR WANGOLO: Madam Chair, I think we can go with the one-third as earlier proposed, which is the common practice. We do not need to change it because constitutionally – 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, this is simple English. When you say “either gender”, women could be the majority and then men can be the one-third.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, let us look at where we are coming from. It is common knowledge that women have been subordinated for quite some time now.That is the background of affirmative action. Unless there is new evidence to show that now men are being subordinated, that is when we can reverse it; and this is a constitutional matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, for the sake of peace, let us use what we have been using – one-third of whom shall be women.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to give notice that I will be moving a motion to recommit clause 33 because we left out local government and cultural institutions; and also clause 27 because of the constitutional provision, Article 159, on borrowing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Didn’t we include the local governments and cultural institutions?We did; we resolved that and said it should come under clause 33.

MR EKANYA: Then I concede, but I give notice to recommit clause 27.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.Honourable members, we can now move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, on clause 27 there are two amendments. If we intend to carry the one we amended, it is wrong because we said, “the board shall”. If we use “shall”, it means that they must always borrow –(Interruptions)– Yes, that is what we said; I am the one who brought it. 

What we are trying to say is that we would like to recommitthe whole section and reinstate the word “may” and not “shall”. That is why we are saying that you should not get hard when we saywe want to recommit.

MR OPOLOT: Madam Chair, I tend to agree with the Leader of the Opposition because that was the concern I also observed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Report adopted)

8.51
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion to recommit clause 27 of the Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the justification?

MR EKANYA: Seconded –(Laughter)– By hon. Wafula. Madam Speaker, on borrowing, I would like to make reference to Article 159 of the Constitution. When the Attorney-General was defending his argument, he made reference to clause (8), which says, “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.”

The justification and argument is that the Attorney-General did not have adequate time to read Article 159 in its entirety. Article 159 is very detailed. There is clause (2) and clause (3), which are referred to in clause (8), but clauses (5),(6) and (7) still make it mandatory. I read them, with your permission, Madam Speaker: 

“(5) Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or a grant out of any public fund or public account.” Clause (8) does not talk about clause (5). It only talks about clauses (2) and (3). 

Clause (6) says, “(6) An agreement entered into under clause (5) of this article shall be laid before Parliament…”- This means even if you give an institution power to borrow, that agreement must be laid here - “…and shall not come into operation unless it has been approved by Parliament by resolution.” Clause (8), which the Attorney-General referred to, did not talk about clause (6).

Clause (7) says, “(7) For the purposes of this article, the expression ‘loan’…” - this defines what a loan is - “…includes any money lentor given to or by the Government on condition of return…” -because this is an institution established by an Act of Parliament, this money will be returned - “…or repayment and any other form of borrowing…” - even from commercial banks - “…or lending in respect of which- 
(a) monies from the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund may be used for payment or repayment; or…”We shall appropriate money here for repayment of that money those gentlemen would have borrowed.

“(b) monies from any fund by whatever name called, established for the purposes of payment…”- even if they get money through appropriation or from business –“…or repayment whether in whole or in part and whether directly or indirectly, may be used for payment or repayment.” Even if you give them opportunity to use space in a building, you are paying the money indirectly. 

So clause (8), which the Attorney-General referred to, only says Parliament may by law exempt categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3). It does not talk about clauses (5), (6), (7) as I have justified. Therefore, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg that clause 27 be recommitted and be re-worded or deleted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourablemembers, I do not know whether you have read the headnote - “Power of Government to borrow or to lend.”  That is the headnote. 

“(5) Parliament may, by resolution, authorise Government to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or a grant out of any public fund or public account. 

(6) An agreement entered into under clause (5) of this article shall be laid before Parliament…”

They are talking about Government lending out of the Consolidated Fund or another public fund like the Road Fund or the Electricity Fund. That is how I understand this. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA I will also differ from hon. Ekanya because what this Bill is doing is – (Interjections)– first wait.

THE SPEAKER: We need to understand what we are justifying. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Through this Bill, we are creating a perpetual organisation which can be sued, which can sue, which can borrow and which can own assets. If you say for any form of borrowing - even taking credit is borrowing. This organisation can take credit and supply us beans so that we supply these beans to children before paying the money; that is borrowing, and it is short-term.They may back that with maybe a draft or something. That is some form of borrowing.

In this clause, they emphasise that it will borrow for meeting its obligations -these are short-term obligations - and for the discharge of its functions. So, if you want this organisation to function, then we should not deter them from this short-term borrowing. This big borrowing by Government on behalf of the UNESCO Commission can then come here as the normal borrowing we do, which hon. Mukitale always takes us through in Parliament. That is my submission. 

THE SPEAKER: If the government wanted to borrow money from the World Bank for the UNESCO commission, they would have to come here. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, when reading the Bill as you are proposing, you must read clause 27 together with 29. What does this mean? We are talking about borrowing, we are talking about estimates. 

What we are saying is that an entity of this nature must come up with estimates. It is not operating in an ad hoc manner so that the board wakes up one morning and says, “we need some money to travel abroad”. What we are saying is that after this entity has come up with estimates arising out of their work plan, they now have a budget and they would know how much money they would need to run a financial year and if they need more, then they would know what the sources are. 

If the MTEF ceilings are to the effect that you need Shs100 million and Government will provide only Shs70 million, then you need an extra Shs30 million and one of the sources can be to borrow to finance that budget deficit. This is all that we are saying as far as this is concerned.We are not objecting to borrowing. We are saying that the entity shall consult the line minister in the Ministry of Finance so that the borrowing is reflected in what the Parliament appropriates. 

 Madam Speaker, I have said that in the Public Accounts Committee where the chairman of this committee sits, one university, even after getting 100 percent of the appropriation by Parliament, mortgaged the university buses. When we asked them why, they said that the law allows them to borrow.We are telling them,“Yes, you borrow in light of what you are supposed to do; you borrow to finance a budget”. If a supplementary is being raised to attend to an emergency, you would also ask what the source of the supplementary is. You must see what the source of the money is and the source can be borrowing. 

All that we are saying is in view of Article 159(2), which says,“Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” What does this mean? It means that if we are to authorisethat once we appropriate and allow - (Interjection)- What I am saying is that we are agreeable to borrowing but that borrowing should form part of the normal appropriation so that once we vote institution X, we have voted for Shs 100 billion – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, are you saying that there should be no emergencies in the UNESCO Commission? They should never have any emergencies; is that what you are saying?

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the Public Finance and Accountability Act allows the government to spend under supplementariesand under any other arrangement.If the entity wants to spend, then they must go through the normal process. Otherwise, if we allow this, it is a vote of no confidence in the budgeting process. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, hon. Mwiru. I would like to seekclarification from you. In case the commission submitted its estimates and the funds are appropriated and there is a delay in releases and there is an emergency, how would that entity operate? One would go for an overdraft, for example, but that overdraft is part of the borrowing. How would the commission operate in such a situation whereit must operate but the releases have delayed?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually, I am glad that my colleague now agrees with me.What we are saying is that once there is appropriation and it is clear that this money is going to come from the central Government, this percentage shall be raised by way of a loan and they go and pick it once we have appropriated.What we are objecting to is for them to borrow and spend outside their budget because it is automatically an audit issue. Madam Speaker, you spend as per the budget and as per the appropriation. Whenever you spend outside the budget, it is an illegality – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I want to give you is that I have discovered that we need to study –(interjections)– I am serious on that one. You knowthat when passing a budget here, they refer to deficit financing. What that means is that the money will be borrowed from the Central Bank.It means we have given Government authority to go and borrow money without coming here to say “we need you. Where did you get approval?” That is why I am saying you need to learn. 

What he is saying is that the moment the budget of UNESCO commission comes here and you approve it and say it is Shs10 million and you give them Shs8 million, then you have given them the authority to commit a public debt of Shs2 million. That is the rationale. So, what they are putting forward is a very vital point, and that is what we are saying. The moment you approve the budget of UNESCO Commission, the moment there is a deficit, you have authorised them to go and borrow. It is in that context.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, may I just ask you; supposing UNESCO had heritage sites in Bududa and one morning after we have approved your budget and everything is okay, the floods wash it away and they need to do work quickly?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have a lot of ways in which to finance. There are so many budget lines, and that is why we go through the contingency fund. 

The issue of the Bududa slides is not the responsibility of UNESCO; it is the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and that is why the Contingency Fund would take care of emergencies in any ministry. There is no ministry which has never gone to the bank to borrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you have heard the argument; can you think about it and give us advice on this particular aspect, because we are not agreeing? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am getting at pains with this provision. When I look at – 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we sleep over it? You go and consult.

MR RUHINDI: When I look at section 20 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it says “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the authority to raise money by loan, to issue guarantees and to accept grants for and on behalf of the Government shall vest solely in the Minister and no other person, public organisation or local government council shall, without the prior approval of the Minister, raise any loan or issue any guarantee, or take any other action which may in any way either directly or indirectly result in a liability being incurred by the Government.”

In view of the existing provisions in the laws, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and in the Constitution, we can as well be silent on the issue of borrowing.If under those other existing laws there is a necessity to borrow and there is conformity to other laws which are already clearly spelt out for the purpose, then they will apply. So, why do we have to put it here?   

THE SPEAKER: So, let us recommit clause 27.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourablemembers, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled,“The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012” and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and greed to.)

(Report Adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO BILL, 2012

9.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Commission for UNESCO Bill, 2012” be read for a third time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR UNESCO ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) We thank the Committee on Education, the minister and all of you, Members, for the hard work you have done today. 

Before we went to the UNESCO Bill, we had the issue of the Arabic language in our reports. Under our Rules of Procedure, the proceedings and debates of Parliament shall be in English. Under rule 208, the minutes of the proceedings of the committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House together with the report by the Chair of the committee. 

Tabling means laying of an official document on the Table and laying it before Parliament. It is construed as an entire document, therefore part of a report of a committee which is supplied in a language other than English would violate our rules since it is part of the proceedings of this House. The document should be translated and then the original version and the translation should be properly certified by the person translating and attachedto the original version, which is not in English. So we still need one small step to accomplish that; we cannot accept Arabic in its form. I am sorry, you have done so much work but we ask you to get it certified and then you can come back to this House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I am sure the chairperson has heard –(Interjection)– Yes, Makerere University is where they do it. 

Madam Speaker, I want to give notice that tomorrow we need to report on our talks, our dialogue. I pray that it should be after prayers and your communication, so that we get to know what is taking place. –(Interjections)– No; I am not fixing it. I said, “I pray”. I pray that after the prayer and your communication, it should be the next item so that the whole world can know what has been taking place. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay -

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, about eight months ago, before the recent KCCA clash with the Police and the polarisation between the Mayor and the Executive Director of KCCA, I made a requeston this Floor and you directed that the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition resume the interparty dialogue, beyond what happened recently. Can I get clarification if you are dialoguing beyond that small KCCA agenda because our concern is beyond KCCA? 

THE SPEAKER: That is for tomorrow. When they report tomorrow, you can supplement and ask them what else they are talking about. Honourable members, House is adjourned to 10 o’clock tomorrow morning –(Interjections)– Did you want to say thank you?

9.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for keeping the House beyond 9.00 p.m. to enable our Bill pass. I also thank the honourable members for their contributions and for sitting here beyond 9 o’clock. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, minister, you will have to proceed to the canteen with the members. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, as the chairperson of the Parliamentary Network of the World Bank, yesterday myself, the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and some other membershad interactions with the country office of the World Bank. They said that there is a loan which has stayed here for over seven months. The Chairman on National Economy is ready andso we beg you that maybe tomorrow, you consider it. 

Also, Madam Speaker, as the Shadow Minister of Finance, I request to make a statement tomorrow in this House on the state of the economy. 

THE SPEAKER: No, on the other one, you are interfering with my work. Probably, what you are talking about is already on the Order Paper. That is why we are sitting from morning until evening – until midnight as I told you – and also on Friday. So, you are a broker? House adjourned to tomorrow at 10 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 9.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 December at 10.00 a.m.)
