PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6538ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTThursday, 1 December 2022Yesterday, I officiated at the closure of the First Annual National Microfinance and Savings Groups Conference. I highlighted the importance of microfinance and savings groups; the SACCOs. It is basically meant to widen and deepen financial inclusion in our communities and the SACCOs are helping us very much with this, especially now that we have Emyooga and Parish Development Model projects. Therefore, it is very important for us to have a legislation that protects SACCOs. I would like to ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that as they look at the law that has been forwarded to them, they should include provisions that protect the savers and borrowers at SACCO level because these are not regulated by Bank of Uganda, which only regulates tier one, two and three, but not tier four where the SACCOs fall. The law should have an inclusion element for the SACCOs so that we have that amendment passed to protect savers in those SACCOs. Honourable Members, I have observed the persistent breach of Part 13 of the Rules of Procedure, regarding the behaviour of Members during debate. Rule 8(3) prescribes acceptable behaviour expected of a Member while in the House. I expect Members to abide by this provision. As you are aware, the Rules of Procedure enable us to operate in the House. They also bring order and fairness to the business transactions of the House. This is the reason, when we are IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 13TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Your commitment to always being in the House and deliberate is a responsibility that you owe to your electorates and the people of Uganda. That is all you can give to Ugandans. As you are aware, we are almost concluding this session. We need to conclude all that is pending because this will help our people. In whatever we are trying to legislate, we need to take up our responsibilities, as legislators. In addition, I want to reiterate my guidance, which I issued to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the National Budget Framework Paper should be submitted to this House by the 15th of December because we will be breaking off on the 16th. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to make a follow up on this with Finance. - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are we still together? - You are welcome. PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6539THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022being sworn in, as Members of Parliament, we are given the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The purpose is for us to manage our operations in the House well. Since the start of the 11th Parliament, we have had trainings for Members of Parliament on the Rules of Procedure. I do not know whether we still need more training because it is the Rules of Procedure that help us to transact our business in this House well. I implore Members to concentrate on looking at the rules. Do not push the presiding officers to the corner because when you do so, we will have no option, but to apply the rules, which you made yourselves. I request – because we are all brothers and sisters – let us behave in a fair way. If you behave in a way that is wanting, then rule 89 will be invoked in respect of you. I want you to look at that rule and ensure that you do not become its victim.  There is always a leader in the House. Even at home, there is always a leader. You do not just look at leaders in the House like they are nobody.Honourable Members, I once again thank you for - because I see the same faces in the House almost every day. (Applause) I sincerely would like to thank you for always being here. As we plan to break off for Christmas, we have organised a Christmas party. (Applause) We will have it next Thursday, 8th December 2022, before you go to join your families during the holidays.I will vary the Order Paper today to start with some motions; the action-taken reports will come next. As I told you, when you look at the action-taken reports, verify at what has been presented and what has not been presented. When a minister is presenting, you can raise what has not been covered to help us hold the Executive accountable for whatever may have been decided by this House. Today is World AIDS Day. As we commemorate the efforts of mankind in combating HIV/AIDS, we need, as the Legislature, to support institutions that are working to reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS or those that are ensuring that people living with HIV/AIDS receive treatment, by ensuring that we include money in their budgets. When you look at the budgets for those institutions, you notice that 80 per cent of their funds come from donors. If that is so, then, what are we doing, as Ugandans? We need to ensure that we support these institutions in order for us to reduce the debt burden. There has been a debate in this House that when people go for ARVs, they are charged a lot of money. That should be handled as we debate issues of AIDS. As we commemorate this date, Government should be able to look at the issue of people getting free ARVs. Once more, I thank you and welcome you to the House this afternoon. 2.10MR ACROBERT KIIZA (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have observed a breach of Rule 52(1) of the Rules of Procedure on the side of ministers. Rule 52 requires a minister to make a statement upon any matter. I have risen on this Floor several times on issues of national importance regarding floods and the washing away of bridges in my area. In June last year, I raised the same issue. In June this year, I again raised the same issue. I am concerned because even on 8 November, I raised the same matter –(Interjections)-  Members, it is my turn.Madam Speaker, I also raised a matter regarding abandonment of a contract to extend power to Bughendera and you ruled that the minister concerned should come on the Floor of this House and give a statement. This is because it was not only Bughendera, but also concerned Bukomansimbi and Rwampara - 6540ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: Hon. Acrobert, first of all, the rule that you are raising is wrong. The rule is on a substantive matter that is on the Order Paper. That is where a minister is required to make sure that he makes an appropriate statement. Secondly, you rose under Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure; on questions to ministers. If that issue was brought up, today, we have the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. If it is not on the Order Paper, it will be answered under “action taken.” Therefore, just wait for the minister to come and make -MR ACROBERT KIIZA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.13MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to – THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, if it is anything on action that has not been taken, reserve it for the “action taken” time. I only want reactions to my communication. Hon. Nakato, is your issue on that? MS NAKATO: Madam Speaker, I would also like to raise my concern. I wrote letters regarding schools that were destroyed by floods – THE SPEAKER: We shall handle that under the Ministry of Education and Sports. MS NAKATO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.2.14MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to react to your communication. Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for attending the financial inclusion meeting yesterday at Hotel Africana where I was one of the participants. Honourable Members, I would like to draw your attention to our country, Uganda. We have a regulatory body; that is Bank of Uganda, regulating all commercial banks and the big financial institutions. However, when it comes to moneylenders, small institutions and saving groups in the villages, we do not have any regulator –(Interjections)– I am coming to that -  THE SPEAKER: We have the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority. MR SILWANY: Exactly, that is what I am getting at. Whereas we have a regulator, there is an intention by the Government to merge and do away with the microfinance regulator that regulates these small institutions. When you raised that matter, Madam Speaker, I would like to implore you that we ask Government –(Interruption) THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order from the counsel. Let us not debate in anticipation because what you are saying is hearsay and it has not come to this House. This House passed a law based on authority and now, you are saying, “you hear.” We have not heard that. MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your wise guidance in your communication and the previous communication from the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker yesterday, we are mindful of the time on the Order Paper. The issues we are discussing now should arise from your communication. The issue being raised by my colleague never, at any one moment, arose -THE SPEAKER: No, it was in my communication. MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: It was in my communication regarding the inclusion of SACCOs in regulation. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6541THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 20222.17MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your communication. You raised a very critical issue regarding health financing in this country. I thank you for highlighting the limited contribution that, as a country, we make on funding for HIV/AIDS. I would like to add that generally, health financing is a challenge. Recently, we read in the media where the US Government, through their embassy in Uganda, bashed our Ministry of Health that they gave their money directly to agencies and so, the ministry should find the money there. This shows you that the moment we leave our social services financing to donors, we shall continue to be ridiculed in the global space of financing. How I wish that as we come into the financing period of budgeting, we prioritise some of these very critical social services, including health, water and the rest because that is all the country needs. If we cannot put money into financing the health of our people, then, all the money we are putting into roads and everything else will go to waste. I thank you for being an ambassador of social services financing in this country. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Members. As we go into budgeting, we need to look at financing of the health sector. Of course, when you leave everything in the hands of donors – most of them are Europeans – they will ask you to abide by their conditions and you know their conditions. We will not abide by their conditions in the name of donations. Let us provide money ourselves other than getting money with conditions.2.19MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me permission to speak today, in this august House.In your submission, you mentioned a very important word: deocram. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER: The boy is from Busia, do not worry. He means “decorum”. MR MACHO: Decorum. Madam Speaker, some of us have dialects from Kenya and Uganda and, so, sometimes our words surpass the understanding of other people. (Laughter)The word “decorum”, under rule 83 – I have been reading the English dictionary – means controlled behaviour, calmness, politeness and respect. Madam Speaker, yesterday, the Presiding Officer guided us on the rules and today, you have reminded us of the same. However, I have concluded that the issue in the House building a bad image, is the character of indiscipline. My call to my honourable colleagues is that we should sort our characters and come to House as Honourable Members. Yesterday, when I called upon the Opposition that we should – or they should – talk to the Honourable Members in the Opposition to have a restraining of character, some people shouted at me. Commonwealth Parliaments do not allow this to happen at all. In fact, in the history of parliaments in the world, it is us who have had Members of Parliament jump on and bang the Speaker’s Table.In the whole of East Africa, it is us, for the second time, who have had Members of Parliament banging the Speaker’s Table. The Speaker is Principal No.3 of the country. Therefore, my colleagues in Government – even the Opposition are in Government because if you were not in Government, you would have refused to take salary.  Please, train your Members on character and behaviour so that the Parliament of Uganda becomes an honourable Parliament within the region. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, not everybody has that character. We 6542ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTcannot generalise that the whole Opposition has that bad character. Character is like pregnancy; you can never hide it. Some people have their character and even now, they are trying to show it. They have their character, but we have laws in the House that will trim those characters. I want to repeat this: we are not going to tolerate any indiscipline in this House, whether from NRM or the Opposition. (Applause) This is going to be the last warning. You cannot behave in a funny way before a presiding officer – not in this House. If you want to do that, the National Theatre is very near. Attorney-General, do you have something to say? (Mr Niwagaba rose_) On the same matter? Members, let us not discuss that. MR NIWAGABA: I just want to conclude, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: I do not want us to discuss that, but I just want to tell you to wait for action.MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged. I would implore my colleagues – because it looks like one of the biggest challenges Members have is how to raise issues in this august House.Definitely, the issue of raising matters of national importance has been silent in the Rules of Procedure. I would implore Members to resort to two very effective means. The best effective mean is to use motions. This is because if you use a motion, you even give opportunity to other Members to contribute to that motion and you end up getting resolutions.The second way is questions to the minister. However, if you want to employ a system of raising matters of national importance when it is not in our rules, then, you have no option, but to always consult the presiding officer before you raise it here. In addition, if you are to raise issues of procedures all the time and you are not relating your interruption of debate to a particular procedure, then, definitely, you will be offending the Rules of Procedure. So, let us study the rules and employ them to be effective in legislating for our people. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Shadow Attorney-General. When you raise a matter of national importance, it stops here. Somebody will just get up and say: “We are going to handle.” However, when you raise it as a written question to a minister, then, the minister will go and do research and you will expect a better response than what you would get in the House. Whereas you may want to raise it because you want the cameras to capture you for your politics, that is fine, but what you need are results. It is not just a matter of getting up and - yes, Government, do you have something to say?2.25THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance.In the Rules of Procedure, the Administration of Parliament Act and the Constitution, in addition to what you have said about there being a leader in the House, those laws do not stop at the Speaker only. They establish offices of Parliament on the different sides of the House. Ugandans took a decision in July 2005 to go for multiparty dispensation, which established leadership on both sides of the House. If you do not respect the person holding the office, you are disrespecting the office itself. Therefore, on both sides of the House, we should also respect the people who are holding offices. I was here, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition in the House then, Hon. Nambeshe, pleaded with the Member and the Member could not listen. Senior leaders on that side pleaded with the Member and the Member could not listen. That is a sign that the individual does not respect the leaders on his or her side. [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6543THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022So, in addition to having the leaders and the Speaker, let us also respect the very offices that were set up by the different laws; the Constitution, the Administration of Parliament Act and the Rules of Procedure because their roles are defined and they are even facilitated to lead us. Let us accord the offices respect even if we do not agree with the individuals in some of those offices. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. (Members rose_) Are we still on communication? Why don’t we move faster? As you go to - I am forced to say this on the Floor. We wrote to your office, Leader of the Opposition: we have lost a car in Parliament and the car is with one of your Members, but we have been looking for that car for long.However, when we act, people think we are bad. We are going to recover it - that is a criminal action. Thank you. Leader of the Opposition – I do not want to name and shame, but I want feedback on the car that belongs to Parliament.2.27THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My office is yet to acknowledge receipt of that communication. However, the moment we get the communication, we shall swing into action. I am sure we shall have the matter resolved amicably because if he is a Member, it is not good to embarrass that Member. There could be a reason; we shall find out and eventually get back to you. Madam Speaker, arising from your communication, particularly, the take of the Learned Attorney-General; it is true that matters of national importance are not provided for in our Rules of Procedure. However, it is also true that matters of urgent public importance, which sometimes mutate into matters of national importance, are vividly provided for in the rules. So, a Member may still have a leeway to raise a matter under the cover of urgent public importance. Madam Speaker, your take on ARVs on this World AIDS Day, was spot-on. However, I am of the view that given the advancement of technology – and now that most countries have better alternatives of injectable anti-retrovirals, for instance, South Africa –even Kenya is introducing that. It helps in two ways -  because most people have been ailing for quite duration of time, they experience a memory lapse; they even forget to take drugs on a daily basis. Secondly, given the levels of poverty, many are wallowing in abject poverty and they may not afford even one meal a day, and the condition for swallowing those ARVs is that one has to have a meal.So, if we would have our ministry shift to injectable anti-retrovirals whose effect takes actually much longer – three months – that would be much better. Madam Speaker, about financing, it is not that the budget committee is to blame. For the last three consecutive financial years, the budget committee has always been allocating Shs 25 billion, but it is rather unfortunate on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that they have been attempting to release only Shs 15 billion, and that is way below the watermark. Therefore, the issue is about the ministry enforcing what the appropriators of the budget do. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we look at the matters? – Yes, minister?2.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to clarify what is on the Hansard on the issue of partners or donors who partner with Ministry of Health. The donors that we partner with attend all our meetings and work within our work plan. No one goes to do whatever they want in this country because they do not have structures. 6544ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTThey are also cognisant of the fact that we are a sovereign State. Even when they came in to help us during the COVID-19 pandemic and recently Ebola, we sat with them in all our strategic meetings and they gave us strategic interventions that they would take on. So, I wanted to allay your fears, Hon. Apea, that they are not taking over this country; we are working with them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: No, they are taking over in terms of financing: if they are financing 80 per cent and we are financing only 20 per cent, isn’t that taking over financially? Yes, let us call a spade a spade. (Applause)Members, let us be fast on matters of national importance. 2.33MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Bufumbira County is a tourism destination area, where Bwindi National Park collects Shs 250 million, but the roads are impassable. I found that all the money collected from the National Park goes back to Kampala and when I talked to UNRA, it was distressed because of the threat for rationalisation. My prayer is that Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities takes a very serious concern about it. Government should also give a letter of comfort such that UNRA is not under threat because they have given up; the roads are spoilt. Secondly, I have an issue of the PDM. I went to my constituency and whereas Government says that they have paid Shs 25 million a quarter or Shs 50 million for two quarters, Honourable Members, those who I visited in each parish got Shs 7 million and they have told them not to touch the money. So, out of a fraction of Shs 50 million, they got only Shs 7 million, and nobody has records. Therefore, as much as PDM is a major national programme, there is no Member of Parliament who has a record of what has gone to his constituency or district. My prayer is that since the ministry of finance has decided to deal with the SACCOs, let them publish and give each Member of Parliament how much has been disbursed so that we can monitor and report. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?2.35THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justines Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for raising this issue. The issue he raised about the tourism roads that have not yet been worked on in his constituency; the response will be made when we are handling item No.5 because you have already ruled that item No.5 on our agenda should also include those roads. I plead. The issue of the PDM, Madam Speaker –  what he raises is a very pertinent issue to us, as Members of Parliament who have the role of deciding what should go to what area when it comes to appropriation. Madam Speaker, I would plead with you that the minister of finance together with the Minister of Local Government should be accorded time before we go for recess with a full report of what has transpired, because as the Member raises the issue of Shs 25 million that went to the 3,000 out of the 10,589 SACCOs in the country, we ought to explain to the country why those and what stage – for those who have not received money yet. We have already moved into the financial year; it would give a comprehensive report and accountability to you, who also have to carry a message to the whole country. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, we need a report. I really do not even know what my own district has got. We need to know how much money has gone to different districts, which are the SACCOs that COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Muhanga]6545THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022are benefitting; and why some areas and not others? The question would be: Is there equity in the distribution of this money? Is there an aspect of national character? So, can we have that report on Wednesday?MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when you have this report and you know what is in your area, it helps you in carrying out your oversight role. When we sent you out to look at what was given out in Emyooga, it helped in improving that project. So, we need to know how much has gone out in terms of the PDM and which people are benefitting from the funds. On the issue of the road, we will get a response from the ministry of works. About UNRA being threatened with a merger, it was created by an Act of Parliament and it will be removed by an Act Parliament. So, there should not be any threat because Parliament has not made a decision to that effect. Let us wait for the Executive to bring its report and we will debate it. If Parliament says that we merge UNRA, it will be the decision of Parliament. If it says, “No, because Uganda National Roads Authority has success stories”, then it will remain there.Hon. Begumisa? (Members rose_) Honourable Members, this business of “procedure” – “procedure” - do not bring your chaos through points of procedure; not on me. If you have an issue to raise, raise it, but you are not going to continue standing up in the name of “procedure”. Please, resume your seat. Yes, Hon. Begumisa- 2.39MS MARY BEGUMISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of public importance in my district, about political chaos in Sembabule District. We travelled through the night with my people and reached here at around 8 a.m. The political chaos in my district, regrettably, is caused by a minister, Hon. Anifa Bangirana, again – (Laughter) – creating new districts in one of the counties, which is just three subcounties. She wants a whole district. She says, “It is a Presidential directive under PDM; it was passed last night” and everybody is on tension, demonising all of us before our people. Secondly, our local council leaders from LC I -(Interruption) - protect me, Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, listen. MS BEGUMISA: Local leaders from LC I to LC V have been suppressed for a very long time, but now, it is worse. All levels in our district are non-operational now. It is “orders from above” and just from one person – the untouchable minister, Hon. Anifa Bangirana. Thirdly, five people from Kafumu-Matete have been arrested and they have been in prison for three weeks, on remand. They have not been tried. Their names are Abbas Mutesasira, Timothy Senyama, Mayanja and the rest. I can lay them on Table; they have been in Sembabule Prison on remand for three weeks now. I am a woman Member of Parliament, honourable colleagues, please, bear with me. My prayers, Madam Speaker: 1. We are asking for security from Parliament for my people and I. This is the second time I am doing that – you have a written report from me, Madam Speaker, but this is worse than last time. Currently, my husband and family are in the parking lot of this Parliament waiting for me because we are insecure.2. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development quickly save our people; travel to Sembabule as soon as possible and solve the issue because the untouchable minister evacuated people from the land. 6546ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT3. The Ministry of Local Government, in particular – I called you honourable minister - but now in particular, Minister Raphael Magyezi who has promised to create - in my own village where I am born, married, grandparents – every zone now has five LCs to make each two parishes  - by last night -   a Subcounty; this is on record. (Laughter) I have called the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and everybody has nothing to do. Thank you, please, it is on record. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, Hon. Begumisa has been coming to my office. Today, she came and cried. She cried and said I have also been compromised not to allow her speak. I said, “This House is yours; come and speak whatever you want to say.” (Applause)Last week, I thought this issue would be resolved. I told the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition to resolve the issues of Hon. Namugga – issues related to this, but nothing was resolved. I want to guide this way; When you talk about Hon. Magyezi, honourable members, under Articles 177 and 179 of the Constitution, and Section 7 of the Local Government Act, are instructive as far as the creation of districts and boundaries is concerned. There is no way a minister or anybody can create them. Article 179 (1) bestows the power of creation or alteration of boundaries to Parliament; this is the preserve of Parliament. Therefore, nobody should tell you that they have created a boundary, a district or a constituency because it is the preserve of Parliament. Any attempt to do that, besides you Members of Parliament, makes it void. Besides that, I do not know if you are aware that Government halted the creation of new administrative units; it was halted. So, there is no business of saying it has been created. Even me, I would have loved to create my own small constituency, but I cannot. So, you should bother about your security, and I will ask Government to respond to that. (Laughter)You want an order to the ministry of lands, Ministry of Security, Ministry of Défense and Veteran Affairs, and Ministry of Local Government. 2.46THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Government, I want to apologise that this is happening to a colleague to the extent of coming to pour out her heart on the Floor. I am not judging, but as women and as mothers, we should not get to that level -(Interjection)-  and Members from my political party; it is very unfortunate and a shame to me and all of us on the right hand side of the House. Madam Speaker, I am going to take it up with the Minister of Security immediately and I will share a response with you before we leave this House. Also, Madam Speaker, since this has been raised in the absence of Hon. Anifa Kawooya, I would request that she also comes and makes a personal response because she is a minister, a Member of Parliament and she should also be listened to. Madam Speaker, we shall hold meetings and it also requires involving you so that we find a solution. Everybody should be secure and feel good as he or she serves this country. I will also inform the Minister of Local Government and the minister of lands to immediately take up issues that have been raised, which concern their sector. I thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. The minister of lands m ust go to the locus and ascertain what is happening and ensure that land grabbing stops. Minister of Security, we need the Member to be secure. Minister of Internal Affairs, please, we want the safety of the Member.[Ms Begumisa] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6547THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022Minister for the Presidency, they say the orders are from “above”. I do not know which “above.” Maybe, it is from the Prime Minister. This should be handled becauseI do not believe when they say, “orders are from above.” Honourable member, we will do whatever it takes to support and protect you. (Applause) I want to ask the Clerk to Parliament to ensure a follow-up on this and have you secured.2.49MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to – THE SPEAKER: Speak about your issue.MR KATUSABE: I sympathise with my sister, but also thank you, Madam Speaker, for being a mother to all of us by prioritising the security and safety of your Members. Honourable member, you are in the right hands; we have a Speaker who really cares. About five days ago, Kasese was confronted by heavy floods. (Interjections)  My honourable brother is saying he saw it because the news was all over the television stations. Up to 257 houses and two churches were affected by these floods. The communities are still flooded and you cannot even see the houses because they are submerged in water. Our fellow citizens are now taking shelter in schools and churches.Madam Speaker, the bitter part of it is that we had just got two bridges constructed and in two communities. Those two are at the verge of being swept away, yet, those bridges cost a lot of taxpayers’ money. Madam Speaker, I have, briefly, about six prayers:1) That UNRA goes to Kasese – Kisororo and Karambi  – and saves the two bridges from being swept away because it is going to take Government about 10 years to get money to restore these bridges. Before they are swept away, please, save those that are already in place. 2) I have just said that where your people used to get the food from is all over flooded. In other words, the communities have nowhere to go get food. They are sheltered in churches and schools. Can we get Government going to those two communities in the five subcounties of Karambi, Isango, Kitororo, Kanyasi, Bwera, Ihandiro and part of Nyakiyombu - to avail food relief? 3) There is a huge crack - maybe the geologists should also be deployed there - that is separating the two communities. Behind the cracks, there is a huge rock, as big as this very building, just right on the mountain. Our worry is that if, God forbid, the crack were to give way, the stones would roll over the settlements leading to loss of lives. Madam Speaker, the Kasese District Woman Member of Parliament and I have already appealed to our community members to relocate, but the question they keep giving us is: “Where do we go? Atkins, do we go to your home?” Yet, we have nowhere to put them. Our prayer is: Can Government relocate the citizens to safe places as we work out a way of sorting this?Disaster mapping not only in Kasese, but the entire country is necessary because this is a season for heavy pounding storms, rain and floods; let us get a disaster mapping plan in the entire country.4) About UNRA - Honourable Minister, can you save the roads?  One can hardly connect from one community to another. Please, find the money. If you do not have it, the Speaker is here and we are here. You can ask for a supplementary budget so that we have the roads fixed. Lastly, as I take leave to give the honourable minister a chance, there is the issue of compensation. Kasese people are familiar with our communities - putting up some iron sheet 6548ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTroofed house takes about a decade. Now, all the 257 houses have been swept away. Madam Prime Minister -THE SPEAKER: Is that compensation or rehabilitation of the people who have been affected?MR KATUSABE: Well, Madam Speaker, with your guidance, it should be rehabilitation. Government, please, can you look around within our system or disaster fund and allocate sufficient iron sheets to these communities? I am saying this because we have people who have nowhere to stay and I do not have money to facilitate that process. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Atkins, do you have a district disaster committee report to show us the extent of the destruction?MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise leadership. Yes, my district woman Member of Parliament and I have already appealed to the district authorities to ensure they fast-track; they sit as the district disaster committee to assemble the impact and send a report to the district woman Member of Parliament to document it before she sends it to the concerned offices. However, Madam Speaker, allow me applaud Government. Every time we get a disaster knocking down our communities, Government is always fast. However, for this particular disaster, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know what is going on. The community is waiting for you to go and assess the impact so that you can have relevant interventions. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Florence Kabugho, would you like to say something? 2.57MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me chance to talk about this issue. There is additional information I would like to pass on to the House about a fraudulent payment for land meant to resettle people who were affected by floods two years ago. The money was given to a fraudster - a person who was not supposed to be given that money - at the expense of the rightful recipients. One man called Isejjemba forged a land title. He went to the district authorities and told the leaders that he had land for sale having heard that Government had released money to pay for land meant to resettle these people. Without verifying, the leadership paid this man and now, the farmers are on the verge of being displaced. Madam Speaker, a few days ago, Isejjemba was given security to plant mark stones around that land and the farmers had no say over this. My prayer, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: Who gave him security? MS KABUGHO: It was the RDC and the Chairperson LC V .  My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that you ask the minister of lands and the Office of the Prime Minister that released that money without verifying whether this land had no issues. It is only your directive that will save the people who are about to lose their land. We are at your mercy. Thank you.2.59 THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, colleagues, for raising this issue. I beg for your indulgence. Since the ministers who have been handling this same issue and have dispatched teams are here, I request that you give them an opportunity to explain. We have the ministers of Disaster Preparedness; Works; Water and Environment here. All this is a result of environmental degradation. If you accord us some few minutes, Madam Speaker -[Mr Katusabe] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6549THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: That is fine. The reason I said Government is because I want you to be the one to decide who of your ministers explains. I am giving you the respect of being in charge of your leadership.3.00THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Ms Esther Anyakun):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my senior colleague for raising this issue concerning Kasese. I also had a one-on-one with him yesterday on this same issue. We know very well that Kasese is one of the most vulnerable districts in the country with disaster issues.Madam Speaker, you gave me a directive last week to respond to Tororo, Ibanda and Kasese. The team has already done its assessment and we are preparing to send food to these three districts as you directed. The issue of the land is very serious. The alarm was raised and the Office of the IGG is handling it. It is also very unfortunate that someone has gone ahead to put landmarks on this land, yet it has a contentious issue yet to be resolved. Nonetheless, it is being handled by the IGG and the staff who handled the administrative issues. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Could we find out whether due diligence was done before the disbursement of the money to the fraudster?MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, that is what should be investigated, maybe, by your directive. Otherwise, what I know is that the land in Kayunga and Kasese were paid for. The only land that we have not yet paid for, I think, is the one in Ntoroko District. Even as we have this land, including the one in Kasese, we need funds to resettle these people because you cannot just move people from where they are now and put them on bare land. We also need to plot the land and put up some structures for the IDPs.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to handle the land issue. If the land does not belong to the person who has sold it to Government, then, any transaction in regard to that land must stop until clearance is done.I would like to ask the Minister in charge of the Presidency, who is aiding the person defrauding people, to ensure that the RDC stops whatever she is doing. How can you aid somebody that is taking land from other people? Please, minister of lands, go to Kasese and report back to this House on Wednesday.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister of lands and the minister in charge of the presidency will make statements and explanations of what has transpired and why such actions took place. However, Madam Speaker, even a criminal is supposed to be protected so that he comes to explain everything. If his life is in danger, he must also be protected. However, that does not mean that the powers given to RDCs, as the chairpersons of security in the districts, should be abused. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let us not condone crime. Now, you want to protect criminals That is why we want an explanation from your office on how that money was paid. We want to know how you released the money to a person you do not know. What basis did you use to give out the money? Your office is protecting the person. We want to know the details.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, we shall explain to the country. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: You need to explain to this country and protect people from being defrauded of their land. Concerning the release of the money, on what basis did you do due diligence? How much was it? Who gave you authorisation to do it? How much did you take as commission? That is a joke.  MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, the laws of the country are very clear. Once a criminal 6550ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENThas been identified, there is a way they are protected. They are protected in the police cells or taken to the police cells. Wouldn’t the Prime Minister, having admitted that they have identified the criminal, have this criminal arrested, properly arraigned before Court and kept in gazetted places where criminals are kept, other than allowing the criminal to roam around? THE SPEAKER: They are kept in a safe place. Thank you very much. 3.06THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Before I respond, there was some exaggeration in the submission of the honourable colleague where he mentioned that Kasese was washed away. This is not true. There are parts of Kasese - By the time the scenario happened, he was there and if it was the entire Kasese, he would not be in this House. However, we have dispatched a team of about seven engineers –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fred Byamukama, have you ever been to Kasese? MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: I have gone there twice, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Do you know the nature of the land in Kasese? MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: I know it is quite terrible. THE SPEAKER: Please, do not start with that. Tell us what you have done. It is not about coming to defend - What have you done? MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, we have dispatched a team of seven engineers, who are on ground trying to see the best option to rescue our Ugandans there and enable them to access their homes and other services. By tomorrow, they will be back and by next week, we shall respond to the situation. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Are you going to report on the action-taken or whether people have gone or not?MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Okay, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fred Byamukama, we want you to report on the action that you have taken so far; the immediate action, the medium term and maybe, the long term action.MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 3.08THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sincerely sympathise with the people of Kasese; I have been there many times. There was a time we went there with Egyptians and removed boulders – you know whenever it rains, huge stones are washed down. Those boulders were stopping water from flowing freely. Therefore, we did some work with the Egyptians; we built gabions and thought that what we had done would sort the problem. Unfortunately, it was very not enough.  If you have been to Kasese, you must have seen that it is a very interesting terrain. I do not know what you call it: there is a hill every side. (Interjections)  No, it is not like Sebei, which is mountainous. This one is a very funny mountainous area. As a ministry, we had come up with the idea of tree planting. In fact, we had started bamboo planting. We intend to continue with tree planting. I am glad that Cabinet has approved the Tree Fund. Therefore, with the approval by the Cabinet, we expect to get money for the Tree Fund. This is the time we should concentrate on Kasese. Thank you, Madam Speaker.[Mr Odur] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6551THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 20223.10MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance regarding the absence of sign language interpreters in our courts of judicature. All over the country, in our criminal justice system, there are no sign language interpreters.THE SPEAKER: Is it only in courts or even in the Parliament of Uganda?MR ZIJJAN: I am talking about courts because it touches on the fundamental rights of accused persons, Madam Speaker. When accused persons, who have hearing impairments, are brought before Court, they are not able to understand the charges or indictments against them. Therefore, they cannot plead. If a plea has not been entered, the judicial officer cannot admit the accused person to bail. The only option they remain with is to remand the accused person. Madam Speaker, this is a gross violation of the rights of accused persons, who have hearing impairments because it offends the cardinal principles of law, especially fair hearing and the presumption of innocence. I have made calls to different registries around the country. They say that they will train some people, but they do not explain how long this training will take, implying that those who are victims of this human rights violation will continue to suffer until people have been trained as if there is no unemployed sign language interpreter in this country. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR ZIJJAN: My prayers, Madam Speaker, are that; 1. This House summons the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, specifically Hon. Norbert Mao, to explain this indefensible violation of the law. I say specifically him because I know he is a learned colleague and understands the gravity of this violation. 2. This House follows up this complaint as a matter of urgency to cure the continued violation of the rights of accused persons with hearing impairments. At least, the ministry of justice could provide one sign language interpreter per High Court Circuit so that when a judicial officer is faced with this kind of situation, this an impaired person receives a fair hearing. I so pray, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Summoning Hon. Mao is not the solution. What we need to do, as this House, is to ensure that we enhance the budget for special needs education or for special needs people; even this House needs an interpreter. Therefore, we need to put it in our budget that this must be provided for so that we have it in every institution; I think you just love Hon. Mao. (Laughter)3.14THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, we have a policy to do with sign language. We also have a policy to do with the special needs education and these have been scattered in different policies. However, the good news is that on Monday, this was brought as one document – bringing all those that were scattered into one document – and it was passed in Cabinet. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will be coming to lay it on Table in Parliament and also proceed to write to all of the ministries and guide the private sector. Now that we are in the budget cycle, this should be part of what will be included – like you have just said, Madam Speaker – for all Government institutions, but also with guidance to the private sector. 6552ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTherefore, I thank the Member who has raised it. You are in time. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nsegumire - 3.15MR MUHAMAD NSEGUMIRE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of war memorial sites – the mass grave – which turned into historical sites across the country. Most of the sites are hosting skulls, bones and war equipment from the armed conflicts. In my constituency, for instance, I have two memorial sites – Mukonga in Kyamusisi, Kalangaalo Subcounty and another in Kikandwa Parish, Kikandwa Subcounty. However, all these memorial sites are abandoned and left to no good use. Madam Speaker, these sites would be useful for tourism and education of our young generation. My prayers are:1. That the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities updates this House on the status of each memorial site across the country.2. That Government should rehabilitate the roads leading to these important sites. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, remember we have a Bill that is going to cover all those gaps. Yes.3.17THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for raising this and I appreciate your guidance. The issue concerns our history as Uganda, NRM and also concerns us in terms of tourism. Therefore, we are going to make sure the prayers he has made are implemented. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Finally, Hon. Macho – please, speak from there. Why do you want to move? (Laughter)3.17MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): I take your advice seriously, Madam Speaker, although it is a very important matter. THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can come in front. (Laughter)MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this rare opportunity because some of us have been habitual backbenchers for six years. Coming here in front is a blessing. (Laughter) I rise on a matter of national importance - on behalf of my people - the bosses who voted me here; the people of Busia Municipality. The business we do in our constituencies, majorly by my people, apart from cross-border trade, we do a lot of enterprises like hairdressing, welding, artisanship and all this needs electricity. I am speaking with pain that Busia District - so far now eight months - takes a week without electricity. Sometimes, we are apportioned electricity so that we get power three days, sometimes four days. The same happens even to the place of the Prime Minister, who is seated here with us. Therefore, this is a problem to our business community - people who earn from welding are no longer working, ladies and gentlemen in salons are not working, moreover Government gave them money  for Emyooga. I will give an example of western division. One parish was given Shs 7 million and when we divided this amongst the population, each person got Shs 5,000 although they brought it together and put up enterprises. Majority of [Ms Lumumba] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR6553THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022these enterprises are welding, but they are not working because of inconsistence of power. I, therefore, I have a prayer. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I need your protection. (Interjections) I will give you, but let me first drive this point.My prayers:1. I request the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to go to Busia District and tell people why there is always load shedding - because as a result, 14 women have died in Health Centre IV Busia (Red Cross) and Masafu. Hon. Denis Nyangweso, will give information on that. 2. I request that you allow us - with the permission of the Prime Minister who is here - next week when we have no power, we tie a Umeme worker on an electric pole so that we demonstrate that our people are going through a lot of pain by having their enterprises stall without making any money. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, I will not allow you to do an illegality. First withdraw the illegality that you want me to allow you to do.MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I withdraw. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: What have you withdrawn, all your prayers?MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I withdraw and request my people not to tie a Umeme worker on an electric pole. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity. That issue is not only in Busia. Yesterday, at around 9.00 p.m., the entire country experienced a power outage, Hoima City inclusive. This is not the first time it has occurred because for the last two months, we have been experiencing power outages. Electricity being one of the major factors of production, as a shadow minister, I have been approached by traders, a number of manufacturers and individuals, complaining about their electronic appliances, which have been destroyed in the process of these outages.My prayers:1. That the minister of energy brings before this House a comprehensive explanation to what could be the root cause of these outages. 2. The ministry of energy should also come out and explain to this House the immediate interventions that it has taken to permanently solve this problem. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.MR MACHO: Thank you for the information, my colleague. Madam Speaker, Hon. Nyangweso had requested for information. THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can we finalise?MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I beg that I summarise by giving my colleague because if I do not give him, it will be a problem for me in Busia.THE SPEAKER: Okay, you now take your seat.MR NYANGWESO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent Samia-Bugwe Central County. The information I would like to give my honourable colleague and the House is that Samia-Bugwe Central has been privileged to have access to water, but this water has been pumped by electricity. For the last nine months because of load shedding, people have no access to water. The only hospital in the district is the general hospital and nine women have so far died during surgical operations, and there is power 6554ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENToutage at the same time. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think this issue is affecting the whole country. Government -3. 23THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Members for raising this issue. It is very unfortunate that we have lost lives of mothers and other Ugandans because we have not been able to offer electricity at a time when it was needed most to save their lives. However, Madam Speaker, I commit myself that the minister of energy - with your permission, please, accord her space on the Order Paper so that the explanation is given, accountability for what has happened and also the way forward to avoid this happening again in the future. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We will expect a report from the minister next week before we break off for recess. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION ON SALARY ENHANCEMENT DISCREPANCIES FOR NURSES AND INTERNSTHE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson here?MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE DELAYED PAYMENT OF CONTRACTORS HIRED BY UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITYTHE SPEAKER: The chairperson is also not here. Get me those chairpersons who are not in the House when they know their reports are here. (Applause)MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON AN OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE UGANDA HIGH COMMISSION IN LONDON-UNITED KINGDOMTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the basic role of the Diplomatic Mission is to represent and safeguard the interests of the country and its citizens in the host country. – First sit down. Over the years, we have heard concerns about the state of Ugandan’s missions abroad, not only in one mission, but almost in all the missions. This report will give this House an insight on what is happening in the missions abroad, especially the UK mission because we have heard numerous reports on what is happening there. So, the chairperson is going to briefly present a summary of the report, their findings and recommendations. After this report, then, we go back to the action-taken reports.3.27MR FRED OPOLOT (NRM, Pingire County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity. On behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we thank you very much for propagating support for the committee that enabled us to effectively execute our mandate. Before I make the presentation, may I lay on Table the minutes of the report of the committee? Madam Speaker, may I now present the report of the Committee of Foreign Affairs on an Oversight Visit to the Uganda High Commission in London that took place between the 20th and 26th of August 2022. The terms of reference for the oversight visit are as follows, and they are listed from (a) to [Mr Nyangweso] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6555THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022(k). Madam Speaker, because of time, I shall go to the findings and observations. First is the mandate of the entities. Rule 187 (k) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates the Committee on Foreign Affairs to cover:1. Missions abroad; and, 2. Bilateral, Multilateral and International RelationsMadam Speaker, the reporting on findings from the missions abroad is cross-cutting, due to the fact that several services and programmes, which are provided and run at the Mission cut across various sectors, including, but not limited to trade, internal affairs, security and infrastructure. These issues have a bearing on economic and commercial diplomacy, which is a docket under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The mandate of the Uganda High Commission in London: 1. To protect the interests of Uganda;2. To protect Ugandans living abroad within the limits permitted by international law. 3. To negotiate with United Kingdom and Irish Governments; and4. To ascertain, by lawful means, conditions and developments of the UK and Ireland and report thereon; and5. Coordinate with the mission’s accredited countries, which are, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Findings and Observations The status of the mission - now this touches the actual terms of reference by which we visited this mission. The status of the Mission Charter and its alignment to the NDP III:A Mission Charter is a document outlining clear objectives, the structure and planned operations of the mission. However, like all other missions abroad, this Mission Charter was last updated in 2014. At the time of the delegation’s visit in August 2022, the Mission Charter was still undergoing review by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the meantime, the mission was being guided by:1. The Uganda National Development Plan, that is, NDP III; and2. The Mission’s Strategic Plan, which was approved by the National Planning Authority (NPA) as provided by Section 16(6); 18(4) and 27 of the NPA Regulations (2018). The Mission’s Strategic PlanAs indicated above, the Mission’s Strategic Plan was aligned with NDP III and it covers the following – and again because of time, it is listed from I to X1V and that will be expounded as follows: 0. Tourism development - In an effort to enhance tourism, the Uganda High Commission, through economic and commercial diplomacy, supports companies from Uganda, which export to the UK and Ireland. In the same way, the mission interests UK and Ireland companies to invest in Uganda and to make Uganda the number one tourism destination. However, these are the observations: 1. The delegation observed that while efforts were being made to promote tourism, the mission was constrained because it lacked the basic promotional materials such as banners, adequate funds to enhance media marketing and advertising.6556ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT2. Secondly, additional budgetary support was found necessary to enable missions to carry out various activities that will promote Uganda as the best tourism investment destination and a source of quality products to the outside markets.Recommendations Given the current commercial diplomacy, Government should provide a budget for this programme to enable adequate tailored activities, which will effectively make an impact on foreign Government policy and regulatory decisions that affect global trade and investment. Secondly, Government should facilitate this mission to enable it negotiate at the World Trade Organisation, European Union and other fora where Uganda is destined to benefit. Governance and securityMadam Speaker, the mission promotes regional and international peace and security through lobbying the United Nations and Ireland for both financial and technical support especially the Great Lakes Region, South Sudan and Somalia. ObservationsConsidering that Uganda has involved itself in pan-African efforts to pacify our neighbouring countries, this can easily make Uganda’s Mission vulnerable to target, hence the need to ensure adequate security at the official residence and the commercial building and chancery. Just to re-echo or re-emphasise that point, aside from Uganda’s pan-African interventions, a lot of protests against Government actually take place within the proximity of the Mission, and that quite often has endangered especially staff and people who access services in the Mission. Therefore, we recommend as follows: i) Metal detectors at the entrance to the Chancery.ii) Deployment of security guards to ensure full-time watch of incidences of insecurity at both the Chancery and the official residence.iii) Placement of front, side and rear boundaries as well as side and rear gates, providing clear demarcation to the Chancery. This will provide a fast-line defence. iv) A comprehensive intruder and hold-up alarm system to complement the physical security.v) Adequate lighting around the Chancery and the Official Residence; and vi) Establish a lift with a fob control in order to allow only staff to use the lift. In case of visitors, they should be escorted by staff. In the meantime, the Mission may be allowed to use some of the money, Madam Speaker, collected as Appropriation-in-Aid to install basic security equipment and personnel for the Chancery and Official Residence. Agro-industrialisation and trade - In accordance with objective IV of NDP III, this Mission has contributed to commercialisation and creation of competitiveness of agricultural production. The Mission has established a quarterly consultative framework for importers of Ugandan products to identify opportunities and challenges that they often face. The delegation visited Spitalfields Market where most of Uganda’s agricultural products are sold. This is a very old market - under the Corporation of London. It is strategically located near London City Airport, Heathrow and London Stansted Airport.The market receives a lot of agricultural products from Uganda ranging from Matooke to sweet potatoes, red chili, avocado and sugarcane, among others. These products are delivered by air cargo and there are pictures for reference to that effect.[Mr Opolot]SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6557THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022As already mentioned in the report, many people go to this market – traders, producers - all sorts of people. However, the absence, sometimes, of Ugandan products is so glaring whereas it is the opportunity –THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, sorry for interrupting, but it is common knowledge that this particular information was uploaded a fortnight ago. I am sure most Members are abreast with the details. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally proper for the Member to go to the observations and recommendations rather than reading the report, word by word?THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, this item has been on the Order Paper for the last two weeks. The presumption is that everybody has looked at it. Just go to the general observations and recommendations.MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, it is true that this item has been on the Order Paper for quite some time. However, when you read the report, you realise each item has its own uniqueness and comes with recommendations. Also, the issues in this report, over the years, have been reported, but nothing has been done. Just allow me –THE SPEAKER: That is why we are applying rule 220; we will ask for an action-taken report. This report was uploaded and they will report back to the House on the action-taken on each item that you are raising. So, just give us the general challenges affecting the performance of the Mission.MR OPOLOT: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will delve – based on your guidance - into the general challenges affecting the performance of the Mission. The general challenges are:1. High freight costs of cargo. The charges have made Uganda’s products expensive hence, uncompetitive; 2. There is also the lack of direct flights. This causes delays of products in arriving at the destination hence, the perishable goods ripen before they reach. This is coupled with supplies, which ought to be improved upon to ensure improved quality of the products that meet export standards, sanitary and other requirements; 3. Inadequate resources for promotion activities by the Mission due to budget ceilings provided by the ministry of finance. The Mission requires a total of Shs 71 million for the five-year period in order to fully implement its strategic plan. However, the medium-term expenditure projections or ceilings for 2021/2022 - 2024/2025 provide for only –(Interruption)MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, you just informed the House a few minutes ago that the report that is being read by the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs was uploaded a fortnight ago. I notice that the Minister of Foreign Affairs is not in the House. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to have the sector minister present in the House when such an important report is being presented so that issues that come up are handled immediately?THE SPEAKER: Are we going to stop legislating because of the inefficiency of ministers? 3.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason we have rule 220 in the Rules of Procedure is to ensure that actions taken by the House, whether the minister is there or not, are acted upon and a report is brought to the House. Therefore, while we would have desired that the minister be in the House, now that he is not here, I request that we continue. We are capturing and Government is here. Thank you.6558ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you finalise?MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, there is just one more page. 0. Foreign exchange losses. The Mission spends in Great British pounds. The entitlements, salaries, contracts and commitments are still indicated in pounds, but the actual Mission budgets - just like for other Missions - is prepared and approved in Uganda shillings. It is, however, noted that over time, the shilling often depreciates against foreign currencies, hence leading to a loss on foreign exchange and eventually, affecting the Mission’s budget and operations.  0. Budget ceilings and recurrent budget shortfalls. Funding of the Mission has greatly been affected by this. It was observed that while the Mission’s requirements keep increasing every year, the approved budget for the respective years does not keep pace. The Mission budget was cut from Shs 6,700,000,000 in the Financial Year 2021/2022, to Shs 6,150,00,000 in the Financial Year 2022/2023, this financial year, the total deficit for critical items is Shs 733,950,000 while the total budget shortfall is Shs 1,560,570,000. General recommendations1. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in conjunction with the Ministry of Public Service, should ensure that the following staff are deployed at the Missions:i) Education attaché;ii) Commercial attaché;iii) Labour attaché; andiv) Tourism attaché. This is basically to take advantage of the opportunities available in the United Kingdom.2. The Government of Uganda should provide funds to enable the establishment of official representation of Uganda in Ireland by establishing a diplomatic Mission in Dublin with initial minimum staffing. 3. The minister of finance should review and consider, for inclusion in the ministry’s Annual Budget 2023, the priority budget proposals submitted by the Missions to enable them effectively discharge their mandate. 4. The Government of Uganda should enhance all Foreign Service allowances. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit and lay the report on Table. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Opolot, for representing the committee. Members, when you look at these issues that are crosscutting, it is not about the UK Embassy alone; it is all over. When these officers exchange the allowances that are given to them, it comes to very little money. These people are expected to be paid a little better, but what they get is less compared to the cost of living in those countries. It is about the image of Uganda and you need to look at that. On the issue of releases, just imagine somebody is living in Russia. We appropriate money here, but no money is released. How do you expect that person to live in such a country? These people need the money in order to be able to operate. You need to look at these missions the way you look at the account of Parliament because they represent this country out there. I was asking somebody in Russia how much they earn in allowances and I was surprised. I said, I would rather be in Bukedea than in Russia. This is because in Bukedea, I can dig and get money. The allowances these people are getting are not something that can motivate somebody to go abroad. In addition, most of our buildings in the Missions are dilapidated. When you look at them, they are not worth saying that they are our buildings. SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6559THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022Honourable members, you have heard the issues. I am opening the debate for only 10 minutes.3.50 MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. Let us believe that the mere absence of Ministers of Foreign Affairs - definitely our Foreign Missions have to be like that. Order Papers are released a day before and every Member and minister has an iPad to access information on what will take place the next day. Madam Speaker, we need more time for Foreign Missions and we must know the purpose of creation of Foreign Missions. The moment we discover that, we shall do what is required by our country. Secondly, when you talk about your charter, what is the purpose of a charter? If you cannot review your charter for over 10 years, then that is not a charter. What are the goals, objectives, aims and achievements, as received from the Foreign Mission? Under the Committee on Public Accounts, we investigated these Missions and we know the challenges. Let us make comparison with other East African states such as Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania and see how they manage their Foreign Missions. The challenge we have here - and this is factual – is that our Foreign Missions became political missions. We need people with qualifications. There is an honourable member - I think he was a Minister of Internal Affairs sometime back; Hon. Baba. He raised serious issues here when we were eulogising a Member that I do not remember very well. We have all the capacity, but is there willingness from Government, Madam Prime Minister, to give power and energy to these Foreign Missions? We have a lot of wealth in America, but look at our Uganda House. It is next to the UN Headquarters and they were renting that building. However, because of mismanagement or not taking good care of these Foreign Missions, we are losing money. In Washington, we have a big house earning $60,000 per month, but all the money disappears mysteriously. We have to give more attention, but we definitely know the type of Government running this country. That is the way they can run Government; they cannot go beyond that. They have failed and will fail whatever can earn us money. We need foreign income from Foreign Missions, we need tourists, but all that work is done through Foreign Missions. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs is well educated in foreign affairs. I know where he worked before he came to Parliament –(Interjections)- Thank you very much, but it is very painful.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, I hope you are taking note of matters raised by Members. 3.53DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro):  Madam Speaker, 20 years ago, I was the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. The committee then combined those two; presidential and foreign affairs. One of our concerns at the time, having travelled quite a lot to our Missions, was exactly the issues that our colleague here is raising. 20 years later, hardly anything has changed. The truth of the matter is that the world is changing. If you cannot invest in commercial diplomacy, frankly, you are going to be weak and your influence in the world is going to be minimal. I just wonder what goes on with our colleagues in the Government, not to understand that the survival of our nation and the ability for Uganda to remain a member that is respected among the community of nations – that failure explains why we continue to ask for resources for these Missions. 6560ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTI would like to propose that this House takes it upon itself to fundamentally have a look at the state in which our Missions are. It is in our interest that we have Missions, which are very well represented. We should have men and women who are eminent and able to be the correct face of this nation. Can I, therefore, suggest, Madam Speaker, that you consider allowing Parliament to have a critical look at the state of our Missions? I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Much as we want to have a critical look at our Missions abroad, there is also a financial constraint. You cannot send people to all the Missions and still ask the ministry of finance to provide for that. 3.55MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the presentation. I also made some observations. One, investing in commercial diplomacy is a very important thing. This is very important because we need to build our economy, but from the local resources alone, we cannot do that. That is why we need to invest a lot in commercial diplomacy. Before I came to Parliament, I was working in South East Asia, especially the Mekong region of Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Myanmar and Laos. We did not have the presence of a diplomatic mission; we only had embassies in Kuala Lumpur and Beijing. It is very difficult for Ugandan students who are there to get visas in the Mekong region; you have to go to Kuala Lumpur. The good thing is that you get a visa on arrival there. However, to go to Beijing, you need another visa. I am happy that last week, His Excellency the President went to Vietnam to interact with that country that has focused on their economy, especially in the agricultural sector – focusing on rice, coffee and infrastructure. That country has moved and I am hopeful that many initiatives that can help Uganda were shared. Two, we have the World Trade Organisation. We need the ministers of trade and foreign affairs to pay attention to the issues that go on at the World Trade Organisation in Geneva. On many occasions, I have observed, even when very important meetings are going on, that Uganda’s seat is empty. Therefore, we need to focus on that so that we can build our commercial diplomacy and also benefit and build the economy of Uganda. I thank the committee for the report.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Gabriel Okumu -3.58MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you called Zombo, we all got up. Thank you for remembering me. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. However, I would like to ask the august House to particularly pay attention to our embassies abroad because if we have good embassies, which will promote the image of the country, even our agricultural produce will be able to fetch good prices on the world market. Today, I would like to inform the House that because of our poor marketing, coffee prices are at a free fall at the global stage. Six months ago, the price was at approximately Shs 12,000 in Zombo, but today, it is at about Shs 7,000. The House should give our Missions priority in terms of budget allocations. On their part, they should also work for the people to make sure that our produce fetches better prices. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.4.00MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. [Dr Buturo]SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6561THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022I would like to mention that when you focus your attention on promotion of products, you must promote a product, which is being produced. Therefore, your recommendation should touch the area of production so that it can be promoted. However, when you say you are going to promote goods in UK, yet, you have not made the goods appropriate for export, then, you have not completed these recommendation. Further, you mentioned the issue of the airline. We should have an express recommendation, which advises Uganda Airlines to try their best to at least support cargo exports. You have the airline; let it have kombi space so that you can support the process of both production and logistical support for export. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe, we also need to find out if we have a written foreign policy. 4.01MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Opolot and the Committee on Foreign Affairs for this good exposition of the report. I would like to make a comment, specifically on remuneration and facilitation of Foreign Service Officers. I was privileged to be on your delegation last year to the Fifth Eurasian Summit at St Petersburg. The Foreign Mission in Russia was involved in a lot of commercial diplomacy. They had a lot of exhibitions about our coffee and other agricultural products and they were also trying to attract Russian industries to Uganda. However, when we interacted with the staff of the Mission, one thing that struck us was that our Foreign Service staff still get a Foreign Service Allowance of $4,000. You might be alarmed and think that it is a lot of money. When we questioned how much it takes them to rent an apartment – mark you, that is an apartment, not a house. An apartment, for instance, in Moscow costs between $2,500 and $3,000. Remember these people have families and they have to subsist within such an economy. I suppose today, with the current sanctions, in such a Mission, it is even worse. Madam Speaker, the House should note that the current Foreign Service Allowances were determined way back in 2007. Uganda attempted to review Foreign Service Allowances two years ago, but it was stayed. We, therefore, implore Parliament that as we debate this report, we must look into the aspect of facilitating our Foreign Service Officers. Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on one more thing: equipping foreign Missions. Many of my colleagues here, whenever they arrive on a particular foreign visit, the first people they would like to see at the airport are the people from the Mission. I bet you anything that when we arrive there, we all expect them to accord us certain courtesies, as VIPs of this country. However, most of the time, these people cannot even afford beyond one vehicle that the ambassador is allocated. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, stop disturbing the ministers. MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For instance, our Mission in Rome has only one vehicle that is allocated to the Ambassador. Sometimes, when dignitaries from Uganda arrive in Rome, the Ambassador has to fix herself together with all the dignitaries from Uganda and others even sit in the extra seats in the boot of the vehicle because she wants to manage the VIPs from Uganda. These matters are very serious. I believe that just like the way we allocate resources to some projects – some of which do not even return investments as well as growth in this country – we need to support our Foreign Missions because the image that people perceive of you is the one that determines, in their view, how serious you are. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 6562ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, let us use one minute each. 4.05MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is a very important aspect that can actually contribute to nation building and foreign exchange. However, one, we need to ensure that these embassies and excellences therein can think of avenues. As a human resource person, I want to see that they exceed the requirements in terms of performance. For example, can they look at avenues where we would have a catalogue and have exports going to these countries? Madam Speaker, one time, I was on the streets of London and I saw a jackfruit, which cost £149, an equivalent of about Shs 70,000. (Interjections)W hatever the computation. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to look at these -THE SPEAKER: You know, whatever the figure is, you are a human resource person and not an accountant. (Laughter)MR BYAKATONDA: That is very true. So, Madam Speaker, our preoccupation as a country should be seeing about we can step up export promotions and reduce on imports. This would even increase employability. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have a lot of opportunities outside there that we are not maximizing, but we can only do that by motivating our staff who are in those embassies. 4.07MR RWEMULIKYA IBANDA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. According to the chairperson, the most important aspect is for the Missions to protect and promote the image of our country, Uganda. I had the privilege of travelling to Cairo and we went to our embassy, but it is alarming. The Ambassador took us around and the structure, where the Ambassador resides, is dilapidated.  Secondly, our Missions are not being facilitated to protect our citizens abroad. Many of our citizens are being rounded up and jailed, but when you ask the embassy - first of all, they are understaffed. The person serving the embassy is the same individual manning the gate as a security man. Why don’t they have staff? Madam Speaker, the issue of staff is also very critical and if the problem is funds, why don’t they merge? We have the Embassy of Canada in Tanzania, but if you want the visa here – Why don’t they merge? Do what you can manage. The other embassies should be closed so that we have those in the countries that we can manage.  (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We should bite what we can swallow. Let us not take too much when we cannot afford to look after them. 4.10MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take up from where Hon. Ariko ended on the issue of funding to the Missions. I would like to bring it to the attention of the current Ambassadors and High Commissioners who have been appointed. I was in Pretoria about two months ago and it shocking to learn that the ministry of finance has not released money to enable our High Commissioner submit his letters to other countries in the region because that Mission covers six other countries. I was with the Deputy Speaker in Mozambique. The High Commissioner could not come to Mozambique before presenting his credentials to the Head of State of Mozambique to receive the Deputy Speaker in Mozambique. SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6563THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022What is so special with the ministry of finance that it can consider this as consumptive expenditure? The Prime Minister must take it up. Good enough, the minister of finance is here. Are we serious when we are deploying our ambassadors? It is now coming to six months and they have not left the Mission to go and present their credentials to those countries that they are manning in the region. And it is not only limited to that; even those that have gone to other countries like in Tanzania and were supposed to cover the other regions - they have not been able to travel to present their credentials. Therefore, we call upon the Prime Minister to cause the ministry of finance to release the money because we budgeted for this money. It could have been little, but it was budgeted for to enable those activities be done. Let it not just be taken that they are consumptive expenditures. We want to move the House that the ministry of finance releases the money and provides for those High Commissioners and Ambassadors that have not presented their credentials to the respective countries to do so. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you look at the mandate of the High Commissioners, part of it is for them to protect the interests of Ugandans and in protecting the interests of Ugandans, they must take care of the Ugandans and have interactions with those who are living there in order for them to know what is happening. In Russia, a student committed suicide and the Embassy could not even afford to bring the body back home; the student was on Government sponsorship. We need to be able to facilitate our embassies to operate within what they are supposed to do. 4.13MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I picked a point from page 9 concerning the residences.One of the basic needs, according to Maslow, concerns the provision of shelter. However, you realise that the High Commissioner is renting and paying £150 per day. I computed and realized that this is £54,000 per year, which translates to about Shs 270 million per year. This is quite a lot of money. (Member timed out.)  THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.MR NELSON OKELLO: How many beds are being rented? I concur with the recommendation of the committee that the ministry of finance should consider giving money because they requested for only Shs 680 million to renovate the residence of the High Commissioner. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: In fact, per month they are paying Shs 22.5 million and that is a lot of money. The issue of renovation would be more feasible. 4.15MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu East County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about Uganda being represented in another country, we should also look at the quality of the human resource there, people who are well trained in diplomacy. It is alarming that majority of the staff and the Ambassadors – because an Ambassador is addresses as “His Excellency” or “Her Excellency” - meaning he or she is representing the whole country. For somebody who does not know diplomacy to represent country, I think the appointing authorities should also –THE SPEAKER: That is a general perception. Which ones lack diplomacy? MR KATABAAZI:  Most of them.THE SPEAKER: No, it should not be “most of them”. Just give us an example of a country; you may not mention names, but say “Country X or Country B”. That is a sweeping statement.6564ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMR KATABAAZI: Madam Speaker, it is sweeping statement, but in most cases, those who have failed somewhere are the ones who are appointed as Ambassadors elsewhere.THE SPEAKER: No - we have credible Ambassadors. You cannot say that all our Ambassadors lack diplomacy. It is just like saying that all our Members of Parliament have qualifications that are only equivalents. - No, we are not just “equivalents”. Do you understand? Do not say that “everybody lacks diplomacy”; “they do have diplomacy” because they go through a vetting process before they are approved by this House. Unless you are imputing that this House has a problem - because we are the ones who approve them. 4.17MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important matter and I just want to touch on a few issues. I thank God that Honourables James Nsaba Buturo and Elijah Okupa are here. I would like this Parliament to know that the Foreign Affairs building you see now was given by Parliament. We decided that Foreign Affairs must move away from that old wretched building to give a good image to our foreign affairs. We worked hard to make sure we have a Foreign Affairs building that presents the right image of this country. In Washington D.C., in the Ambassador’s Office, there are buckets collecting water, whenever it rains. Madam Speaker, I was in Brussels. Our building there had been blacklisted for criminal hideouts and we had to work hard to get money to rehabilitate that place. Madam Speaker, recently, when the Queen died, I was in the UK, where you had sent me. Can you imagine the Ambassador does not have a heating system? During winter, temperatures are negative degrees – I mean, what is going on? London is like our main Mission. Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Peter Ogwang and I were in China. A prime country with free land, which was given to us – just to develop the property, but nobody has taken action. Are we really serious? Madam Speaker, we need a strategic plan for the Foreign Affairs so that we know where we are going. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We should have a written policy. -  We do not have one. – let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition and then, the Prime Minister. 4.19THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the one of – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hajj, please, do not leave. Issues of works are coming in and you are the shadow minister for works. I want you in.MR NAMBESHE: I applaud the UK Mission for the good working relationship with the Ugandans living in the diaspora. They are reputed for mobilising our diaspora citizenry for development through their remittances, investment, and skill transfers. Madam Speaker, there is a grave concern from Ugandans in the diaspora especially when it comes to the fact that they do not participate in the governance of their country. It is a disenfranchisement that has been occasioned on them given that we have not fast-tracked the Constitutional Review Commission to have an amendment in the Constitution so that they are allowed to exercise their right and privilege to vote their leaders. Lastly, the issue of lack of a well-documented National Foreign Policy is a serious concern because it impedes the realisation of our National Development Plan III and I do not know why the Government is in – (Member timed out.) SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6565THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to know what is happening with the National Foreign Policy – whether we have it or not, including the Mission Charter.    4.22THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a good and guiding document. Thank you very much, Chairperson and your committee. I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for according them time. Honourable members, we have a Foreign Policy, but it is not written; it is guided by the Constitution. What you are demanding of us is to have it written, go through the whole process and lay it on Table in Parliament. I will take that up because it is something that we ought to have done years back. (Interruption)   MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for allowing this clarification about the unwritten Foreign Policy. I would like to know from among the Government officials and ministers –THE SPEAKER: There is no unwritten policy. There is simply no policy. MR ODUR: I would like to know whose brain, among the ministers here – (Laughter) – so that we can know -THE SPEAKER: There is no policy. Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members -THE SPEAKER: Anyway, we need a written policy. MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker. Most obliged. Honourable members, the report had given us – the recommendations are good and we all desire that. When it comes to issues of rehabilitating the embassies, you have appropriated funds and this has been on-going. We should speed up and make priorities since there is competition in the world. We need to ensure our country’s interests are covered in all the areas where we have embassies, in issues of commercial diplomacy, trade and labour. You have appropriated funds here and that is why our UN House in New York was rehabilitated. Currently, rehabilitation is also on-going at our High Commission in Nairobi. On the issue to do with export and our interests in trade, let us have our policy implemented; we need to add value to our products because that is the only way we shall implement the import substitution policy. THE SPEAKER: Let us have a policy in place first, then we can implement it. MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have said that three times. For the time, I have been on the microphone and there is no other word that I can say, other than “most obliged” which I have already used. (Laughter) I need guidance on this. THE SPEAKER: Let us have the policy first, then we implement it and do the business. MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I was that the price of coffee beans may go down, but not the price of brewed coffee. The price of cocoa beans may go down, but not the price of chocolate.  (Interruption) MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, my young sister who is now the Prime Minister today –(Interjections) – she is my young sister. I am the one who knows, not you. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, she is trying to justify that there is actually a policy, which must be implemented, yet you have laboured to explain to her that there is none. Can I, therefore, procedurally advise - or probably, you can guide us - as to why we should give money to Foreign Affairs unless 6566ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTwe have a policy to guide us where that money is going? Is it right for this ministry to continue asking for money for the recurrent budget when actually, they do not have a policy? THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, we need a policy in this House before we go to the budgeting process.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I would like to say that I support the report. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members and the Prime Minister for supporting the report. In this report, you notice that the issues cut across very many Missions - almost all of them. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Oversight Visit to the Ugandan High Commission in London, United Kingdom, be adopted with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: Executive, please, prepare a report on the actions taken report on all the issues that have been raised in here as per rule 220. Thank you.PRESENTATION OF ACTION-TAKEN REPORTS ON RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENT, MAY 2021 TO MAY 2022MINISTRY OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVESTHE SPEAKER: The minister of trade is one of the very loyal ministers. He is always here even before anybody else. He is a very consistent minister. We thank you for that. (Applause)Actually, we should have awards at the Christmas dinner and give you one. Can we look at the issues that were raised, the decisions and actions taken?4.30THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I invite you to look at Page 47 of the report of the Leader of Government Business, which was uploaded regarding actions taken by Government on the resolutions of the 11th Parliament. The first issue was on the Shs 200,000 that was charged from the farmers to supply pumps by the Teso Farmers’ Cooperative Union. The House resolved that this money should be refunded. We have agreed to refund this money in a phased manner, beginning January next year –THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.MR MAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 41 on Prime Minister’s Time states thus: “There shall be time designated as Prime Minister’s Time, commencing at 4.00 p.m. every Thursday.”Are we proceeding well yet this is the right time for the Prime Minister’s Time and this -THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the custodian of these laws is the Speaker of Parliament and since she has said, “Can we go to action-taken reports,” that is a decision of the Speaker. The fact that these are actions that have been taken by the Executive, which you expect from the Prime Minister, I am using my prerogative, as the Speaker, to have this presented on the Floor. Can we look at the action-taken reports?MR BAHATI: Resolution Two was to do with the supply of fruits. The House resolved that the Teso cooperative union should not monopolise the supply of fruits to the factory and recommended that this should be opened up. This has been opened up. [Mr Odur]6567THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022The cooperative now only supplies 20 per cent of the required fruits and 80 per cent is supplied by other organised farmers not only in Teso Region, but even in the neighbouring districts. Resolution Three was that the House resolved that we should put the board of the factory immediately in place. Action-taken is that UDC, which is a shareholder, has nominated five members to the board. These will be ratified by the general assembly, which is scheduled for this December.The House also resolved that the IGG should investigate the Chief Executive Officer, Mr Douglas Ndawula and the entire management because of possible inflation of the cost of operations and other related expenditures for the Financial Year 2020/2021. Madam Speaker, the CEO has since stepped down from the company. We have also agreed that the IGG continues to investigate and then action will be taken thereafter. We resolved, as a House that the factory should secure a weighbridge. The action-taken is that through a supplementary provided by this House, for which we are very grateful, the weighbridge has been secured and installed with a capacity of 100 tonnes. The certification process of this weighbridge is being concluded by UNNBS. The House also resolved that Government should provide the factory with funds to start processing oranges, which are predominantly grown by farmers in the Teso Subregion. Madam Speaker, three weeks ago, Government decided to increase the capitalisation of UDC, from Shs 500 billion, to Shs 5 trillion, creating a headroom for the company to invest in not only processing facilities for crops like oranges, but also consider others like cocoa, which is grown in Bundibugyo, Cassava, grown in the Acholi and Irish potatoes grown in the Kigezi Subregion. This will be done as soon as we get the resources.Further, the House recommended the termination of the contract between UDC and Teso Cooperative Union. We are of the view that this has no consequences because there is no monopoly by the Cooperative Union since it only contributes 20 per cent of the required supplies. In the same vein, the House recommended that we should separate the powers between UDC and the Cooperative Union. The action-taken is that this has been fully achieved with the appointment of the board and management. This will be fully implemented when the board is ratified this month, at the general meeting. Also, the House recommended that there should be a forensic audit of the management of the factory. I hereby report that the Auditor-General is currently undertaking the audit and we are waiting for this report. Action will be taken after the Auditor-General has reported to Parliament since he is an officer of Parliament. Furthermore, the House resolved that 20 per cent of the shares in the factory allegedly owned by the Cooperative Union be opened up to other farmers’ cooperatives and unions in Teso Subregion. Since this is a legal matter, we think that it can smoothly be implemented and action is taken when a new body is in place, after the ratification of the members this month. The contract reviews and performance of the staff Action takenWe have developed a strategic plan where key performance indicators and targets have been set. All staff are being reviewed, including vacant positions that are to be filled. Investigating the project manager for the perimeter wall and the roadMr Jude Matsiko is no longer an employee of the UDC since 2016. However, the IGG is 6568ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTinvestigating these allegations and action will be taken after the investigations. The value for audit on the factoryAs I said, Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General is auditing and will take action after he has reported to Parliament accordingly. In order to grow the company and ensure that Soroti Fruit Factory meets the demand of the farmers, all shareholders should make their fair contribution towards re-capitalisation and administration costs of the company. Capital restructuring of this factory has been approved by the UDC board and mobilisation for more capitalisation is being done by the shareholders. We should incorporate corporate governance in the running of the factory affairs. This has been done because now the new board will be in place to separate management from the board issues. Securing a fully-fledged packaging lineMadam Speaker, Parliament resolved that we should procure a fully mechanised packaging line to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of production in the factory. Action takenWe are grateful that a supplementary budget of Shs 5.5 billion was provided by this House to cater for the packaging process. The process of procurement to acquire a new line is on-going. In addition, more land has been acquired from Uganda Investment Authority in the Soroti Industrial and Business Park for the expansion plan. Therefore, once the procurement is done, we will install this packaging line and expand the factory to be able to accommodate increased production by the people of Teso. The last resolution was that the officers that are said to have misappropriated funds, which were appropriated and invested by UDC in the Soroti Fruit Factory step aside as investigations are carried out. If they are found not guilty, they can be reinstated to their offices. Mr Jude Matsiko has not been staff since 2016, but more importantly, the CEO, who is the key manager of the factory, has stepped down as investigations go on. Therefore, these are the actions that we have taken on the resolutions of this House. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Bahati. I seem not to have heard the report on rice. You have only concentrated on Soroti, but there was also the issue of sugar.4.41THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, also conspicuously missing, is the resolution on the controversial vinci coffee deal. It has not been captured and it could be deliberate.MR BAHATI: On the Vinci coffee, like you said, it is deliberate because it is being handled by another ministry. The ministry of finance will report on that. On rice -THE SPEAKER: Actually, the contract for coffee was between the ministry of finance and the Attorney-General’s Chambers.MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will ensure that the actions taken on rice and -THE SPEAKER: Tea and tobacco. MR BAHATI: Yes, we shall make a report next week to the House.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, we will not subject your resolutions to a debate until we have everything from your ministry. We will debate all of them at once. 4.42MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In line with your guidance, the minister has presented actions taken. However, last week, we resolved that [Mr Bahati]6569THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022they should also be laying something evidential to this effect. He has told us what they have done, but there is no empirical evidence laid on Table. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: When you say they are being audited, we want evidence that the audit is taking place. They wrote a letter to the Auditor-General - When you say that the board is in place, who are the board members that you have selected? We need action taken plus evidence-based reports. I hope you are not debating this report.MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will lay the letters that we have referred to, for example, the CEO stepping aside, the work of the Auditor-General and others on Table next week. Needless to say, the Leader of Government Business and all of us were reporting on action taken on the reports, which were considered between May 2021 and May 2022. That is the report that has been submitted by the Government to this House. The report on rice came after May 2022.MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I thought Hon. Bahati had understood what was going on because since Tuesday, he has been attending the House. You have seen how your colleagues have been presenting their reports; they came with a written report. You saw yesterday when Hon. Nabakooba presented the one of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on the issue of the Naguru–Nakawa Land and the Kasoli Project. It was in a written format with annexes attached. I think that is what the Speaker is asking of you. That is the format your colleagues used. Could you, please, adopt that such that we are able to crosscheck this information?THE SPEAKER: He said he is going to bring it next week.MR OKUPA: Then he should have said that he was not ready. THE SPEAKER: By the way, even the Markets Bill, 2021 falls under your docket. Could you give us the status of the Markets Bill, 2021, which has taken almost six months? MR OCEN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the action-taken as has been presented. Although – THE SPEAKER: Are you debating what I have already ruled? MR OCEN: I am not debating. I would like to give information on the promotion of cassava growing and processing where he stated -  THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ocen, you are getting out of context. Can we debate it on Tuesday? MR OCEN: But Madam Speaker, I wanted to give information – THE SPEAKER: I am saying, can we debate it on Tuesday?MS AGNES ATIM: Madam Speaker, mine is a procedural issue. Last week, the presiding officer guided that the minister should present to us the action-taken report as per Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, which requires both resolutions and recommendations. They were guided, like you have just guided, that the report be amended.However, I was going through the report that has just been presented and it did not accommodate the resolutions that we made last week to include the recommendations that you have rightly highlighted and other issues that were not reflected. So, are we proceeding rightly to receive more reports, which are just the same as the ones we received last week, yet, we had requested that they should be amended to accommodate most of the areas that were omitted? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: He is going to amend and present them next week. In the next presentation, he will have amended it and brought evidence to that effect. Thank you. 6570ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTMR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This rule 220, under which we are proceeding, commands ministers to bring action-taken reports. From the reports that have been submitted so far, it is clear that some ministers – and it will continue – are not reporting on some aspects and there is no rule that guides on how we shall proceed with that. I would like to ask you, Madam Speaker, that when you retreat to your Chambers, under rule 8, you get guidance for us on how we are going to proceed with ministers that either intentionally or unintentionally omit certain reports from being brought to this House. You could give us guidance next week on this matter so that we know how to deal with these ministers.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jonathan, when I gave an order that we should have reports, I made it very clear that they needed to extract everything that was discussed for a particular ministry. If a minister brings, partly, what he thinks he can answer, then, you should be able to raise what he has not brought and it must be responded to. So, that ruling was already made. I have issues that have not been covered. I also expect you, honourable members, to have issues that were not covered. Therefore, you need to do your research and make sure that everything that was brought in this House – be it oral or written– is covered. That is why they do a rebuttal on whatever is presented. (Interruption) MS NANDAGIRE: I have an urgent issue, which I would like to inform the minister about.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Christine, we are not on those urgent issues; we are on actions taken. Urgent issues come immediately after the Speaker’s communication.Honourable members, I do not even know where the May issue came from – “from May 2021to May 2022”. I do not know where it came from. It is not on the Hansard. It did not come from me. I said I wanted actions taken to date. Why don’t you give us the actions? The rules do not specify the time. That is why I was telling Members that instead of raising matters of national importance, you should bring them when ministers are presenting actions taken. There are those that take a long time, which you can report that they are work in progress. 4.50THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I think we will have to guide our ministers to adhere to the guidance you have just given because the letter the Prime Minister wrote to the ministers indicated May 2021 to May 2022 and that is what the ministers have prepared.  Therefore, please, bear with us – for those who are going to present – to present up to May 2022 and then, we go back and do as per your guidance. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: No problem. You will come back and finalise to-date. We should be able to go for holidays when we know that we have sorted whatever is outstanding. Next item -MINISTRY OF WORKS AND TRANSPORTTHE SPEAKER: Minister of works, when you look at the items that have been addressed, one, the Physical Planners – can you get a pen and paper and write? The Physical Planners Registration Bill, 2021 is under your docket. We need to know - is it under lands or works?Anyway, the Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill is under your docket; can we know the status? MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the ministry of lands is the one – THE SPEAKER: No, I withdrew that one. I am on traffic. MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you. 6571THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022THE SPEAKER: Can I know the status of that Bill? Two, a motion to withdraw a request to borrow €96,270,833 which was equivalent to $108 million from Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance Masindi-Biso-Kabale. Can I know the status of that? Three, the report of the Supplementary Schedule No.1 of 2021 – the money that was provided for your ministry. Can we know what that supplementary did and how much it covered?The report on the National Budget Framework 2022/2023, 2026/2027 – how much was released to you, how much have you received and what has it done? Are we together, Hon. Fred? The report on the operations of Civil Aviation Authority - you saw what was in the papers and everywhere. Can we know the status? A report on the operations of Uganda Railways Corporation – can we know it? A report on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for 2023/2024 on Physical Infrastructure sector – can we also know that, on top of what you are going to present? That is what I saw that you have left out. (Applause)4.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin with the resolution of Parliament urging Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. The resolution urges Government to increase funding for the road safety programmes and activities -THE SPEAKER: Can I give guidance for the next reports. Resolution of Parliament urging Government to strengthen the efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda, arising out of report A, B, C and D or arising out of an oral question or arising out of  a motion -so that we can easily make a follow up. Are we together? You must refer to something, where are you getting what you are presented.MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg that if it is in that case, we be given time and come up with a well organised report because we did not refer to that when we were preparing our report.THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the shadow minister and then infrastructure?4.57MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come on the microphone with a very big smile. I have just been taking notes of what you have highlighted. We have had interaction with the ministry outside Parliament and the issues you are raising have no answers to-date, I am sure.  Therefore, I would really agree and join my colleague as a checkmate to give him ample time to address these salient questions and areas you have highlighted, Madam Speaker. I beg to support him because as we talk, it will take hours for him to answer and address these. Now that you have rightly guided, I am sure he will go home and come up with a response appropriate to what has been raised by you.THE SPEAKER: Yes infrastructure -S4.58THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give clarification on two issues. We processed the Physical Planners Registration Bill here and the President assented to it.THE SPEAKER: I thought that was withdrawn.MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  No, it was not.THE SPEAKER: Hon. David Karubanga, we said leave that out, we are looking at traffic - unless you were not listening. 6572ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTBy the way, chairperson, you vanished when we wanted you to present your report. I am going to give all the chairpersons warning letters, those who vanish when they are supposed to be here. All chairpersons are supposed to be in the House daily. That is why you are chairpersons.MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Madam Speaker, I wrote to you a note on that. The second was the traffic amendment, which is under finance not the ministry of works. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Traffic -MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Yes, Madam Speaker, road safety and traffic is under finance because it has fees. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pacuto is that true?MS PACUTO: Yes, Madam Speaker. If you recall, that is one of the Tax Bills that we usually present on the Floor. It has a fee component. It is under the ministry of finance.THE SPEAKER: We are not talking about the fees. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are talking about how to regulate the traffic on the roads. Stop misleading this country.5.00THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, all laws or Acts that have a component of revenue collection, it is only that component that goes to the ministry of finance, but it is also done by the line ministry. Let me give an example. The ministry of lands collects Stamp Duty, which falls under the ministry of lands, but the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. Members are mixing up the issue of revenue collection and the issue of regulating that sector.MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This falls under our docket. [The Speaker]I am also a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Matters of policy and operations fall under our committee. THE SPEAKER: The line sector, ministry of works. MR NSIBAMBI:  Then the minister of finance, just talks about collecting dues. THE SPEAKER: The revenues, yes. MR NSIBAMBI: In my response, Madam Speaker, we have a response to their report in this regard.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you also have a response to the issues that I raised. If you do not have the issues that I have raised, please, pick a copy from my office to help you so that you get the details to respond to.MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Remember it is still under your ministry that the issues of the Project Affected Persons (PAP) were also raised in different areas of Bunyoro. Please, go and look at the reports and come with it. PAPs came up several times.5.02MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the ministry of works how the sector will be affected by the new Traffic Act. I think that is of great interest because it has a lot of areas that are likely to be affected by the new act. So, when you come to present, we will be interested to know how it is going to impact in many areas. That is under your docket. Thank you.5.03THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine  Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, what Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising is part of the road safety that the minister of works will come here and explain. Thank you. 6573THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 1 DECEMBER 2022MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES5.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE)(Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I presented mine on the first day of the presentations. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Minister of agriculture, did you present?MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, the minister of agriculture presented, but it was only in respect to one resolution passed that touch different ministries and this was the one on cattle rustling; and what they were supposed to do, but not on all the resolutions.THE SPEAKER: Minister of agriculture, we have the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021. Can you give us an update to that effect? Are you writing?Secondly, we need a report on the Supplementary Schedule No. 1, 2021/2022, how much money did you get? Where did you put it and what is the outcome? Thirdly, on the report on the National Budget Framework 2022/2023, 2026/2027, we need a report on the revised expenditure estimates of 2021 and the budgetary proposals for the estimated revenue amounting to Shs 48, 130, 684, 383. And then we need a report on a ministerial statement. Finally, we need a report on how much money you got from what was approved or how much was released and where was it put.So, you will come back, but also, you need to get a report from what the Opposition has so that you go and work backwards and report back. MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, basing on the guidance that you gave us this afternoon, the record that was submitted to the Clerk’s Office does not meet the standard. My prayer is that you give us more time and we shall come back and take into consideration the guidance you have given us so that on Tuesday, we give more comprehensive reports.  THE SPEAKER: But do you appreciate what I am telling you that if we gave you supplementary money or a loan, we need to know what it did?MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, we had put more effort into these other resolutions outside the Budget Framework Paper, the Budget and the supplementaries. That is something that is running through all our reports and that is why I am requesting for more time because I have appreciated your guidance as more comprehensive and detailed than what we have. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, can I have copies of your responses. 5.07THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Madam Speaker, most obliged, but as a matter of procedure and you being the custodian of the same-THE SPEAKER: No, I am saying, can I have copies in my office?MR NAMBESHE: Copies have already been supplied to your office, Madam Speaker, and we have scrutinised this –THE SPEAKER: You supplied my office without uploading them?MR NAMBESHE: We have uploaded even the responses. After scrutinising the reports, including this one from the ministry of agriculture, we have found very many gaps. I would like to be on record on the Floor of Parliament, raising these gaps before this action-taken report. We are ready, Madam Speaker, as per that list of ministries that is on the Order Paper apart from that of Trade, which featured after you amended the Order Paper. 6574ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE 11TH PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: No, the ministry of trade will still come back; no problem. 5.09MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): I thank you very much on this area, but there is something to the Prime Minister. When you hear the Speaker reading all those areas she has given, they must have been handled by this House. What we need from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is what the Speaker is doing by removing laziness from ministers. What the Speaker is reading is business for Parliament. It includes Bills – I think you have been following  – the moment the Speaker reads all these areas that have been demanded by the House, as resolutions, the most important issue is that ministers should accept responsibility for failing to produce those Bills. Parliament works through Bills and other business, but -THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has accepted. They are going to take it up and actually, she appreciates what we are adding into what they have. Honourable members – (Member rose) yes?MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker-THE SPEAKER: By the way, our ministers are not lazy. MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Executive, to thank you for leading us and guiding Parliament. (Applause) Previously, in the last Parliament, these action points would come and be laid on Table, but it has been improved that we have even to debate them as we audit ourselves, as Parliament and the Executive. Therefore, I thank you, but since it is the first of its kind, I would really plead, Madam Speaker, the honourable Member saying that we are lazy -THE SPEAKER: I responded to that: my ministers are not lazy. One thing is, once you bring an action-taken report on the Floor, once we debate it, I would also want you the Members of Parliament to do your oversight role and go and check to whether it is really correct. If they said they worked on a road, is it true the road was worked on? If they said the PAPs were paid, you need to confirm that they were paid. Let us not do lamentations in this House.As I told you, my House stops at 5.00 p.m. I, therefore, adjourn the House to Tuesday. (The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 December 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)   