Tuesday, 27 November 2012

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. At the beginning of this session, I reminded honourable members about the need to attend the plenary as well as committees of the House as expected by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, and my office continues to receive reports on Members’ attendance. We note that while there has been a bit of improvement in the plenary, there are areas that are still wanting. So, I want to call upon the party whips to execute their mandate so that attendance both in committees and plenary comes up to our satisfaction. This is the last time I am warning Members that if this continues, I will not hesitate to name the Members who are continuously and repeatedly absent.
 
I also want to inform Members that the Parliamentary Outreach Programme, which we institutionalised, is continuing, and we shall be in Moroto in the Karamoja region between the 19th and 21st December. The rationale for this programme is to take Parliament to the people and explain what we are doing; and to also to understand the issues of the population in the region so that we can appreciate their needs, their challenges and aspirations. 

So, I am giving notice to the Members from Karamoja that we shall be there 19th to 21st December in Moroto Municipality.

On medical insurance, honourable members, we notified you, and we invited the service providers who came here, but I am informed that on the first day, there were six service providers and there was only one Member. On the second day, a few more Members came in and so far only 122 have indicated their preference as follows:

•	Fifty Members for AAR rescue services;
•	Forty Members for International Air Ambulance;
•	Twenty-five Members for Case Medicare; and
•	Seven Members for Sanlam Medical Insurance. 

I want to remind you, honourable members, that you are delaying the process by not cooperating with the Commission, and putting your lives at risk and those of your families, especially in case there is an emergency, which will require medical intervention. Members need to be responsible. I know that sometimes Members feel that they have not fallen sick, and so, they do not need medical insurance; but accidents can occur any time and you may end up in the hospital. 

So, I appeal to all of you who have not yet selected a service provider, to do so by Monday 3rd December, so that we can process, in a timely manner, the package on your behalf. 

I urge the party whips to assist the Commission in this exercise by emphasising its importance and urgency. Actually, after the deadline of 3rd, the Commission will go ahead to unilaterally determine the medical insurance providers for the rest of the Members. So, we shall allocate you automatically after the 3rd if you have not chosen.

We propose to have an end of year party on the 14 December 2012, to coincide with the end of the second meeting of the session of Parliament. You are requested to note this date in your calendars and come with dancing shoes, and polish up your dancing skills. 

I also want to announce that the Clerk to Parliament and the Finance Committee have organised a half-day sensitisation workshop for MPs on the Public Finance Bill. This will take place on Tuesday, 4 December 2012 in the Parliamentary Conference Hall starting at 9.00 O’clock in the morning. Please endeavour to attend; the Bill is very important for our work.

The MP for Moroto had something very important to say.

2.50
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising under Rule 65 to raise a very important matter. This matter is coming up as a result of the looming tension between the investors in Moroto District.

His Excellency the President, launched a cement factory in Budaka on 20 November 2012, and the owner of this company is Dauwu Group, which is a Saudi Arabian based company that would like to mine minerals in Karamoja, more notably cement. 

However, the people of Moroto District are dissatisfied because of the location of the factory. They would not want to ferry marble and limestone from Moroto for the factory in Budaka. Budaka is a distance of about 300 kilometres from Moroto. So, the people of Moroto District are on tension; they are demonstrating, and yesterday the bishops joined the communities of Moroto to air out their dissatisfaction over the factory, which is supposed to be located in Budaka.

The bottlenecks for investment in Karamoja have been addressed; notably, insecurity, which was caused by armed conflict. This was addressed by the 10-year disarmament programme, which has rid the region of illegal guns. 

The second bottleneck which has been addressed by Government is the extension of power to Karamoja, which is in its final stages. So, it defeats our understanding why the factory should be located in Budaka and not in Moroto. We know that when you relocate the factory from Moroto to Budaka, you are actually relocating the social benefits that are associated with the construction of this factory. This would have given the people of Moroto District and the people of Karamoja an opportunity for employment and to improve their livelihoods. But it defeats our understanding and logic why marble and limestone will be ferried from Karamoja to Budaka. 

So, the people of Matheniko County, want an answer from the Minister of Energy and Minerals, because they are saying they will not allow even a crystal of limestone to leave Karamoja for Budaka. No crystal of marble will leave Moroto for Budaka if the Dauwu Group Company continues to construct a cement factory in Budaka! That cement factory is regarded as a white elephant -(Interruption)

MR ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give information as regards the matter that my brother has raised. Just this morning, I got a call from a number of young people, who are saying that even if Government has taken the guns, stones are available. I advised the, and told them, “No, before you resort to picking stones, let us first understand what this strategy is this, that Government is encouraging factories outside of where their raw materials are.”
 
It is on record; in the UN reports 2008/2009/2010, Karamoja stands at 82 percent of people living below the poverty line, and  we thought that all these opportunities from the factories would also boost the economy of our people. It is very disheartening. 

This should be on record. We are not against the people of Budaka getting such an opportunity, neither are we against the investors. We welcome that; but we are saying, for how long shall we continue undermining a region that has suffered and that has remained behind for these years? 

As I add more information, the people of Kitui in Kenya yesterday threatened to drag Government to court because Government is also trying to put a factory outside their constituency, which has got raw materials. 

As we talk now, the youth are organising a riot and we do not want to encourage it. My brother has put a point clearly that these raw materials that God has endowed - this region has been blessed with just stones  and you are denying them benefits from natural stones – limestone! If you have even probed OPM, what about the stones? Why don’t you give our people chance? We thank Government for connecting power. That is good. The roads are getting worked on, but what is the logic of now taking these resources out of the country? 

A rebel group was formed in the Nile Delta region in Nigeria because the resources were taken out and that resource was denying a chance to the people of the Nile Delta, and it became a problem. That is the information I would like to give to this House so that this House, with the wisdom that God has given us, supports the initiative to be in Karamoja. Thank you, my brother.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that useful information. I want to conclude, Madam Speaker, by highlighting the disadvantages associated with this long distance transportation of raw materials from Karamoja. 

We have seen how the road condition between Amudat and Tororo has degenerated. So, we are not going to allow another road to get spoilt because of long transportation of limestone. We want a justification from the Minister for Energy and Minerals, to explain to us and the people of Moroto District why this is happening at this time. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, Your Excellency the Vice-President, I think you have heard the issues of equity that they are talking about. I do not know who will respond to their concern that a they are a poor region that is impoverished, but the raw materials are being driven 300 kilometres to Budaka, instead of establishing facilities in Karamoja.

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I do take cognisant of the important point the honourable colleagues are making, and it is Government intention to attract investment, especially to the Karamoja region like to other areas, in respect of the raw materials that exist in that region. The fact that one production unit is being established in Budaka is not reason to believe that nothing is going to be done in Karamoja. 

As a matter of fact, this week we shall be receiving a delegation of investors who are particularly interested in setting up a cement factory in Karamoja. We are going to met them this week and we hope the negotiations and discussions with them will lead to the establishment of this factory as soon as possible.

MR MPUUGA: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What rule?

MR MPUUGA: Rule 22.

THE SPEAKER: Speak to the rule and explain.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am only one-and-a-half years old in this House, but I am privy to the normal way of functioning of this House. This morning and afternoon as I came into this House, I found a seemingly unusual situation around Parliament. I did not know whether it is by your tacit approval or direct approval. Parliament is seemingly besieged. I had to explain myself to enter the precincts of Parliament.

As I came through the security checks, I also realised that there is anti-riot Police and military around and inside Parliament, almost akin to what some of us saw in 1966.

I rose, Madam Speaker, under Rule 22, to be guided by you whether what we see around Parliament is actually normal; or as to whether there is an attempt to try to really force Parliament to act in an unusual manner; or to force it because, what happened in 1966 was that Parliament actually legislated under gunpoint. 

I remember when one Arm of Government attempted to besiege another Arm - the judiciary - it protested because the military and Police were deployed without their approval. I see the same thing happening to Parliament. Is this really normal, Madam Speaker? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think something unusual has also happened in that, for the first time, people are being invited to come to Parliament in large numbers. Radio announcements have been made; and press statements have been made telling people, “come to Parliament.” So, that is an unusual situation. The public can access parliamentary proceedings on radio and television; but they have been invited in thousands to come to this House. 

Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE DECISION TO CONSTITUTE THE PHYSICAL PLANNING COMMITTEE OF THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

3.00
THE MINISTER OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, the copies are ready for distribution, and I request that they get distributed before I read out the statement. (Interruptions) They are available in the Chamber.

Okay, thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on 21 November 2012, hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality, in Mukono District, raised a matter concerning the management and running of Kampala City in regard to physical planning. She wanted to know why I had directed KCCA to constitute the Physical Planning Committee and the Metropolitan Planning Authority. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I promised this august House that on this 27th day of November, I would make a statement on the directive, and I do hereby oblige. 

It is true that a week ago, I instructed Kampala Capital City Authority to establish the Physical Planning Committee in accordance with the provision of section 9 of the Physical Planning Act, 2010 to process and handle the backlog of about 4,000 plans/development applications, that have been pending. Many developers whose work is at a standstill because of KCCA’s failure to approve their plans have been petitioning the minister, including my predecessor. 

It was on that account that my predecessor wrote to the Authority on 10 August 2012 asking them to urgently establish the committee. The Authority did not take action and there was no response as to why they hadn’t. See the letter attached. 

Given the urgency of the matter, and the need to help developers who were sitting on loaned money and were unable to commence their sites, I decided to act in accordance with section 79 of the KCCA Act to direct them to act. I am now glad to know that the committee has been formed and the developers’ plans/applications are being considered. This was my major concern and I hope it is in everybody’s interest. 

However, the process of forming the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is ongoing, and as soon as we finish all consultations, the membership will be appointed.

The issues raised by hon. Nambooze hinge on whether KCCA is supposed to have a physical planning committee or whether physical planning matters within Kampala are to be handled within the Metropolitan Physical Planning Committee provided for in section 22 of the KCCA Act, 2010.

Madam Speaker, in consultation with the Attorney-General, the following explains the distinction between the Physical Planning Committee and the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. It is important to understand the stability of the Physical Planning Act, 2010 to Kampala Capital City; the dichotomy between the physical planning committee and the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority; and the appointment of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, which has little powers over the others.

The Physical Planning Act, 2010

The Physical Planning Act, 2010 stipulates as follows:

i)	To provide the establishment of a National Physical Planning Board; 
ii)	To provide for the composition, functions and procedure of the board;
iii)	To establish district and urban physical planning committees; and

iv)	To provide for the making and approval of physical development plans and for the applications for development permission and for related matters.
	
Section 3 of the said Act declares the whole country as a planning area and brings it under planning control. This implies that all development, whether in the urban or rural areas, should be subjected to planning approval from either the National Physical Planning Board or the respective physical planning committees as the case may be. 

The National Physical Planning Board replaced the former Town and Country Planning Board. The board has supervisory powers over all district and urban planning committees. The Physical Planning Committees are largely composed of district technical staff, but also include a planner in private practice, who is appointed on the advice of the Secretary, National Physical Planning Board. 

The Constitution, (Amendment) Act No.11 of 2005 amended Article 5 of the Constitution to reflect the special status of Kampala as the Capital City of Uganda. And Article 5(4) provided for the administration of Kampala by the central government. From the foregoing, there is an evident lacuna in the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 in so far as the approval of the applications for development permissions is concerned. 

However, Section 5(4) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 provides thus: “Any enactment that applies to a district shall, subject to this Act and with the necessary modification, apply to the Authority.”

Reading this provision together with the Physical Planning Act, 2010, permits the establishment of a Physical Planning Committee in the Capital City. The Physical Planning Act, 2010 provides for the establishment of district, urban and division or local physical planning committees. This establishment is based on the structures at the various levels of local government. 

According to the Physical Planning Act, 2010, a physical planning committee includes a district physical planning committee, urban physical planning committee and a division or local physical planning committee. 

Urban authority includes a city, municipal, division and town council, declared as such under the Local Government Act. 

Section 9 of the Physical Planning Act provides that every district council shall establish a district physical planning committee. Whereas section 11 of the same Act provides that each urban authority or city shall establish an urban physical planning committee. 

Section 9 of the said Act provides that each district shall establish a district physical planning committee which shall consist of:

a)	The chief administrative officer, who shall be the chairperson, 
b)	The district physical planner who shall be the secretary,
c)	The district surveyor,
d)	The district road engineer,
e)	The district education officer ,
f)	The district agricultural officer,
g)	The district water engineer,
h)	The district community development officer,
i)	The district medical officer,
j)	The clerks of all urban and town councils in the district, 
k)    The district environment officer,
l)	The natural resources officer, and 
m)	A physical planner in private practice appointed by the council on the advice of the secretary to the board. 

The functions of a district physical planning committee are - Members can read that; from (a) up to (h). 

Under part 5 of the Physical Planning Act, the physical planning committee has the power to grant development permits and when doing so shall - you can read (a) up to (d). 

Section 5(4) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 provides that any enactment that applies to a district shall, subject to this Act and with necessary modification, apply to the Authority. 

It is our considered view that whereas the Physical Planning Act, 2010 was enacted and commenced operations before the KCCA Act, it is still applicable to Kampala Capital City since it applies to the entire country. Any reference to a district in the Physical Planning Act, 2010 shall, for the purposes of the Capital City, apply to the Kampala Capital City Authority and, therefore, the composition of the physical planning committee as envisaged under the said Act, has to be construed with modifications for purposes of the Kampala Capital City Authority. 

The composition of the district physical planning committee as stated in the Physical Planning Act, 2010 is actually covered in the staff structure of Kampala Capital City Act albeit with slight modifications in nomenclature, which modifications are envisaged under section 5(4) of the Kampala Capital City Act.

Pursuant to the above stated provision, therefore, a physical planning committee of the Capital City is a district committee and not an urban committee in the context of the Physical Planning Act, and as such, its functions are those stipulated under section 10 and not section 12 thereof. 

The question that may be asked, therefore, is whether the Capital City Physical Planning Committee is rendered irrelevant on account of the establishment of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority.

Section 7(K) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 mandates the Authority to carryout physical planning and development control in the city. 

Section 20 of the Act establishes the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. 

Section 2 of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 provides that “metropolitan area” means, “The area of jurisdiction of the Authority together with the districts of Mpigi, Wakiso, Mengo Municipality and Mukono.” 

Section 2(1) of the Kampala Capital City Act provides for a body known as the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. This body shall consist of a chairperson, and four other persons, all of whom shall be appointed by the minister with the approval of Cabinet; being persons qualified and with experience in physical planning, civil engineering, architecture, environment, public health and survey. 

The Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is mandated to carry out the following functions - you can read them, honourable members. 

As compared to the functions of the Physical Planning Committee, stipulated under Section 10 of the Physical Planning Act, the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority covers a wider scope of the matters pertaining to physical planning and development control within the city and the metropolitan area. It is worth noting that the physical planning committee within the city or within the district are responsible for physical planning and development within their local jurisdictions. The Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, however, oversees physical planning, development in a wider regional area, which includes the Capital City and the neighbouring districts of Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso. 

Actually, Section 22(2) of the Kampala Capital City Act gives the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority veto powers over physical plans or activities that are inconsistent with the Metropolitan Authority Development Plan, structural plan or land use policy. So, it cannot have veto powers and at that same time have approval powers. 

In Section 22(4) of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010, the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority has the mandate to prepare comprehensive and integrated development plans and in incorporating the plans of the lower urban councils. 

These plans of the lower urban councils can only be considered by a physical planning committee at the city and district levels, and later on collated and integrated as a whole by the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. It is, therefore, our considered opinion that the functions of the Physical Planning Committee and the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority are explicit and none overrides the other. 

To operationalise Article 5(4) of the Constitution, Parliament in 2010 enacted the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 to provide for the administration of Kampala by the central government and for the development of Kampala as the Capital City.
 
1.	Neither the Constitution Act No.11 of 2005 nor the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 excludes Kampala as a planning area within the meaning of the Physical Planning Act. Accordingly, all development within Kampala Capital City may be subjected to planning approvals by the relevant entity established in accordance with the Physical Planning Act, 2010.

2.	The Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority provided for in Section 22 of the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 is evidently a superior body to the Physical Planning Committee provided for in the Physical Planning Act. This is from its functions as well as the powers to veto bestowed upon it in sub-section (2) of Section 22. To construe otherwise would mean – 

a)	That there should be no physical planning committee in all in the districts of Mukono, Mpigi and Wakiso by virtue of Section 22(1)(b) Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 which extends the geographical jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority beyond the Capital City; and
 
b)	The development plans and applications for development permissions within the metropolitan area cannot be approved since the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is not clothed with the legal responsibility and functions to approve the applications for development permission;
 
c)	The power to veto physical plans or activities vested in the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority would be redundant since a body cannot veto its own decisions, but rather a body/organ inferior to it. 

The appointment of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority

As stated herein, this body shall consist of a chairperson and four other persons all of whom shall be appointed by the minister with approval of Cabinet, being persons qualified and experienced in physical planning, civil engineering, architecture, environment, public health and survey. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have perused the handover report of my predecessors and noted that some efforts were made to have the members of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority appointed and I shall endeavour to conclude what was started, after all consultations have been made, to enable this body operate as mandated in the Kampala Capital City Act, 2010.

Once again, Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable colleague for the issues raised, and I hope this statement clears her concerns. 

I further wish to request and in particular the MPs from Kampala, to give me and KCCA all the enabling support in our big plan and vision of taking Kampala to heights of a world capital city standards. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not know whether the Attorney-General would still want to add anything, because we had asked for a legal opinion. 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I want to associate the Office of the Attorney-General to the statement made by the Minister in charge of Kampala. There is nothing useful to add because the statement speaks for itself in terms of law, logic and everything that is necessary as far as this matter is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, the Physical Planning Act, is a statute of general application in Uganda. It is true that under the Kampala Capital City Act, there is provision for the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. But a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is a superior body and it cannot exercise its powers unless its infrastructural facilities are put in place, and some of those are the physical planning committees. So, accordingly, I wish to associate the Office of the Attorney-General to this statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Just a few clarifications from Members.
			
3.21
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to be a physical planner, and I was actually the physical planner for Mukono Municipality before I joined this House. Mukono Municipality is now part of the Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

When I read in Section 3 of the minister’s submission, it states that: “Section 3 of the said Act declares the whole country a planning area and this brings it under planning control.” This implies that all development, whether in the urban or rural areas should be subjected to planning approval from either the National Planning Board or the physical planning committees. 

Madam Speaker, the practice hasn’t been that physical planning committees approve development plans. The practice has been that if you want to construct a house or any other building, you apply and the committee or the people tasked with approval: 1) the one in charge of health; 2) the engineer; and 3) the physical planner. So, we should draw a line between spatial planning and approving a building, because what is implied here is that even if you want to construct a building, it is still the committee to approve, which is not the case. So, I seek some clarification from the honourable minister on whether it is the committee, which is going to approve a building plan. Thank you.

3.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sometimes it is this dishonesty that results into confusion in the management of the city. I have been looking at the letter written by the minister on 16 November 2012, and on page 2 of that letter, he invokes his powers under section 79(4). I will first read the letter and then read the law.

The letter states: “Under Section 79(4) of the Kampala City Council Act, 2010, Kampala Capital City Authority is obliged to give effect to any directive given by the minister under sub-section (3) thereof.”

When we go to sub-section (3) it reads, “The minister may veto decisions taken by the Authority, which appear to the minister to be illegal or where the Authority fails to perform any of its duties, the minister may, by writing, direct the Authority to carry out those duties.”

Clearly, Clause 79(3) does not apply to this directive; and even if it did, let us look at what the Authority is. The “Authority” is defined under section 2 of the interpretation clause to mean “The Kampala City Council Authority established under section 5.”

Section 5 establishes the Authority, but the composition of Kampala City Council Authority is actually under section 6 which reads, “The Authority shall consist of the following members: the Lord Mayor, the Deputy Lord Mayor, two councillors representing the youth, one of whom shall be female, two councillors…” – 

I don’t know why the learned Attorney-General was so eager that I get off the microphone.

Anyway, the composition of the Kampala City Council Authority is clearly defined in the law, and when you look at the letter, it is directed to a person who is not the Authority: the Executive Director of KCCA is not the Authority; she is not even a member of the Authority. This directive can only be addressed to the Mayor, the head of the Authority, as provided for under the law. This practice of you bypassing the legitimate authority and you deal with civil servants, certainly, is what is causing confusion in the city.

This letter, if you really wanted it to invoke your powers, should have been directed to the Authority itself. There is no legal basis for this letter you wrote to one of the employees of the Authority, and that is why I am so surprised that the learned Attorney-General said he has nothing useful to add. At least he should have had something useless to subtract. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have always had the greatest regard and respect for my brother and friend hon. Katuntu, but I am surprised by his very unparliamentary language. Let me say this, before I come to the point of order. He has cited the provision, which establishes the Authority, and to show that he is more unfaithful than those he is citing to be unfaithful, he did not go to Section 17 of the KCCA Act, which establishes the position of Executive Director. 

The chief executive of the Authority is the Executive Director, and under sub-clause (1) it states, “There shall be an Executive Director who shall be the chief executive of the Authority” meaning that if you are writing to a ministry officially, more often than not, and unless otherwise the situation demands, you communicate to the permanent secretary of the ministry.

Are you not used to the functioning of Government? You communicate to the chief executive or the permanent secretary. In the case of KCCA, you communicate to the chief executive of the Authority. Is he, therefore, in order to use unparliamentary language on a matter of such serious Government importance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not examined the contextual authority of the executive director. So, I am not able to make a ruling on this one.

3.31
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue that has been presented by the honourable minister in response to what hon. Nambooze said is a legal issue, and indeed, you have heard from both attorneys-general.

Having heard both opinions, I believe that this issue may not be settled here, and I think we may have to go to the Constitutional Court. However, the issue causing all this confusion in Kampala - in his last paragraph, the minister was requesting for our support as Members of Parliament in Kampala -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You should not have preambles; go directly to the point.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we would wish to see as Members of Parliament from Kampala is a harmonious working relationship. I have never seen a city developed without the input of the political wing and the reverse is true. So, the technical and political wings must work hand-in-hand. But in any case, if the political wing is not involved in whatever is being done, definitely that is why you are hearing about all these struggles in Kampala. 

It is my humble wish and prayer that we are more than willing to give hon. Frank Tumwebaze all the support he needs as long as he puts into serious consideration the political wing of Kampala Capital City Authority. Short of that, there is no way we can move together because at times the radical decisions that are taken are not pro-people.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I thank hon. Nambooze for raising this issue and the new minister for giving a detailed response to this matter. This is a very important matter; the way we handle KCCA has implications on our policy as a country, to do with urbanisation, and also the way we handle other districts and urban centres in the country. And I have seen that, Madam Speaker, you are giving us two minutes to respond to issues that have been raised in a full pamphlet. 

I thought that it would be procedurally right to allow us some time to go and ponder on this issue, read through the document and then tomorrow we shall have a lot of time to debate this matter comprehensively. It is a matter that has been on for very long time and has been bringing a lot of conflict; we need to give it the justice it deserves, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, admittedly, the KCCA Act is a new law which we made recently and it is just finding its feet. I think we need time to study the Act and the Constitution because there were some issues raised by hon. Nambooze about how the laws are relating to one another. So, maybe you can sleep on it and then - committee? Yes, hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on guidance. I appreciate the concern raised by hon. Bahati that we could ponder over this and come back tomorrow. However, I shot up before you concluded your guidance. If you could find a mechanism of ensuring that Members who come to Parliament do not tend to list what they think is more important and what is less important, because my understanding of what is raised by hon. Bahati is that, some people are here in a hurry to vote. They want to vote and go and leave some of us -(Laughter)- Yes, because everything is equally important. 

So, I was just seeking your guidance so that you could caution Members, especially those who like conducting themselves like voting machines to also be there tomorrow to discuss this important matter concerning KCCA. I do not want to mention names. That is the guidance I was seeking. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the work of this House is important, but also the decisions we take should be informed and based on knowledge. I do not know how many people have the KCCA Act here. I think there is even work before our committee about KCCA. So, there are a lot of issues.

3.37
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, today I do not intend to take people so much into the law, which I have read from page 1 to the last page. But I wish to make one statement; personal ego and impunity are going to destroy this country. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, while standing there one day – before he crossed to the front bench – criticised the manner in which the road leading to Imperial Royale Hotel was blocked by KCCA without the involvement of the city authorities and the government - it turned into a private road. I was happy when he was appointed to that ministry because I thought he was going to unblock the road. (Laughter)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, how a political officer in the name, form and style of a minister decides to write instructing civil servants, and he is overseeing this department, and is not bothered about following up to see whether the processes are complied with, is shocking! Because the head of that Authority is the Lord Mayor, and he is only given a copy for information. How compliance is ensured, the minister does not want to know. Impunity and personal ego are going to destroy our country!

3.39
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you Madam Speaker. We have not had an opportunity to extensively discuss the issues of Kampala. Each time a matter on Kampala has been raised in this Parliament, we have postponed it or pushed it forward. I would have been happier that we dedicate today to discuss issues of Kampala, because it is not every day that you are going to have everybody here, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Army Commander. (Laughter) But if that is not possible, I have two proposals to make, with your indulgence: 

First, the honourable Minister for the Presidency, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, in his statement says that there is a metropolitan physical planning authority and a metropolitan planning committee. He says one is superior and is supposed to even veto decisions of the other one. But on page 1, he says the reason he is in a hurry to make sure that a junior committee – if I may borrow that word he has put in place – is put in place, is because there are 2,000 plans to approve. So, there is nobody to veto; there is no superior committee and you want Parliament to approve this. 

Madam Speaker, my proposal, therefore, is to ask the minister to kindly rescind his decision. I do not know whether there is any city in the world that has ever been planned as a by-the-way. These short-cut methods of having a committee in place to approve the plans – and I would not be surprised that some of the individuals looking at me are beneficiaries. Why don’t we have all the bodies responsible for planning a city then we begin approving plans. Why are you in a hurry? Is Kampala going to end tomorrow? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if the minister is not willing to rescind his decision, my other proposal would be for this Parliament to ask the minister to recall this letter until such a time when we have enough time as representatives of Ugandans to comprehensively discuss this matter. Otherwise, if we say we discuss it tomorrow, there will be another directive by the minister, who seems to be in a hurry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought I said that the resolutions and decisions we make must be based on good information. I do not know how many people in this House are ready to debate KCCA today, in this House. You must accept that not everybody is ready to debate KCCA today; KCCA has very many issues and there are very many petitions pending here. I do not know whether anybody has internalised the KCCA law. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In response to the question you have just asked, this matter was raised last week and in your wisdom, after the request by the minister in charge of Kampala, you directed that this matter be attended to today and indeed, this statement is captured on our Order Paper. It also comes to me as a surprise that Members, including the deputy Chief Whip who was here in the Eighth Parliament when the Kampala Capital City Authority Act was passed, are not ready to discuss item No.3 on our Order Paper. 

For that reason, I would also like to remind this House about the commitment we made in March this year. Issues about Kampala Capital City were raised on the Floor of this Parliament - the Hansard can bear witness – and, Madam Speaker, you ordered that the Committee on Presidential Affairs undertakes a hearing about the issues that were raised then concerning the staff who were going to be dismissed and other issues about Kampala. I remember that day, you told each one of us who had an issue to raise about the management of Kampala to go to the Committee on Presidential Affairs and you ordered that that committee would take two weeks. In fact, you advised the committee not to go for the Easter holidays. Up to today, the – (Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that I was the lead petitioner of that petition. The chairman called us, he intimidated us - (Laughter) – Yes! Up to now, I have been asking him, “Where is the report?” He cannot produce the report.

People lost their jobs and they brought in new staff. I hear now about 20 of them have been interdicted because they are also stealing. The chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs should produce the report. He called us and intimidated us in the committee - (Interjections) – No, we want that report today. 

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Speaker, the item we had on the Order Paper was a statement by the minister. I have heard people suggesting that we should commit this day to debate that statement. However, our Rules of Procedure, rule 44, state as follows: 
“Statements by ministers 
(1)A minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by rule 24…
(2)Statements made by Ministers may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.”

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members who are raising issues to do with KCCA and the response given by the honourable minister and every debate that you are according to matters pertaining to KCCA. They are asking why we have not produced a report and laid it on the Table for Parliament to debate.

When my committee was considering this matter and we had done around 80 per cent of the work, we received a copy of a letter from the petitioner telling us that they had gone to court. We sought guidance from the Clerk and we were guided that we could not proceed on a matter that was in court. If honourable members are raising new issues, my committee is ready to handle them and produce a report immediately. 

The allegations that – (Interjections) - I am not taking information.

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish, honourable members.

MR MUSINGUZI: Is it in order for a senior chairperson of a committee and an honourable member to confuse this Parliament that he cannot produce a report because he got a letter that people are in court, when we have similar cases, for example, Jamwa? They produced a report and the case was in court. That could not derail you from writing a report. Maybe there was some other motive. (Interjections) Therefore, I would like to know if he is in order.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when a committee is unable to complete its work, they are supposed to come here to report to the House - (Applause) - so that they are told, “You can abandon it” or we give them more time. So, I think, honourable members, you must have made a mistake to sit with the letter and not inform the House. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, of course, we do not run the committee as politicians or Members of Parliament. We run it with the Clerk. We are going to get back to the Clerk and produce a report on where we had reached, because at this stage to say that you produce a report of what transpired - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, this is not a matter for argument. If you are unable to complete a report, you come back to the House and say, “We are unable to complete for reasons a, b, c, d”, and the House will guide you.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us finish that matter.

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: On that day, Madam Speaker, when the issue came here, there was a proposal to form an ad hoc committee or a select committee of Parliament to look into matters surrounding the administration of Kampala. The Hansard captured your honourable chair properly when you ruled that if we were not satisfied with the work of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, then this House would come up with a select committee to look into all matters pertaining to Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, today we are talking about physical planning. The other day, we were talking about the Clock Tower. The next day, we shall be talking about the land board. The other day, we were talking about staff. On Thursday, the Executive Director of KCCA announced that she was going to re-brand the city by dropping the city emblem, the city logo, the city vision and the city colours. 

This is the capital city of our country. Those who are managing it are just stewards; they are just custodians of this city. The city belongs to the whole country; it is the national capital city. For that matter, I would like to seek guidance from you whether it would not be proper at this moment to revisit the ruling you made. We have not been satisfied by the Committee on Presidential Affairs. They do not have a report and so many issues are arising. With me here is a petition from the leaders of Kampala – 

THE SPEAKER: The petition is not on the Order Paper; do not smuggle it in. 

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, I beseech you to allow that a committee of this House be formed to look into this particular matter and others surrounding the administration of Kampala. The honourable minister should direct his letter to the Authority to sit and determine the members of the physical planning committee of Kampala Capital City House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What I can propose, honourable members, is that the committee should report quickly - they could do it even tomorrow - to say they are unable to complete the work. We shall then have a debate on that report and take a decision. We cannot take a decision from the air. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, as a matter of procedure, before the Prime Minister makes gestures as if he is my whip – (laughter) – there are two specific and fundamental allegations made with respect of the conduct of this committee with which we are entrusting our work. One is that the chairperson is intimidating members. 

There was another allegation which went to my brother as a person about his integrity, his relative having been employed by KCCA. We have not accorded him an opportunity to clear his name on that. We have not afforded him an opportunity to clear his name on the way he conducts the affairs of the committee, and this is the committee transacting business on behalf of this House. He has not responded to these issues yet we are going ahead to entrust him with more tasks. Are we procedurally correct?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you want to complain, you should have brought your complaints in writing so that I can pass them over to the rules committee. However, you have just brought them here now. If you have a complaint, write to me officially and I will give it to the rules committee to handle, both on the integrity and the intimidation. 

Honourable members, I think we agree that the issues of KCCA are important and we need time for them. But you should report quickly so that we can have that debate together with all the issues that are being raised. We can devote time for KCCA specifically and then after that, we can decide whether we need a committee or not. When can you report, hon. Tinkasiimire?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The whole of last week we were handling issues to do with Owino Market and even this whole week. We have already written to witnesses to appear concerning Owino Market. So, the earliest we can report on this matter is 6 December 2012. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That is Thursday next week. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Is it committee stage? Honourable members, last week there was a motion for recommittal of clause 9 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012, but we could not vote on it. So, we now want to ask Members to go to the division lobby so that they can take a decision on whether to recommit or not. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It is true we had reached the voting stage, but that motion was lost. It was lost because it failed to have the requisite number or quorum. In view of that, as per our rules, the motion has to be moved afresh and indeed, we go through the merits because at that stage of the motion, we did not have the quorum – (interjections) – it is important that we go back. 

We have to go back to that stage before we go to the division lobby. Once the motion is moved and the motion is lost, we revert to the original status. (Applause) What I have here is our amended clauses; they still stand because the efforts to amend them collapsed and we still stand by that. So, procedurally, I pray you guide on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we recommitted. I think the question now is whether to restate clause 9; that is what we have to vote on. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I imagine that all of us, when we are soliciting for votes from our constituencies, we promise the people that we are going to Parliament to discuss issues, debate and vote in the interest of the country. As a matter of fact, two thirds of colleagues in this House were actually not here on Thursday. Some of them did not attend for a single day while we were debating this Petroleum Bill – (Interjections)– This is the time to show the country that we are not voting machines. (Applause) We have come here and our people take us seriously. (Applause) For us to be told that we have come here to vote is wrong. It is wrong, Madam Speaker. We want to have this matter debated and voted on and let all of us stand to be counted. 

At an appropriate time, I would like to move a motion that after we have thoroughly debated, we should vote by roll call and the entire country sees where we have voted. We will not be party to mob justice, Madam Speaker. We are not going to be party to mob justice. The only strategic resource remaining in this country is oil and for anybody to imagine that we are going to use this opportunity to vote and hand these resources to people who we know are guilty, we will not allow.  

On this point, it is not going to be the game of numbers but the game of persuasion, logic and in the interest of the country. (Applause) Anybody who thinks that we are just coming here to be shouted at is mistaken. So, Madam Speaker, I do pray – (Interruptions) 

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, Our Rules of Procedure are clear. Rule 78 (2) says, “The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” Therefore, is it in order for the learned friend to stand up when the Speaker has made a decision? 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, on Thursday the other week, a motion was moved by the minister for recommittal. - (Interjections) - Hon. Nambooze, I want to tell you that I am a Catholic and I am talking as a Catholic – (Interjections) So –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please allow an environment for a conducive debate. Please, honourable minister.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: We agreed that the motion would be debated the following week, which was last week. On Thursday, we were here and the motion was debated and we took a vote on the motion and we won. We carried the day. When we got to the motion by the minister to rescind or change as per what we had agreed, we debated and when it came to voting, that is where we did not have quorum. The motion was debated and what is remaining is voting – (Interjections) - I want to make it clear  that Members who were not present -

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, there is no way we are going to wait for those who were not in the House. For Members who were not present, they should find out from those who were present or they should consult a copy of the Hansard. This country has to move on. We were at the level of voting and we should go on and vote. 

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know why our colleagues are shunning debate. It is not in bad faith that we should arrive towards a well informed decision after having reasonable debate. I am here today and we are all here today, including hon. Sam Kutesa and I have seen hon. Nasasira around. (Laughter) These are some of our colleagues that have not been attending. It would be very fair to their constituents if they also participated in this debate so that we come to a well informed conclusion on the strategic matter of oil.

Therefore, Madam, Speaker, it is my plea to you that in lieu of justice that is demanded by our constituents, we first be given time to debate this matter. There is no hurry today. At the time of voting, we shall come back here and vote. What is the rush for today?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I was here last week and I have been following debate. I have attended harmonisation workshops and I am here today. By the time you adjourned, Madam Speaker, we were at committee stage, the Committee of the whole House. That is where we should take a vote from on the clause that the minister wanted to recommit because the vote on recommittal was carried. 

The motion for recommittal was done and the Committee of the whole House sat and you were in the Chair, Madam Speaker. Therefore – (Interjections) - Please, can you allow me speak. I stood on a point of clarification and so can you allow me to make my clarification? May I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: That is friendly fire. You are protected.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Let me make this clarification, please – (Interjections) - We shall sort it out.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I listened to the Clerk when she called the next item and she called for “committee stage” because that is where we have to go back to. We have to vote when you are the Chair because we are still handling the recommittal clause, and then the report will be called and maybe Third Reading will be done when you are in your Chair as the Speaker. 

The clarification that I am seeking is whether we can break now to vote when we are not in the Committee of the whole House and when the Speaker is in the Chair. I thought that we should break when we are in the committee to take a vote. (Interjections) I am just seeking clarification. Otherwise, it is glaring that there are people who have come for the purposes of voting, and it is okay – (Interjections) - On both sides. That is why we have whips. We have never had full capacity on both sides. We have never, on both sides.

So, Madam Speaker, the clarification I seek is whether we should not really begin from where we ended. The time for debate ended.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, permit me, together with colleagues, to come in with what may seem to be my last attempt to arrive at consensus. 

Where we have come from, which is 99 per cent of this Bill, we have been trying to arrive at some form of consensus. Rule 127 (4) of our Rules of Procedure reads: “When the Bill has been recommitted in respect only of some particular clause, amendment or amendments, the Committee shall consider only that amendment or those amendments and any other amendment which may be moved to them, unless the Chairperson in his or her discretion, is satisfied that the clause, amendment or amendments proposed are substantial and it is necessary or desirable, to reconsider the whole Bill as provided in sub rule (3) of this rule.”

Madam Speaker, my point is that consensus has guided this House in arriving at where we. The consensus has been that the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources would be requested, together with his members, to harmonise with members and come back with a compromised position. May I suggest and I appeal to you my colleagues that we refer this matter again to the chairperson - (Interjections) – You see, Madam Speaker, one of the things that makes me happy is that when I am debating, even hon. Sam Kutesa who has been battling with other things will attempt to shut me down, but I think I have a point. (Laughter) Honourable colleagues, let us agree that we give ourselves time. Uganda is here and we are here. Let us – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when this matter came up for recommittal, I brought it to the attention of the House that a reconsideration of clause 9 would have an effect on almost 80 per cent of this Bill.

This Bill, in my view, is divided into three parts, and I am informing those who did not participate in the amendments that we passionately handled here for the good of this country. The first part is about the environment, the second one is about institutional arrangement and the third one is about transparency and accountability. When we moved with the Speaker of that day and got stuck at clause 23, I moved a motion that we go back to first consider this clause 9 and that after doing that, we would move forward. Indeed, when we did that, we moved forward and reached somewhere.

So, if we reconsider clause 9, definitely, we must reconsider the entire Bill and we must also know that the mid-stream Bill will be affected 99 per cent. So, even the debate on the mid-stream Bill must begin afresh. So, Madam Speaker, in the interest of harmony, that is the information I wanted to give.

MR SSEGGONA: I thank hon. Niwagaba for that information. That information is extremely vital and – (Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: The further information I would like to give to the House is that Uganda is a signatory to the UN Charter and we need to know that access to information is a fundamental human right. So, why do we want to deny our Members who have constituencies to report to the information on this Bill? Let us allow the Members who were not here, for example on Thursday, to access the information. Why don’t we debate this?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, I would like to implore honourable colleagues– (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural point to help us get moving. We seem to be contesting the way forward on how to handle the decision. The business of the House for that day was well captured in our Hansard. This Hansard can be brought here and if there is a contestation, a recording can be played. Therefore, I am seeking your procedural guidance on whether we should not look at that record in order for us to decide on how to proceed. 

I am saying this because a debate is beginning to ensue to portray people with different opinions as being non-loving for Uganda. That annoys some of us because we all have constituencies that we represent. (Interjections) Yes! Madam Speaker, let us use the Hansard to determine the way forward. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last Thursday we received one request for the recommittal of clause 9. We also indicated that if there were other areas that needed recommittal, they could be presented after conclusion of clause 9. That is what we decided. So, we need to either reject or agree on clause 9 and then those who have other areas for recommittal can bring them. Otherwise, we cannot move to a Third Reading until everybody is satisfied.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. What hon. Niwagaba said is the point I want to seek your guidance on. 

The substance of the matter in clause 9 is on whether powers to grant a licence should be left to the minister in charge of oil alone and not the Authority. Hon. Niwagaba said that by recommitting clause 9, the Bill will be substantially polluted up to 80 per cent because we will have given most of the powers, which we spent hours giving to the Authority, to the minister. So, technically, what would be the substance of amending one clause that will affect the entire Bill? I think we need to address our minds to that issue, Madam Speaker. That is what I am seeking your guidance on.

Members of the House decided to entrust issues pertaining to oil to the institution called the Uganda Petroleum Authority and not the individual. Now we are being forced to change a decision we made in less than one month, to remove all the powers from the Authority to an individual. We need to be assisted. We can even see soldiers in army uniform here today and Parliament has been surrounded with different types of guns. So, in the circumstances, can we proceed to make this law when there are more guns than human beings around Parliament? (Laughter)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that we had debated on the recommittal last Thursday. However, after hon. Niwagaba indicated over seven clauses that would be affected, I made a request as to whether the record could be given to us by the Clerk. Since Thursday, we have not been given what particular provisions would be affected by this recommittal. 

Madam Speaker, Parliament is a representative institution. Between Thursday and Tuesday, we have also seen key stakeholders in the institution of the State make statements. I have a statement, and we all have statements, from the Inter Religious Council of Uganda. (Interjections) Yes! We also have statements from the civil society members who dressed in black. We are a representative democracy. The guidance I am seeking is whether it would not be prudent for us, as people who take decisions on the people’s behalf, to listen to the views of these stakeholders just because of the decision that we were about to take on Thursday, which has forced them to make these statements and take such positions? 

Is it possible for the Clerk and for this Parliament to address the simple question that hon. Niwagaba put across? The issue is that what we are about to do will dismantle the whole Bill. So, is it difficult for us to get that before we can proceed, instead of doing mob justice and we fail to listen to the views as representatives of the people? Madam Speaker, I would like your guidance. Is it possible that this Parliament can listen to the views of the people? (Interruption)

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your ruling a few minutes back, you clearly read the Order Paper as it is stated. It clearly says, “Voting on the recommitted clause 9.” Your office or the Clerk’s office did not make a mistake. (Interjections) Let us have some order. I am the one speaking. (Interjections) Hon. Nebanda, you do not instruct me to sit because you are not the Speaker of the House.

Madam Speaker, you had earlier on indicated that we should move to the lobby. Since when have we started defying your orders? What are we still doing in the House? We should be following your instructions. Those agitating for the debate; we have had this debate. For heaven’s sake, are we going to make the country lag behind because of five, seven to ten people? We should be able to move forward. 

If somebody has a motion, they should give notice because we cannot lag behind due to a debate that is not on the Order Paper. The Order Paper is very clear that we are supposed to be voting. We should not start debating when there was no notice of a motion for debate. Madam Speaker, it is my humble plea that we go to the lobby.  

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, all of us who were here on Thursday - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I need your protection. I am the one who moved the motion for the question to be put and indeed, you put the question. We are all working in national interest. I would like to put the record right and maybe it will help us.

Before the voting took place, the minister moved for recommittal. That is when my good friend, hon. Sseggona, moved that we could not recommit. It took him some time to say what he said and after that, he honourably walked out. We moved to the second stage, which was the committee stage. We once again debated until such a time that I rose and said that I had been on this committee - (Interjections) - the Hansard is very clear.  I said that we had taken a lot of time and it was time that we voted.  Members chorused that I should move a motion for the question to be put, which I did and it was seconded.

Hon. Niwagaba rose and said that if we were going to vote, he would move for the amendment of very many clauses. In fact, hon. Mariam Nalubega moved a motion to amend my motion, which was defeated. The Speaker ruled and said, “Hon. Niwagaba, let us vote and then we go back to the whole House and then you move the amendments.” 

When we were moving on, the matter of quorum was raised, and that is when hon. Ssekikubo stood up and started counting the Members in the House. That is when you ruled that there was no quorum and we would come back and vote. Now that the quorum is there, we should be voting. I would request that we go to the lobby and vote. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is that whereas in the last meeting all that you have described took place, the purpose of our being here is because we bear a responsibility to the people who voted us. (Applause) We are here because you failed to take the decisions since you were the minority - you did not have the quorum.

It is because we are discussing oil. Oil is important for us today and tomorrow. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I would like to submit to my colleagues that let us accept that this is oil, so give us the time and let us debate even if it takes us another day or two. Thank you.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for your patience and wise guidance in this matter. I would like to invite this honourable House to appreciate that by the attendance seen in this House today, the mood of the country on the matter in discussion has been captured. Therefore, wouldn’t it be a shame that this House can be turned into a voting machine without taking cognisance of the mood of this country?

Madam Speaker, you will notice that on this Floor of Parliament, even Catholics have started changing positions and telling lies. Even Catholics have started eating meat on Friday and saying it is not meat. (Laughter) Today is a day the people of Uganda are listening to this House on a matter that surpasses all levels of debate in this country because we are talking about a resource that is of fundamental importance. If we lose the opportunity to handle this matter-(Interjections)

I would like to make reference to what my sister, hon. Betty Amongi, has said. People of Uganda from all walks of life have come out boldly to support the view that because of the importance of what is being discussed and on the basis that – (Interjections) Madam Speaker, the choice before us now is to decide whether we want to sell our country cheaply or to have an opportunity for everybody in this country, through their representatives in this House, to voice their opinions about matters that concern not only the present generations but generations to come. I would be ashamed – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I am very proud of you because you give us the opportunity to air some of these concerns. I now propose that this matter - (Heckling and Chanting)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I suspend the House for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 4.36 p.m.)
