Tuesday, 18 December 2012

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware that this House had been adjourned until the 5th February 2013. That means the sitting we are conducting now is special and comes under very difficult circumstances. Members, I see most of you in black, signifying the gravity of this moment of great loss to this House. 

We will be having a motion and discussions. It is my prayer that the result of our discussion should communicate clearly our feelings about what has happened; but at the same time, it should also respect the presence of the deceased in the Chambers, and also respect the processes that are going on. There will be no limitation, and I ask Members that since this is a serious moment, we should pour out what we have to pour; but do that within the framework of what guides us in terms of executing orderly debate in the House so that we give honour to our fallen colleague .

This week has not been a very easy week, particularly last week. We have just buried the father of the Rt Hon. Speaker. We have also just lost the first Speaker of this House, Rt. Hon. Narendra Patel. And, we also lost our own, Cerinah Nebanda, last Friday. So, it is a very compact sad week and we should be able to communicate this. 

Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting.  I have summoned you for this special sitting just a few days after we broke off for recess because of the sad events that have hit this Parliament.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank all the honourable members for the support which has been given to the Rt Hon. Speaker and her family upon the passing on of her beloved Dad, Mr George Kadali Kadaga.  I wish to commend all the honourable members who converged in Kamuli in large numbers yesterday to give Mr Kadaga a befitting farewell. Your material, financial and physical presence was highly appreciated, and the spirit of togetherness and solidarity exhibited should be maintained.  

The ugly hand of death has robbed the Parliamentary fraternity of the first Speaker of Ugandan origin of the National Assembly of Uganda, Mr Narendra Patel. He was born and raised in India. He graduated with a Bachelor of Laws Degree from the University of Bombay in 1947, and worked as an advocate in the Bombay High Court.  He moved to Uganda and joined his father’s law firm in 1948, and practised law in Kampala.  In 1954, he went for further studies in the United Kingdom and qualified as a Barrister at Law.  He opened his law firm in Mbale in 1957, where he became very popular with the locals because he represented them effectively in courts against the colonial masters, free of charge.

When nationalism activities started growing among the nationals in Uganda joined by the Asians, Narendra Patel was one of the Asian Ugandans who joined the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) and strengthened its hold in Mbale. During the 1962 elections, Mr Narendra Patel rode his popularity among the Bagisu people to get elected as an MP for the constituency then called Mbale.  Immediately thereafter, he was appointed as a Deputy Minister for Internal Affairs in the first 17-man Cabinet of post-independent Uganda.

In 1963, the British expatriate who had been left behind as the Speaker of Parliament, Sir John Bowes Griffin, left the country and Mr Narendra Patel was unanimously elected Speaker.

Honourable members, Mr Patel is reported to have been outspoken, articulate, intelligent and well informed about many issues and steered the National Assembly from 1963 until 1971 with honour and distinction.  

Honourable members, it was with great joy that Mr Narendra Patel was received by the Speaker on the 28th of September this year at Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort during the Parliamentary Week commemorating the 50th Independence of Uganda. He was honoured for the distinguished service he rendered to the Parliament of Uganda. He was indeed excited and grateful for that honour, which had taken decades to be given to him. It is, therefore, very sad that Mr Narendra Patel has passed on.  I am informed that his body has also already been cremated in Baroda - India following Hindu tradition.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to register our utmost condolences to his family and to the nation for losing such a great person; may his soul rest in eternal peace. When Parliament next resumes, an opportunity will be given for Parliament to pay tribute to him. 

Honourable members, for the second time in this Ninth Parliament, we have again lost a dear colleague, hon. Cerinah Nebanda, in a very sudden and untimely manner. The death of hon. Nebanda has shocked us all and it is indeed a great tragedy. She was a young legislator, who was very vocal and open-minded. We will miss her in the Ninth Parliament. 

My spirit is not totally dampened, because despite her short life in this world, and as a legislator, she has left an indelible mark, which can never be erased in the annals of the Ninth Parliament and those of the history of this country. The people of Butaleja will forever remain proud of her achievements because she left a legacy. 

Honourable members, I know it is a very trying time for all of us; I urge you to control your emotions and sober up as we pay tribute to our fallen colleague. We have no control over our destinies and have only to leave it to the Almighty Creator who is the Alpha and Omega of all things living and non-living. May her soul rest in peace. 

Turning on another page, I wish to join you in welcoming our Parliamentary football and netball teams from Nairobi, Kenya where they have been participating in the sports tournament organized by the East African Legislative Assembly. I am happy to report and to congratulate the football team for defending the title and coming with the trophy back home. Well done and asante sana. 

I further wish to congratulate our netball team for being the runners up. You put up a good fight but next time work harder to bring the trophy. 

Honourable members, following the tragedies that have befallen Parliament, it is not possible for us to eat, drink or make merry during these sad times. I have consulted and it is agreed that the End-of-Year party which had been scheduled for Saturday, 22 December 2012 has been put off. You will be informed of a new date.

The Parliamentary outreach programme scheduled for 19 – 21 December, 2012 in Moroto Municipality – I am consulting on this proposed activity to see whether it is feasible or not, and you will be informed through the normal channels of the decision taken. 

Honourable members, as we enter the festive period, I urge you to be careful in all you do; be conscious of your security; drive carefully if you have to and remain sober. I wish you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year. And may the New Year bring us more happiness than this year has. 

We have received tonnes of messages from different people; it would be an impossible feat to attempt to read them. I will just try to highlight the authors of the messages and I will stop at that. 

We have received a message of condolences from Eng. Badru M. Kiggundu, Chairperson Uganda Electoral Commission. We have received a condolence message from Al Haji Moses Kigongo, National Vice-Chairman NRM. We have received a message from the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association signed by Expeditto Ssebayiga. We have received a condolence message from hon. Mukasa Fred Mbidde, MP East African Legislative Assembly. We have received a condolence message from the Health Service Commission signed by Prof. Pius Okong, Chairperson, Health Service Commission. We have received a condolence message from the Office of the Prime Minister from the hon. Amongin Aporu Christine Helen, Minister of State for Teso Affairs and NRM Chairperson, Kumi District. We have received a condolence message from the Human Rights Committee of this House signed by Hon. Jovah Kamateka, Chairperson, Human Rights Committee. We have received a condolence message from Metro FM signed by Capt. Edward Francis Babu, Director/Vice-Chairman NRM Kampala Region. We have received a condolence message from the East African Community/East African Legislative Assembly, signed by the Speaker, Hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa. We have received a condolence message from the East African Community/ East African Legislative Affairs signed by hon. Bernard Mulengani on behalf of all the other Members of that Assembly. We have received a condolence message from Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, Tange River Farm; he sends his condolences. We have received a condolence message from the Office of the Government Chief Whip, signed by hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, Government Chief Whip and Chairperson NRM Parliamentary Caucus. We have another message from St Joseph Secondary School Nagalama, signed by Agnes Nsubuga, Headmistress. We have another condolence message from hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. We have also received a message from the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, signed by hon. Rose Akol Okullo. Those are the messages which we will pass on to the family. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda.)

National Anthem (Three verses)

East African Community Anthem (One verse)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the circumstances are not very normal. It is not the usual meeting of two or three sides of the House. It is the responsibility of the Speaker to sit the Members in the most comfortable way. So, for this particular special sitting, I will order for free sitting and feel comfortable wherever you will be - there are some spaces on this side - so that we can all be seated while we pay our respects. In these circumstances, you can take refugees I am sure, without asking for permission first. 

(Laying of wreaths)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CERINAH NEBANDA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, BUTALEJA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business moves the motion, let me make some recognition of people in the VIP Gallery. I have the hon. Tibwita Grace, former Member of Parliament; the Mayor of Mukono, Mr Senyonga; the Chairperson of Kamuli District - I am advised she is called Chairman of Kamuli District. I have the hon. Anthony Butele, His Lordship the Mayor of Kampala City, hon. Edward Rurangaranga, hon. Baguma Isoke, hon. Karusoke - I think he used to be formerly of the Human Rights Commission; hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki, former honourable member for Hoima, hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member for East African Legislative Assembly; the former Member for Chwa, John Livingstone Okello-Okello; I have hon. Sebalu Mike, East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Susan Nakawuki, East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Nusura Tiperu, East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Bernard Mulengani, East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Gerald Menhya, former Bugabula; he is here; and I am sure I will get advice on the rest of the people whom I am not able to recognise from here. Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, your motion.

3.24
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda Alioru. It is spelt ‘Alioru’ not Arioru. That was a wrong spelling - if you spell it with ‘R’. [HON. MEMBERS: “That is your motion.”] But the motion has to be corrected.

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with sadness of the demise of hon. Cerinah Nebanda Alioru, the District Woman Representative of Butaleja District, which occurred on the 14th December 2012;

AND WHEREAS the late Cerinah Nebanda Alioru was born on 10 September 1988 and attended St Joseph’s Education Centre, Ntinda View College and Katikamu Seventh Day Adventist Senior Secondary School for her O and A’level education respectively, and Makerere University where she graduated with a degree in Social Sciences;

AWARE THAT while at Makerere University, she held the position of President of the Faculty of Social Sciences and was passionate about youth and women affairs, and participated in a number of their activities, at the time of her death, the late Nebanda was the patron of the Bunyole Youth Development Association, a Member of the Women Development Association in Butaleja, and was the Managing Director of the Nebanda Oil Services Station;

RECOGNISING THAT the late Cerinah Nebanda Alioru joined the Ninth Parliament in May 2011, where she unreservedly served on the Sessional Committee on Social Services and in the Second Session up to the time of her demise, on the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs and the Standing Committee on the Budget;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT she was an active Member of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas, and was one of the youngest legislators in Parliament whose age did not deter her from articulating issues that affected both the people of her constituency and the country at large.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys it deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Butaleja District, Government of Uganda, Members of the National Resistance Movement Party and the people of Uganda upon the demise of a young and vibrant legislator.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered by the late Cerinah Nebanda Alioru to the Ninth Parliament of Uganda, the people of Butaleja, the National Resistance Movement Party and the people of Uganda. I beg to move.

Rt Hon. Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali 
Third Deputy Prime Minister/Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament and Member of East Moyo Constituency”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Leader of the Opposition; the hon. Sam Otada, Coordinator of the Independent Members of Parliament and honourable member for Mbarara Municipality.

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker to justify the motion. The late hon. Cerinah Nebanda Alioru was born on 10 September 1988 to Peter Waiga of Maracha District and Ms Alice Namulwa of Butaleja District. After the death of Peter Waiga, the biological father, the late Nebanda was then brought up by Mr Peter Mukasa up to the time of her death. Mr Mukasa is the step-father. 

The late Nebanda attended Entebbe Modern Primary School before joining Katikamu Seventh Day Adventist and Ntinda View College for her secondary education. She later enrolled for a degree course in Social Sciences at Makerere University, where she a pursued a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Social Sciences.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, before joining Parliament, the late Nebanda was so much into student’s politics. She was a member of the Uganda Young Democrats and served in the Guild Representative Council for the Complex Hall. While serving on the Guild Representative Council, she was also appointed a Guild Minister for Social Affairs. 

The late hon. Nebanda joined active national politics, having gained some experience during her student days. Her desire for leadership motivated her to stand for the Woman Member of Parliament seat for Butaleja District in the 2011 elections for which she won convincingly on the National Resistance Movement ticket.

At the time of winning the election as Woman Member of Parliament for Butaleja District, she not only had a meteoric rise, but had also made history by becoming one of Uganda’s youngest legislators.

While in Parliament, the late hon. Nebanda will be remembered for her firm stand on every issue before the House. She spoke with honesty and bravery at that tender age. (Applause) Her reputation is an inspiration and motivation to the young generation of leaders in Uganda; she served as the bridge between the youthful and old leadership in this country.

The late hon. Nebanda will be remembered for her outspoken nature and vibrancy that captivated many people. (Applause) She represented a brand of legislators that had come to make the Ninth Parliament very unique. (Applause) She was fearless and resolute in pursuing the ideals she believed in. 

As a Member of this Ninth Parliament, the late Nebanda served on the Budget Committee, the Social Services Committee and the Presidential Affairs Committee. As a Member of the Budget Committee and Social Services Committee, she advocated so much for the enhancement of the budget of the health sector. And, to demonstrate her passion for health matters, she encouraged women to deliver their babies from health centres and hospitals by providing washing basins and incentives. If you go to deliver in hospital or a health unit, you are given a basin and some other equipment. She also lobbied for the rehabilitation of Busolwe Hospital maternity ward, which was completed.

The late hon. Nebanda championed the construction of three secondary schools, among them Bugumba Secondary School, using her own funds to help cater for the education of disadvantaged children within Butaleja District. The late hon. Nebanda had also helped women groups in starting up many income-generating projects. The late hon. Nebanda will also be remembered for having set up a number of business enterprises back home. Until her death, the late hon. Nebanda was one of the biggest employers of youth, who worked in many of her business establishments.

She was very instrumental in mobilising youth into groups for support in income-generating activities. The late hon. Nebanda also donated a boat for connecting the people of Kisiro Island to the mainland and this has eased their means of transportation.

Although the late hon. Nebanda has gone too soon, her shining star should be an inspiration to the young people, the girl-child, women and elders. The late hon. Nebanda was socially in touch with her local community irrespective of their religious affiliations. 

Government is going to do everything possible to investigate the cause of death of the late hon. Nebanda and as of now, the Police are progressing well with this investigation. In other words, Government assures the country that no stone will be left unturned concerning the investigation of this serious matter. May her soul rest in eternal peace and may the Lord sustain the bereaved. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, mover of the motion. Honourable members, please, there is another condolence message from the Ministry of Education and Sports signed by Major (Rtd) Alupo Jessica Rose Epelu, Minister of Education and Sports. Also, I would like to recognise that in the technical bench immediately behind me we have the family - the mother and the rest of the family of our deceased colleague. 

Leader of the Opposition -

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I bring condolences on behalf of the Opposition to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, people of Butaleja and Ugandans at large.

Hon. Cerinah Nebanda has died at the age of 24 years and you can imagine that! I knew her in 2010 during the time of campaigns - because Butaleja is near Bugisu - and I saw a promising citizen. That is why you are right, Mr Leader of Government Business, to say that she won convincingly because both the Opposition and the NRM supported her because they knew she was a promising person in Butaleja.

In Parliament, as you said, it is true she has been an independent person and that can be demonstrated by the number of MPs who are present today, who are coming to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. She loved Uganda, she put Uganda first, and I can assure you that any loving Ugandan will miss Cerinah; she was gold to us!

We have MPs in this House who, since they joined, have never said anything apart from “Aye” or “Nay”, but she stood up for what was right at particular times, and she condemned what was wrong without fear or favour.

Mr Speaker, I happen to have been one of those who were invited to go to Sweden when Ugandans in Sweden were celebrating 50 years of Independence and Cerinah was part of the team I met in Sweden. She talked a lot about Uganda while there. We had an entertaining time and we were supposed to have drinks, which we went for. While there, I offered her some drinks - wine, and asked her if she could take wine or beer. She said she was a teetotaller. 

I was, therefore, surprised when I read in the papers when somebody made a comment that hon. Cerinah died of booze and drugs and yet I saw her and offered her a drink and she refused to take it for the entire seven days we were in Sweden. That demonstrates that there is something wrong with people who make comments without knowing the true facts.

Mr Speaker, I have also read in the papers that nobody should talk about the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. I think that is where you are making a mistake. Cerinah was a public figure and she was loved by every Ugandan who loves Uganda, and I am sure they will talk about her death with total energy.

We were told - and I have just confirmed - that even the doctor who was flying to South Africa to do an investigation of what caused her death is under arrest. [HON. MEMBERS: “Shame.”] I don’t know what the motive of arresting somebody who wants to get the facts of what took place is. And I would imagine that Government would be happier to see that we get the right results.

I would like to advise Government that they should not threaten anybody. They should leave Ugandans to talk about the death of a very important person, who at 24 years of age was speaking the truth on behalf of the people of Uganda. And I would also like to tell those who are trying to threaten others, that you are assured of one piece of plot, which is 6ft by 3ft and 4ft deep. So, there is no need for you to threaten anybody; there is no need for you to steal; there is no need for you to hate; there is no need for you to even kill and dislike to hear the truth about what is taking place. 

Cerinah, we shall miss you I know. We loved you; you have fought for Ugandans, and I am sure you have gone in the books of history in Uganda. 

For the people of Uganda to be satisfied, we call on the Minister of Justice to put an inquest under Section 2 of the Inquest Act, which clearly states that: “The minister may by notice in the gazette empower any other person fit to hold inquest under this Act within any area specified in the notice.” 

Inquests under section 4, when a person dies under mysterious circumstances, in fact, it is called “suspicious circumstances” and I know people of Uganda are very suspicious of the circumstances under which hon. Nebanda died. We believe that Government will act on that. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda belongs to all of us; we need to love each other; and we need to respect mankind. It is very unfair that a person who was talking for the voiceless can be eliminated at this stage, unless Government can convince us beyond reasonable doubt that hon. Nebanda was not eliminated. 

I am sure the mothers who have been getting basins, are going to cry more, and yet if you don’t have a basin, you will not go to hospital to deliver. If you cannot go to the hospital, you either survive or you can die while delivering in the shambas. I am sorry for those mothers who will not get a basin to go and deliver children. 

The children who have been educated by her, will miss her. I am sure even the businesses she has been running are going to die. And when they die, the youths who have been employed by her are going to become unemployed. It is unfortunate that such a young person can die at such an age. I know death is a sure deal for all of us - even babies and the elderly die, but when it is natural death and not under suspicious circumstances. 

Colleagues, it is a hard time for all of us. We need to rethink why such a thing has happened to us at this time. To the family, I am sure and I know you are experiencing a lot of pain, but I know there is nothing we can do. It is only to pray for you so that God can really sustain you so that you get strength to move on without our dear Cerinah. 

Parliament of Uganda, I know we have lost; people of Butaleja, I know you have lost; Ugandans we have lost. The only thing I can say here is to ask the Lord to give the soul of our sister, Cerinah eternal peace.

3.47
MR AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. I am not one of those people who want to live in denial about facts of life but hon. Cerinah Nebanda’s death has made me realise another side of me, because I could not believe it until I viewed her body this afternoon. 

I bring condolences from the Independent Members and I want to thank God for the short life of our colleague. I also want to thank the people of Butaleja and her family for supporting her to pursue her very short political vision. I also want to thank her post-humously for standing out and offering herself to contest the seat which she so convincingly won. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we were all here on Thursday when the President addressed this House and the nation, and after his speech, we had agreed with hon. Nebanda and others that we should not talk to the press in terms of giving a rebuttal to what the President had just said. In fact, we agreed that we would hold a press conference the following day, Friday. We held the press conference, but our colleague did not turn up. And in fact, on Thursday, that very day, she gave her rebuttal about what the President said. Now, I know for sure that her God told her that, “You don’t have enough time; make it quick.”

I have received emails, I have seen on face book, I have seen in the papers and in many other media of communication many people sending the question: “What killed Cerinah?” I would like to pose another question, Mr Speaker, that: What killed hon. Cerinah Nebanda in the year of our jubilee celebrations when we were now energised with ideas, confident that we have Members and citizens to drive the agenda of the new Uganda at 50? And she passes on. I would like to pose that question, not for any of us to attempt to answer, but to reflect over it. 

Who is hon. Cerinah Nebanda, Mr Speaker? She is a gift from God that was given to us for a very short time. This country has the bulk of our population as youthful people, and she was one of them. There are so many things that are happening in this country, and people are sometimes being reminded not to speak about them. Some people know about these things, but they choose not to speak about them. Some people, especially the young people, have been inflicted with the stigma that, “You are still young. Do not talk about these things.” Others have always been reminded that, “Where were you when such and such a thing was happening? Do not speak.” 

I have always been worried about that trend of events which hon. Nebanda was a colleague - a partner in dismissing, because an opinion which I will hold when I am 40 years will be an opinion which I would have generated from the time of my youth and grown up with it. Any attempt to stigmatise anybody on account of age, and reminding them that maybe they can talk in future not now because they are still young, is an attempt to inflict the stigma that they have to grow up with from 24 years like she was, and up to 40 years when their thinking will have been distorted. She was a colleague in trying to say, that must not be demystified. 

The hon. Cerinah Nebanda demonstrated that you can hold an alternative view with humility. That side of the House was always vibrant and she made the whole House laugh when she would be raising very serious issues. 

I want to associate myself with all the good things that were enumerated by the mover of the motion which the late did. In the interest of time, I do not want to go through them again because we all know them. That is why this death drives me absolutely nuts. It is these things that are true that have been done by our colleague that we are supposed to be going on with, I believe, that drives all of us nuts. 

But I would like to believe that for those who would doubt when our colleague would stand up to speak, you should now know that she spoke what she had to say for the short time she had the opportunity to say it and she departed. Now she is in another class, which my friend Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere has always said: Another class where she is above making mistakes, but just going to be a witness saying, “But I told you these things.” 

The hon. Cerinah Nebanda proved to all of us that any attempt to stop her from saying what she had to say was an attempt in futility. I pray that may her death not be in futility. Can we get to the bottom of what killed this honourable young legislator? 

Mr Speaker, I heard the Leader of the Opposition saying that some people are trying to say Ugandans should not talk about this death. I want to weigh in on that and say for a fact that last night, I was watching TV, and I viewed the President of this country saying that people who will talk about this and distort it will have to be arrested.

I want to weigh in by pointing out five issues in support of anybody who would want to speak about the death of Cerinah Nebanda, Member of Parliament.

First, reports about deaths of high profile people have been a mystery in this country for a very long time, and Ugandans are uncomfortable about that status quo. 

Secondly, from talking, facts will emerge. From this talking which is trying to be forbidden, facts will emerge. 

Thirdly, anybody with a black skin all over this world apart from maybe those who migrated to the Western world, the African tradition demands that in Africa, nobody dies. It is a tradition which I have grown up knowing. Therefore, people talk. 

Four, I thought and I still want to think that this country allows for freedom of speech, unless that has been expunged from our law books.

Five – and I thought this was more important - in talking, people let out their hearts; people speak out their hearts and get a big sigh of relief. So, it is an anger management strategy. So, I would like to implore the President not to even try thinking that people should not talk.

Hon. Nebanda has been advocating for many things, including good governance, which among other things includes the fact that we must know how many Ugandans are in existence in this country. We must know them by way of identification - either national IDs or otherwise. We must know the management of the borders of this country; how people come in and get out. She has been one of those who have been complaining that in this country, someone can actually get in with $10 million and get out without anybody knowing about it. 

Be it as it may, honourable members, these things she complained about which we have not yet addressed up to this point are some of the things I would like to think we imagine that somebody with a criminal mind can actually do and get away with because we are not properly in control, in charge and capable of tracing people who can do these kind of things. In short, I am saying that she has been a victim of some of those things which she was advocating for that ought to have been changed.

I would like to conclude that the hon. Cerinah Nebanda was a torch for the youth of this country, who realised that actually you can speak; you can have an opinion and express it; you can be reminded that you were born in the year of liberation but still refuse and go ahead to speak about the things which you see are not going on well. She was a torch for that category of people, and I believe they are going to miss them, but I want to urge them to understand the fact that she was meant to serve this purpose for a short time and now it is up to you to learn from what she did and take courage like she did or choose to ignore it.

To the family; God’s purpose for her is done. I know you are in pain. All of us are in pain. We share your pain, but I would like to request you to take this loss as something that God chose no matter how it occurred. 

To Ugandans, a lot of things have been said. I would not want to advise Ugandans on any of the issues they should pick up or not, but I would like to advise them to pick up on all the issues which have been said since the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda, and process them in their own minds and come up with their own conclusions. 

May her soul rest in eternal peace! We are going to miss you Cerinah; we are going to miss you a lot. God bless your soul.

4.00
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since yesterday, I have attempted to put down a few notes in preparation for this motion, but I have failed on how to begin because of the tragic nature in which our dear colleague has faced her demise. 

I saw hon. Nebanda as a young girl in university. The first time I met her, she had come to consult about a Bunyole Students’ Association in the university for which she had identified challenges and she thought that I, as Member of Parliament could be of help. In the short while we interacted, I discovered that she was a highly determined young girl. She was not even called Nebanda by then, she was called Cerinah Alioru. Nebanda is an acquired name because of the place where she grew up from. 

All of you have heard that Nebanda was born in Maracha; she is not a born of Butaleja; she is not a Munyole. But I want to tell you that Nebanda could have contested in any part of the country and would have been elected! (Applause) If you go to her home in Butaleja and see the number of people flocking in from the neighbouring district, you would wonder whether the MP who has died is from the neighbouring district or is from Butaleja. 

In the short time we interacted, I discovered that the youth of this country are up to something and we should encourage them. A number of times, hon. Nebanda has made outbursts on many issues. At times the party leadership has asked me to talk to her, which I have done. And in most cases when they have, even before I would talk to her, I had to remind them that hon. Nebanda at 23 was using her mouth to express things as she should. At that age, some people picked the gun and went to the bush and they had to fight –(Applause)– So, I have always reminded the people that when dealing with the youth, we should appreciate the psychological growth, and we should also know that for some of these issues, these young people will outgrow them. 

What they need is counselling, encouragement and involvement. They have a lot of energy; where do they spend it? So, if somebody comes here and talks, why don’t you encourage her to talk or give her responsibilities to use that energy in the responsibilities you have given them? That is why, to the teachers and educationists here, in the schools, when you have energetic students, you must have a lot of extracurricular activities so that students can steam off the energy. By the time they are tired and they are back to their preps, they do not have an opportunity to go on strike.

Unfortunately, many poor administrators resort to punishing and expulsion without appreciating the psyche of growth and cycle of development. I want to tell the people of Uganda to give the youth an opportunity to demonstrate their abilities; and let them use their mouths as long as in so doing, they have not become terrorists. Others could have opted to become suicide bombers; but they haven’t done that; they say, “Let us talk”. So, why don’t you talk with them? 

I want to thank hon. Nebanda post-humously, because quite often when we interacted, and she listened. But at times, she would be difficult; and the first time I discovered that hon. Cerinah Nebanda was a lady elected to stand on her feet, was after her primary elections. We were in State House for our NEC meeting; she hadn’t even been elected to Parliament, and I thought I would play patronage as a senior politician. I had to talk to her and hon. Wangolo to say, “When you come here, you must listen to others first; do not rush to talk”. Immediately I turned my back to face where the chairperson of the party was, the next person she picked was behind me and it was hon. Cerinah Nebanda. 

From then on, I realised that she had a purpose and could not be prevailed over by patronage, and the only thing was to advise her and progressively talk to her. I want to tell you that it is a role I have enjoyed for the time she has been a Member of Parliament in this House. 

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that hon. Nebanda’s contribution to this House almost put me on the defensive in my own constituency without people appreciating why. I am more senior; I have been here for over 15 years; Cerinah has been here for only 19 months. But in the constituency, people would listen to her and at times my voice was not as loud. And people would ask me, “You man, what has happened? When you became a commissioner and you are driving a red-number plated vehicle, it seems you ceased to talk about our issues.” 

One of the things I knew and kept telling people is that once Cerinah started talking and she was speaking my heart, my role then became advisory. I would sit in comfort because our issues were effectively being represented at various levels and in various places wherever she has been. (Applause) It is a responsibility now that I will have to take up myself. 

When we came to this House, we took a decision as Members of Parliament from Butaleja. We agreed that we come from Butaleja where water is a problem; health is a problem; and the roads are a problem. We agreed to share responsibilities on the various committees. Cerinah said, “I will take social services because education and health are my passion.” Hon. Jacob Wangolo said, “I will take on natural resources because we want electricity and water”. They left Dombo with all the bad roads. But can you imagine that when we went to the district, it was hon. Cerinah who was elected as chairperson of the roads committee. That is how vigorous the hon. Cerinah we are talking about was in Butaleja. 

I have heard people in this House being called Majegere - leave alone those whose right name is Majegere. But I think if hon. Cerinah was male, she would have qualified to be called Majegere. (Laughter) In the constituency, hon. Cerinah has been known by so many names including: Magulukkumi, bull-dozer; all types of names, and that is exactly what she was. With her energy, she was prepared for any eventualities. But as a youth, she was available for deployment for any issue that would be developmental and beneficial for the people of Butaleja. 

No wonder when the organising committee, which I chair, was making proposals for the programme of mourning that hon. Cerinah be buried on Wednesday, the district objected. They said, “We know hon. Cerinah has many friends in Parliament; why don’t we give you Tuesday so that you people in Parliament can pay full tribute, and for us in Butaleja, you allow us a full day and night to stay with our daughter so that on Thursday, we can pay our last respects to Cerinah, with the burial being preceded by a special district council sitting, where Cerinah served as an ex-officio member.” You can see the kind of person we are talking about today. 

Mr Speaker, while people were laying wreaths on the late’s casket, I looked and saw flowers, and I looked at her face which is a flower itself, and I remembered the words of the religious people that, people who are born of women live for a short time; they live like a flower; it blossoms and so on. Our flower in Butaleja that started the journey from Maracha and now is a flower for Uganda, has weathered. We shall not despair as a people. It will return us to the drawing board, but we want to tell you that Cerinah has not died in vain.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, the family asked a question when we were in Entebbe, and I want to ask this question to the Speaker and Government side. The father asked, “We gave you our daughter alive; very energetic and blossoming to do work; and she has done work as we have heard. You are now returning Cerinah to us dead!” They asked us what has killed Cerinah? And we did not have an answer. The only thing we had and we assured them, is that we had hope because the investigative process was on. And, because of that and the involvement of Parliament and other agencies and organs, we thought of a full-proof process which will give confidence and assurance to the family and to the people of Uganda that the process is good; that the cause of death will be known.

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate! I was one of the people who were in the post-mortem room. In the post-mortem room, we agreed that on issues that we see with our eyes, nobody can conclusively tell what has killed Cerinah. And we shall need further examination for us to come out and tell what has killed Cerinah. 

From the post-mortem room, the press asked us to comment on what could have caused the death, and we did tell them exactly that; that the process is ongoing, and until the toxicological analysis – if that is the right word; these are modern words - is done, nobody can conclusively say so. And that is the only information we gave. We all stayed professional and observed.

Mr Speaker, we were surprised the following day, in the media of the Sunday papers when we saw the headlines that Cerinah could have died of drug abuse, drug overdose and alcoholic abuse. Ah! We didn’t know their source of information, but we knew that the person who had given that information was indirectly attacking the integrity of the institution of Parliament. Because by imputing that hon. Cerinah could have died of drugs, somebody was imputing that could be, the information that we give in this House - the way we debate, the way we live as Members of Parliament, is under the influence of drugs. And what they said was that she was alcoholic. I want to tell you that I have been to so many parties with Cerinah. Before she came to this House, we went to many social places as committees, as Parliament and even those organised by the Commission. I want anybody to stand here and testify that she had got Cerinah drunk. 

So, when this information came up, we knew that it was an indirect way to attack the fibre of the institution of Parliament. And as Parliamentary Commissioners and members of the organising committee who converged then, we decided to say a little bit of what had happened and I know when my colleague, hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi gets an opportunity to make a contribution - he is more professional and knows exactly what happened.

Mr Speaker, we came to do that because the Commission couldn’t be convened; the Speaker was very faraway and the Deputy Speaker was not in the post-mortem room. We decided to safeguard the integrity of this institution by giving the correct information. 

However, what surprises me though is that I would have expected the wrath of the people who are talking about the death of Cerinah to have been directed at the sources of information or to those who published it. Unfortunately, the reactions are targeted at us who came in to respond to a mismanaged situation. How do we operate? Or how do we intend to?

Finally - and Government should know this - the family, the Parliament and people of Uganda are waiting for the question to be answered: Who killed hon. Cerinah Nebanda? [We shall need an answer. But if what I have just heard is true, hon. Nandala Mafabi re-echoing what Dr Chris Baryomunsi mentioned this morning when were in the church that actually the only wind of hope that we had in order to have a check-proof process has been compromised. Does this then leave the process of investigation with any credibility? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Shall we have to believe in what comes out of the process? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] The government will have to answer and explain. I thank you. May her soul rest in peace. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my many years of legal practice, bodies have been exhumed after 10 years, 15 years and information can still be obtained. What I am saying is, let us not get desperate. These matters can still be corrected. And we are here to collectively contribute to that solution. So, let us debate this matter in a very organised way. Solutions will be found. By the time we leave this place, we will have a solution. Don’t you think so?

Honourable members, this motion has been seconded by three other Members: Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Dr Bitekyerezo, and Dr Sam Lyomoki. We have already had four speakers; the mover and three seconders. I am going to limit these three doctors to some timeframe so that we can allow general debate on this issue. I am going to give each of them three minutes –[HON. MEMBERS: “An hour.”]- unless you also want them to talk freely. Okay, we give them all the time. 

I have said this motion has been spoken to by the mover of the motion. It has been seconded by three speakers who I have given unlimited time. Should I continue to give the next three seconders unlimited time? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay, so be it.

4.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that since the death of hon. Nebanda, I have not slept. Since she was pronounced dead, I have not entered bed. I have been at the centre of this. So, you will allow me to give a graphic story of what I know and it will answer part of the curiosity within the House. But I will try to be as fast as I can. 

On Friday evening, we had just come from the requiem service of the father to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Kadaga, and we had arrived here at Parliament - in the evening. We received information that hon. Nebanda was dead. I called hon. Dombo, who was in Butaleja and he told me that the parents of hon. Nebanda had also told him that she was dead and was lying in Mukwaya General Hospital, a private hospital in Nsambya. I immediately rushed there. I was one of the first Members of Parliament to arrive at the hospital and I demanded to access the body because they were limiting people from accessing it. But when I identified myself as a medical doctor from Parliament, they allowed me and indeed, I confirmed she was dead, lying still and lifeless in one of the rooms at the hospital. 

Members of Parliament gathered; the Inspector General of Police with his team also came, including the Police surgeon; the Rt Hon. Speaker and you, Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, also arrived and many of our colleagues and members of the public all gathered at the hospital.

The question we immediately asked - because that was sudden death - was: What could have happened? There were two health officers - a clinical officer and a nurse from a small private clinic in Bbunga, who were there. The doctor who manned the hospital told me, “These are the people who brought the body here.” So, I started talking to the clinical officer. But while I was talking to him, the Inspector General of Police entered and said that the President wanted to know the story on what happened, on phone. I advised him to talk to the clinical officer as the person who had managed hon. Cerinah Nebanda from the home of the two gentlemen in Bbunga, who had approached this clinic for assistance. Thereafter, the clinical officer went away to speak to the President on phone while I continued engaging the nurse about what had happened, and she gave me the details. So, I fairly know what happened at the home in Bbunga where she could have got the problem from, before she was taken to the hospital.

As medical professionals we started discussing with Police and Members of Parliament on what needed to be done. Quickly, we agreed that, that hospital did not have adequate services to preserve the body. So, there was need to transfer the body to the Anatomy Department of Mulago Hospital where it would be safely kept.

We also agreed that Police, as constitutionally commanded, starts investigations. But we also requested that the family of the late and Parliament be involved with the Police leadership as this investigation goes on. That was accepted and agreed upon. We, for instance, agreed with the senior Police officers who were there that the body be kept at Mulago and be accessed the following day in the presence of Police, Parliament and the family members. 

At that point the body was transferred to Mulago Hospital. I drove ahead and by the time the body arrived, I was already there to help, having worked at Mulago for long, in ensuring they easily access the different places. Later the body was safely put in the fridge in the Anatomy Room before we instructed the gentlemen who guard that place that the following day would be the only time when the Police, Parliament and members of the family would come for post-mortem examinations to commence. That was agreed upon. I left the hospital at around 3.00 a.m. I was there with Police officer Andrew Kawesi who provided security. I also remember talking to the Inspector General of Police at around 2.00 a.m. He was also at the scene of crime in Bbunga co-ordinating what was going on.

We also agreed that the family should engage services of a pathologist, and the Parliament also engage another pathologist to join the Police surgeon and the government pathologist in conducting the post-mortem examination. And I remember sharing that information with the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, even when she was in a sad moment, and we concurred - we kept her in the picture of what was going on. 

So, on Saturday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have repeatedly said, “We agreed.” Who are these you agreed with? Please let him state that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, at some point I will provide some names, but for now I am saying Police officers, Parliament and the family members were the main stakeholders in this.

So, on Saturday morning, we converged at the Anatomy Department of Mulago Hospital. The Police officers who had been deployed there with the gentlemen who take care of the Anatomy Department insisted nobody would access the body until all the stakeholders had come. We actually delayed the release of the body of a UPDF officer which was also there because of the agreement we had made that we should all be there.

Eventually all of us gathered and had a brief meeting in preparation for a post-mortem examination. In that brief meeting, we agreed - as I cited - that the pathologist from Parliament, the pathologist hired by the family of the late, the Police surgeon and a government pathologist would be on the team to handle the exercise. But we also agreed that doctors from Parliament, namely: Myself, hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki and hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo also join the team to observe; and also, another medical officer from the family and members of the family, who nominated a brother to the late hon. Nebanda, and hon. Emmanuel Dombo as a member of the community, to also join the team to observe the process. This is acceptable within what happens in post-mortem examinations.

Thereafter we went into the post-mortem room and the examination started. The requirement is that all those who attend must sign a document so that they can own that process that your were in attendance of, and that was fully complied with. 

The first phase of the post-mortem, which requires examination of the body and accessing the body organs of the dead, was done, for us to do a naked-eye assessment of the organs at a microscopic level, and preliminary observations were made. However, it was not possible to conclude the cause of death because at that stage you can, for instance, find a clot in the blood vessel and if you relate it with other findings, you can conclude on what killed a person. Or you could find a ruptured vessel, which can lead to conclusions relating to the cause of death. But at that stage, it was not possible to state the cause of death.

So, a decision was taken that specimens be taken for additional analysis, which is usually done in two aspects: There is histological analysis to look at the structures and the body organs at a microscopic level to determine whether there are any changes that you cannot see with a naked eye and could be of significance. Two, one can also do a toxicological analysis to see whether there is presence of toxins - of poison or chemical substances in the body that probably could have led to the death of the person. So, a decision was taken that the next step should be pursued.

In the same post-mortem room a decision was taken and we did express the suggestion that we divide the samples to have an independent analysis alongside the analysis by the government chemist. That also is a tested principle in medical- legal and forensic investigations. And that too was accepted.

We had agreed amongst us that Prof. Wilson Wabinga be the lead pathologist assisted by the other pathologists, and he was the one cutting the samples. Specimen bottles were provided. The samples were put in the different bottles. The pathologist who was hired by Parliament, Dr Sylvestre Onzivua, got the samples for the independent analysis to be done in South Africa. Another set of samples was to be taken to the government laboratory by the government pathologist escorted by Members of Parliament. That decision was agreed upon in the post-mortem room. And at that stage, we moved on.

On that very day in the evening, we also agreed that we should minimise comments in the media in order to allow investigations to take place, so that the Police would authoritatively state the cause of the death after the conclusion had been arrived at. That is when the police would say, they have found the cause of death to be A, B, C, D; and that was on Saturday.

In the evening, the Sunday newspapers came out - notably Sunday Vision and Sunday Monitor - carrying similar stories stating that hon. Nebanda possibly died of intoxication of alcohol or from an overdose of narcotic drugs, and they were quoting the Inspector General of Police. Sunday Monitor quoted the Inspector General of Police, while Sunday Vision said security sources and Police sources.

These days I use five batteries in my phone because every Member of Parliament calls to say, “What are you saying about this?”

The following day when we met, because there was fury across the country especially among the Members of parliament about that, we agreed when we assembled as MPs that we need to clarify to cool down the tempers. And our clarification was that the exercise has started and all of us should wait for the investigations to be concluded so that a definitive cause of death can be announced so that everybody knows, but not to say drugs or alcohol and so forth.

I also talked to the IGP why he was concluding that alcohol and drugs had killed hon. Nebanda and yet we did not have him in the post-mortem room. He said that he was quoted out of context, but we agreed with him that we need to meet later on, and we agreed to meet at the home of hon. Nebanda in Entebbe, at the vigil in the evening, and have a discussion as we compare notes, but also streamline some of these issues in order to avoid confusing the public and giving wrong information to the public.

We did converge at the home of hon. Nebanda and this question was raised by the members of the family as hon. Dombo has said. The father of hon. Nebanda demanded that I as well as the Inspector General of Police should make comments. Both of us addressed the mourners and both of us said that investigations are still going on, and we should wait for the final conclusions.

We had a brief meeting with the IGP; he was accompanied by the Police surgeon, Dr Byaruhanga and the Government Chemist, Mr Mubiru and we discussed the issue. We updated the IGP on what had happened in the room and we agreed that samples would be taken to South Africa, and he informed me that the government chemist was instead sending the samples to London because there is limited capacity within our laboratory here. I said it was fine, let one set of samples go to South Africa and another set goes to London and then we continue handling the matter shortly. 

Shortly, after I received a call from His Excellency the President, and we had a lengthy discussion over the matter. His concern was whether we were working with the Police. We agreed that yes, we must work closely with Police in the lead so that we have a smooth process of carrying out this investigation. 

Later on, the IGP had a conversation with me the whole night – I remember he called at 1.00 a.m. and later on in the morning – and teh whole night we were talking on phone, and we agreed to have a meeting the following day. We were supposed to have a joint press conference, but we could not get time and we agreed to have a meeting. 

Yesterday morning, when we were in Kamuli at the funeral service of the later George Kadaga, I received a call from Dr Onzivua Silvestre, the pathologist who had the samples for South Africa, that the Police were hunting for him and they wanted to arrest him. I made a call to the IGP, Kale Kayihura - I am sure Members who were there saw me moving up and down while talking on telephone - and said that the doctor is complaining that he is being harassed by Police, and we agreed that he was going to talk to the director of CID who was pursuing him to stop, because we had planned a meeting at 6.00 p.m.

I asked the IGP what the problem was because we had been working together. We agreed to have a meeting at 6.00 p.m. He agreed that I come with the doctors and a team from Parliament and he would come, but if he was delayed, the director of CID, Madam Grace Akullo, would represent him, and then he would join us later with the pathologist in Mulago to harmonise and to see how we move forward. So, he said he was going to order his officers to stop whatever they were doing until when we got to the meeting.

Mr Speaker, we cut short our presence in Kamuli to be in the meeting which was held in the executive director’s boardroom in Mulago Hospital yesterday evening. Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki, hon. Medard Bitekyerezo, hon. David Bahati, hon. Abdu Katuntu and myself, represented this House in that meeting to discuss with Police and the pathologists.

Mr Speaker, allow me to read the list of the people who attended that meeting yesterday in the boardroom of the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital, because we all wrote our names on the attendance list: Dr Chris Baryomunsi; Mr Eric Atako Dradrio, Acting Commissioner in the Department of Government Analytical Laboratory; we had Mr Andrew Kay Mubiru a Senior Government Analyst in the Government Analytical Laboratory; AIGP Grace Akullo, Director CID, representing the IGP, and we were in touch with General Kale Kayihura on phone; DSCP Chelimo Beyata, Senior Investigative Officer; Mr Ambrose Murunga the legal officer from Police headquarters; we had Dr Moses Byaruhanga, Police Surgeon from the Police Medical Services; we had Dr Sam Kalungi, Government Pathologist from Mulago Hospital; we had Dr Medard Bitekyerezo (MP), Dr Sam Lyomoki (MP) and Chairperson of the Health Committee; hon. Abdu Katuntu (MP), hon. David Bahati (MP) and Dr Baterana Baryugaba, Executive Director, Mulago Hospital. Thirteen people attended this meeting yesterday beginning around 6.30 p.m. in the evening.

I began by graphically describing what I have said in this House; how we started and how we arrived, and how that meeting had been arranged between myself and the IGP and the other people to give the context to the members who were in the meeting. I did pose a question as to why the doctor was being harassed. The director CID and also Mr Musana from CID - but he later walked out; he did not record his name, he was in attendance but did not sit till the end of the meeting. But I will tell you why I thought he had walked out. 

I asked the director CID why Dr Onzivua was being harassed and she did say that earlier in the morning, they had a meeting and the government medical pathologists namely, the Police Surgeon, Dr Moses Byaruhanga; and Dr Sam Kalungi, a pathologist from Mulago Hospital said that they did not know where Dr Onzivua got the samples from. (Interjections) And we did agree that if that is the sample they got,
then maybe the Director CID was right to move the way she was moving.

Then, we discussed - I do not want to go into details. Later on, they said, “No, actually he has samples, but he does not have enough”
 
I remember hon. Abdu Katuntu getting angry and saying, “Stop being dishonest. You start by saying you do not know where he got the samples. Now, you are saying, he only has samples for toxicology, he does not have samples for histology. How did you know he has those for toxicology?”

It was at that point that Mr Musana walked out because I think, in the beginning, he had been made to believe that Dr Onzivua probably accessed the body on his own and got samples. But when all of us assembled and it became very clear that Dr Onzivua was in the post-mortem room, a decision was taken in the post-mortem room and everybody was in the know, he walked out. I presumed that is the reason he walked out because he did not come back. 

So, Mr Speaker, we had a lengthy meeting, which ended towards midnight, and without going too much into the details - because my colleagues who were in the meeting will expound -(Interruptions)

HON.MEMBERS: Tell us.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Okay, So, I tell you?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

DR BARYOMUNSI: We had a meeting and went through all the issues. The reason we had actually specifically invited hon. Katuntu was to help us with the legal issues, because when I spoke with the IGP on phone, he was saying, “You see, the law. You are the people who make laws,” and I asked, which law? He could not quote any.

I said, “My understanding, as a medical doctor, is that a family has a right to demand for an investigation. Can you quote for me the law which prohibits the family?” He said, “I have to check.” So, that is why we made sure we had a lawyer.

 Mr Speaker, at the end of the meeting, which went on up to almost midnight, it was agreed that, first of all, the samples were divided in the post-mortem room, and I am sure the member of the family who was there - he does not have chance to speak here, but he knows and he was there, as well as hon. Dombo and others were there - we agreed that samples are divided on the table in the post-mortem room and it was clear that Dr Onzivua was proceeding to South Africa with facilitation from Parliament, and that the other set of samples was going to be deposited with the Government Chemist. That was agreed in that meeting. 

It was also agreed that it was wrong to harass Dr Onzivua. I remember saying, “If you think there is need for harassment, harass me or Parliament, because we have engaged him, because we have already procured a ticket for him, we have already paid him per diem and we have already even given him $2000 for the tests to be done in a laboratory in South Africa.” 

So, we agreed and it was minuted that Dr Onzivua should not be harassed and Dr Byarugaba, his supervisor who is the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital, was there in the meeting and was in agreement.

Initially, the Police was saying that those samples should be first given to the Government Chemist, then later on they give them to him -(Interjections)- and we said “no”. I remember we gave an analogy that if somebody who is, for instance, not watching this debate and who is not in the House, later on wants to ask, “What did Dr Baryomunsi say in Parliament?” He can get hon. Nandala-Mafabi and ask him, “What did Baryomunsi say?” Then hon. Nandala gives him his view. Then he can get the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi separately, “What did Baryomunsi say?” (Interjections) No, just wait! [HON. MEMBERS: “Give another example.”] No, because both of them are here and are listening to me, but that it would be wrong to ask hon. Nandala-Mafabi, “What did Baryomunsi say?” Then you go to hon. Mbabazi and say, “Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has told me that hon. Baryomunsi said this.” What did Baryomunsi say after telling him what Nandala told you? That the best way to investigate would be to meet hon. Nandala-Mafabi separately and hon. Mbabazi separately for you to find out the truth and it is a tested principle in forensic and medical-legal investigations. 

So, that was agreed in that meeting and my colleagues are here; when they get the chance, they will add on this because I may not go into details.

We also agreed on how to manage the results because earlier on, the IGP had also indicated to me that they were equally concerned and that in addition to London, the samples at the Government Chemist will also be divided and another set would be sent to Israel and I had said it was okay, as long as we get results and then we see - because all of us are looking for the truth. 

So, we agreed on how to manage the results once they come. We agreed that let the process continue; the South African leg, the Israel leg and London leg, but when results come, this very committee should first sit and harmonise before they are shared with the public so that we avoid confusing the public and give contradictory information. An agreement was also reached that we manage the process even when the results are out. That was also agreed in that meeting.

I am almost concluding, Mr Speaker. 

So, we all ended the meeting happily. I remember in my closing remarks I said, “This has been a meeting which has generated a lot of heat, but I am happy, as a Parliamentary Commissioner, that it has also generated light in terms of giving us direction on how we should proceed.” That was one of my concluding remarks as we finished the meeting. So, we all dispersed happy knowing that now the process is on.

This morning - and we all knew that Dr Onzivua was going with a South African Airways flight which leaves at 7.15 a.m. from Entebbe. Because, Dr Onzivua, during the day, had recorded a statement and had made it known - I think he showed Mr Musana the ticket, because Mr Musana said he even had a ticket that he wanted to fly to South Africa. So, it was known and agreed that he was leaving today morning at 7.15 a.m. from Entebbe to Johannesburg. 

Like I said, I have not been sleeping. I made a call to Dr Onzivua around 6.00 a.m. in the morning to ask him whether he was at the airport. He said, “I am at the airport and we are now checking in. We have no problem, and we are moving.” He kept calling me, but about 10 minutes to take-off, I again called him and asked, “Have you boarded?” and he told me, “I have been intercepted by security officials and they are asking me all sorts of questions”. I asked him, “What are they asking you?” He said, actually, let me pass my phone to one of them so he talks to you. I said, “Give him to me”. So, he handed over the phone to a security officer. When I tried to talk, he kept silent and never said anything. Since then, I continued calling the number; it was ringing, but there was no response.

Later on, I tried to get in touch with the Police authorities, but they were not picking my phone. However, through contacts at the airport, I understood he had been arrested. 

Just this afternoon, hon. Okupa gave me his Ipad and that is why I carried it here. I was reading through the press release, which has been issued by Madam Judith Nabakooba, the Police Spokesperson. I do not have the password, but basically, she confirmed that the doctor had been arrested, that he was smuggling parts of a human body -(Interjections)- I do not know, Mr Speaker, whether I should read the whole of it? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes; go ahead.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a difficult time we are facing, but that does not mean we do not follow the rules. What is that document? Is it signed by anybody? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Let me ask the question. I am asking the honourable member holding the document. We need integrity of this document. Please, let us not become. Please, he is the one holding the document and nobody else is holding that document. Is that document signed?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, this is a press statement that has been signed by Judith Nabakooba, Police Spokesperson, Uganda Police Force and dated 18th December, 2012 and her signature is there. So, with your permission, Mr Speaker, allow me to read the statement which has been issued by Police verbatim:

“As the Inspector General of Police had briefed the public yesterday, Police commenced investigations following the tragic death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda and among other routine procedures, requested Mulago Hospital to conduct a post-mortem examination on the body of the deceased.

Police allowed the family and some Members of Parliament to send representatives and observe the post-mortem examination. The preliminary results of the post-mortem were inconclusive and the team of pathologists referred certain samples to the Government Analytical Laboratory for further tests.

The samples were sealed, as required, and escorted to the Government Analytical Laboratories (GAL) by, among others, the MPs who had witnessed the post-mortem.

At the Government Analytical Laboratory, such samples are, as routine procedure, received formally, their descriptions and quantities determined and documented and the nature of the requested analysis clearly recorded.

This procedure is vital, not just for scientific purposes, but also as part of the crucial ‘chain-of-custody’ requirement in criminal investigations and ultimately, in criminal prosecution in court.

Any samples handled outside this procedure breach the integrity of the forensic examinations, as well as making the final outcome inadmissible in any potential criminal prosecution and suspicious.

On Monday, the 17th of December, 2012, Police discovered that certain samples from the body of the deceased had been irregularly obtained by individuals not involved in the Police investigation and without knowledge of the Police.

Later in the day, after he had been confronted by CID, a pathologist from Mulago Hospital, Dr Sylvestre Onzivua wrote to the Director of CID, informing the CID that he had been hired by Parliament to carry out parallel forensic investigations into the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda and asked for the Director’s advice.

In the evening, a meeting was convened at the offices of the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital, which was attended by five Members of Parliament, a team of Police officers led by the Director of CID, two pathologists, who participated in the post-mortem, and scientists from the Government Analytical Laboratory.

It was resolved that all forensic procedures be consolidated under the Government Analytical Laboratory and that Dr Onzivua would submit the samples in his possession to the stipulated procedures.

Early this morning, in direct contravention of the law and professional requirements and before the Director of CID could respond to his letter, Dr Sylvestre Onzivua attempted to smuggle the samples out of the country. He was arrested at Entebbe Airport while in possession of the samples.

As a general principle and in the interests of transparency and professionalism, Police allow representatives of families and other relevant parties to observe and even seek second opinions in certain matters under investigation.

This, however, must be done in accordance with the law while at all times observing all the requisite professional procedures that would ensure that the results are credible and would add value to the Police investigation.

Should a person require extra samples for independent analysis, the procedure demands that such a person obtains the samples from the Government Analytical Laboratory, which would oversee the process, document it, and ensure that all scientific fine points are observed.

In this instance, it is not clear what samples were in possession of the third parties, how they were obtained and the conditions under which they were kept.

Moreover, Dr Onzivua, who is a civil servant, had not been cleared to travel out of the country and neither had he obtained the authority required to export the samples out of the country.

Dr Onzivua is at the moment in custody of the Police to assist in determining why he violated the laid down procedures and regulations. Any person found to have contravened the law shall be dealt with accordingly.”

It is signed by Judith Nabakooba. 

Mr Speaker, that is the press statement from Police, but I am worried, as a Ugandan, that this is the Police, which is supposed to protect me. As I conclude -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it might help us to understand what actually happened because there is a question being raised about the integrity of the evidence. There is something in law, which we call “the chain of evidence.” A particular sample was obtained. Was it identifiable? Was the sealing witnessed by everybody? - Please, you were not there; because you see, it is important. I am speaking professionally as a lawyer. Now the question is, were those samples - You see, honourable members - please, these questions are important. Somebody could get out free on technicalities. You get my point? Somebody could get out free on these technicalities; I am telling you the truth. (Mr Sseggona rose_) Hon. Sseggona, would you like to speak to this?

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, I agree with you absolutely. One important thing I want to thank you for is that you have accepted to take on your number one role of protecting us even when we are endangered, and I agree with you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, I am not just saying it for fun, because the integrity of the evidence is important. Now, when it was collected, was it signed by all of you and kept in a way that - you were not there honourable members. Was it kept – please - was it kept? Let him answer this question.  Let him answer it. Was it kept in such a form – let me pose the question. Was it kept in such a form that any tampering would be identifiable?  (Mr Katuntu rose_) Yes, information. You were there hon. Katuntu. Let me hear from hon. Katuntu
 
MR KATUNTU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish colleagues could listen to me.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Let us listen to the person who was there.

MR KATUNTU: I happened to be there and I think the Speaker’s question is very legitimate. We need to understand the facts and I think that is what the Speaker wants to bring out. There are two scenarios; we have got the evidence being gathered by the Police and the samples that went to the Government Analytical Laboratory, which should have the chain of evidence because, eventually, they will end up in court in case of prosecution.
 
Then we have another set of samples by the family and Parliament. And their interest is to find out the truth. They are not for prosecution purposes. (Applause) So, this issue about chain of evidence is about the evidence that may be relied upon by a court of law in case of prosecution. And I will really advise that we do not to go into discussing that evidence because it might jeopardise investigations. 

But this particular evidence we are talking about was from members of the family and us, as Parliament, to find out the truth. It has absolutely nothing to do with Police investigations. And any party has got a right under the law, Mr Speaker, and I put it to the Police that any person - a family and an interested person has got a right to find out what happened to their relative. 

So, Police statements trying to vulgarise independent investigations that they should be supervised by the Police does not really make sense. This is purely for our own and the family’s consumption so that they get satisfied as to what happened to their dear one.  And money being paid for this is from Parliament and the family. It has nothing to do with Government samples. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why this is important is because when all the analysis is done, the two are going to be weighed together - whatever two or three - but they will be put together and the question will arise; which one is the true version? You get my point? Someone is going to raise a technicality that, “You see, we do not know this one; we do not know where it was kept; we do not know how it was transmitted; we do not know all these things.” That is why I am asking these questions. 

Yes, Dr Bitekyerezo -

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleagues in this Ninth Parliament is that I witnessed the whole procedure of post-mortem on our fallen colleague here, late hon. Nebanda in Mulago Hospital. I witnessed the collection of samples into different containers but from the same body which was dissected in my presence and the presence of others. 

Mr Speaker, I am the one who took the person who had the samples in my own car in the presence of Dr Sam Lyomoki, and I delivered these samples with the other person from Mulago Hospital in the Government Analytical Laboratory. 

I witnessed - and I am a doctor; I swore an oath never to tell a lie because if I tell lies, then it means that people are going to start dying and evidence is going to be concealed. 

So, Dr Onzivua, that black man, was even putting on a white gown similar to the one Ebola patients use. He took the samples in presence of - actually Prof. Wabinga was the one who was removing the samples and there was another person inside whose name I could not establish because some of them were covered. But Dr Onzivua would get the sample and put in here, and cut and put here and there, and these are things that we did in broad day light. I am saying these things for the sake of the Members of Parliament and for the sake of this wonderful 24 year old girl who has no child, so that we can have the truth instead of people going to the President and tell him lies. They go to the IGP and tell him lies. We would want the truth and that is what we stand for. For God and my Country.  I thank you. (Applause) 

There are things that I would like to say, Mr Speaker, that these samples that we got from the dead body of the late hon. Nebanda were sealed in plastic containers. I thank you.
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the colleague for the information. Like I had said, the exercise was done in our presence and the samples were collected at the same time. Prof. Wabinga would cut a sample, say, from the pancreas and divide it into two for Dr Onzivua and then the Government Chemist, and then they were sealed in our presence and the family members were also there. 

We discussed these issues last night and everybody appreciated and we agreed that, that was done. So, for Police to be raising it now, I am worried as a person who is protected by the same Police. 

As I conclude my submission, Mr Speaker, there have been press statements where the President has been quoted as going to immediately arrest those politicians who are interfering with the work of Police. I hope he does not mean our team of doctors who have been involved because I got information that the lead pathologist was asked, “Why did you allow those doctors from Parliament into the post-mortem room?” That is the same as asking the question: Why is a General in the Army holing a gun? Or why is a Reverend holding a Bible?  

How can you question me how I accessed a post-mortem room with the many degrees I hold in Medicine? (Applause) As well as hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki and hon. Dr Bitekyerezo? We are not only medical doctors but we are senior doctors with high levels of qualifications at postgraduate level. Therefore, we can access theatres and post-mortem rooms anywhere in the world, where they exist, because of the time we spent at school. (Applause)

The other question is: What was our interest? Our only interest is that this is our colleague. Tomorrow, I may die and be the one here. But I would be interested wherever I will be to know how you have managed me. 

Hon. Nebanda stood for the truth and transparency. She is now lifeless and cannot defend her rights. She cannot get the truth herself. So, some people must be there to get that truth. (Applause)

Our interest as Members of Parliament - because when we met, we divided ourselves into groups to do different responsibilities.   For us doctors, we were assigned to handle this. Others are doing other forms of responsibilities. Our interest in this was that there should be a process whose integrity is not questionable in having this investigation so that the results will be credible and the process of having an independent analysis like I said earlier on is a tested principle in investigations. 

I can say this with authority as a medical doctor. There is nothing wrong. I worked as a medical practitioner. It is common for a doctor to draw samples, say of blood, and you send them to two or three laboratories, wait for results and make an analysis. It is something which even somebody who has not gone to school should be able to appreciate. So, our interest was merely to find the truth, and that is the role we have played. 

HonOurable members, now that Dr Onzivua whom we had sent to South Africa has been arrested and we do not know where the samples he had are, we now believe – we have consulted amongst ourselves as doctors who were working with Police - that at this point, we can no longer add value to the process. Therefore, we would like to announce that we are formally withdrawing from that process. Therefore, we shall not associate with any outcome which will be announced. (Applause) So, whoever is holding the samples will have the duty to explain the processes and the results.

We also demand that Dr Slyvester Onzivua should be released immediately. (Applause) My view is that if Police was to arrest anybody, it should be the people who killed her not Dr Onzivua, who was doing a professional duty, and not to start intimidating Members of Parliament that you are going to arrest them. I do not mind being arrested. I can be arrested, but what we want is that what killed hon. Nebanda must be answered.

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for allowing me to go through that lengthy –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. In this House, we have the Minister of Internal Affairs who speaks for the political side of Government in this particular case. We also have the Leader of Government Business looking at me right now. Is this not the time to have an explanation from the minister responsible for Internal Affairs now -(Interjections)– why, a consultant hired by Parliament to do a specific job, which is intended to protect members of the public, and also send a message to killers and potential killers that they would be arrested, is held in custody and samples obtained by Parliament through a particular procedure with the involvement of the Police, would be confiscated without informing Parliament and endangering one, this Parliament and the public?

If a Member of Parliament can be treated like this; if we are going to die like cockroaches today, who is safe in this country? 

Finally, I am told of many stories of Idi Amin killing people; but I have never seen a photograph of Idi Amin holding a gun and shooting somebody. Gen. Moses Ali may tell me; hon. Kajura may tell me; they were around. How else does Government kill? Is it not the time now for the minister responsible for Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister to tell us -(Interjections)- whether we are safe and why we should not withdraw our confidence in them, and why the Inspector General of Police should not resign?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a procedural matter raised. Before the House is a Motion. That Motion was in the process of finalisation of its secondment speeches. We have two speeches to the secondment of the motion and for the record, let me state the Motion again which is before us: “That Parliament pays tribute to the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda Alioru, District Woman Representative, Butaleja.”

That is the Motion. So, I have two more seconders of the Motion who have not spoken, and we had agreed that they should all speak. Can I ask hon. Dr Bitekyerezo and then, the hon. Sam Lyomoki conclude then we move to the debate and, therefore, possible responses from the different people. 

5.16
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in seconding the Motion to honour our fallen colleague, the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda.

I saw hon. Cerinah Nebanda way back when we were in Namboole in NEC trying to vote for –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order Members, order. Let the people who were there speak to the Motion, please. Procedure; Dokolo District.

5.17
MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. You have read to us the Motion and among the issues which we are raising or supposed to be talking about now, is paying tribute to the late Cerinah Nebanda.

I want to know, in the situation in which Parliament is right now; where we have received a very disturbing report, whether we are in a position as Parliament to pay tribute to the fallen friend and colleague without getting clarification? I think tribute is to appreciate the contribution and to see how to move forward.

We feel the content of the report we have received is so disturbing that we cannot move forward unless clarification is given to us. (Applause) And, in the cultural sense, I come from Lango sub-region and I am a Lango by tribe. In a situation of such context, where death is contested and we are not sure of the cause of death, burial cannot take place. 

I, therefore, demand that this Parliament does not bury this lady until the body is opened. (Applause) As a mother, and as a senior citizen in this country, I am crying for the death of this lady. I lost a brother yesterday as I was burying the Speaker’s father - but the pain of the death of this lady has made me stand here. I want to cry to you, Mr Speaker, that this lady should not be buried. Let all the doctors in the world come, open the body, and get a sample in our presence. (Applause)

We cannot move around talking about nothing. We should stop contributing and talking about nothing. We want clarification as to how this honourable lady has died so prematurely. We cannot gloss over this matter. Mr Speaker, I beg for clarification and I want you to guide the House. 

HON. MEMBERS: Aye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any suggestion that is in the intention of the presiding officer or any other Member of this House not to process this matter to its conclusion would be completely misplaced. 

What is happening now, honourable members, is that we have a Motion – listen. What I want to do – please sit.

We are all interested in concluding this matter properly. We are all interested in finding out what actually happened to hon. Nebanda.  [HON. MEMBER: “Not all of us; some are not interested.”] At least from the presiding officer; I am interested. If I we were to tell you how many phone calls we have made from the time these things happened - we are not allowed to debate, that is why we just keep quiet; but we also want to process it properly. 

Honourable members, what is happening is that, this debate has come out of a motion. Now, this motion is not yet even before the House properly. All these people were there  -  honourable members; I wish you could bear with me on this. Dr Bitekyerezo was there; Dr Sam Lyomoki was there; and they have signed up to second this motion. Can we hear from them? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Please wait. Order! [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Guidance.”] Okay, let us process the guidance in a proper manner; you do not have to raise your voices. Can we resume our sits, honourable members – hon. Member for Lwemiyaga, I am not doing anything wrong in this situation. What I am trying to do is to guide so that whatever we decide, we agree on it as the way forward. I am not blocking anything here. Let me have the honourable member for Oyam.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I rise to point out the fact that this House must appreciate that we are in a very peculiar and very emotive situation. It is true that there is now a substantive motion for paying tribute to our fallen sister. But it is also true to appreciate that when you pay tribute, that is now the last stage towards burial. 

Just before my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal stood up and spoke, a point of procedure was raised by my brother Medard. In view of the fact that in the submission of the technical people who represented this Parliament reading a statement, which seems to counter man a procedure that was followed by a committee attended by our people; a statement was raised here and was not denied by Government. That statement seems to be in utter contradiction of what has been reported to this Parliament. The report of this Parliament would be to the effect that Members of Parliament would be satisfied with the processes that have so far gone on and, therefore, we would signal our farewell to our sister. 

My question for guidance now is that in view of the fact that there is a very disturbing matter that has come up; isn’t it correct that the content of this statement either be refuted, controverted or clarified before we move to the next stage of giving –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it, therefore, be procedurally right for Government to clarify on the statement that has been given by the Police?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what we are going to do –(Interjections)– let me guide. It seems it is by the agreement of the House that we dispense with the speeches from hon. Bitekyerezo and hon. Sam Lyomoki. If we dispense with those secondment statements, that means I now have to state the question and open debate in which case it would allow the Government or whoever is responsible the opportunity to respond to those issues –(Interjections)– that is how we process those matters within the Rules. 

Okay, with the order of the Speaker, the speeches of hon. Bitekyerezo and hon. Sam Lyomoki are dispensed with as seconders of this motion. So, the motion is fully constituted before the House; there are statements –(Interjections)– please, let me first finish guiding honourable members, because we cannot proceed like this. I am trying to guide on procedure and you are raising a point of procedure. Let me finish guiding and if it doesn’t answer your question, then you raise it. 

An issue has been raised arising from the spokesperson of the Police in the cause of secondment of this motion. This motion is now properly before the House. It has been moved and seconded. But there are issues that have been raised that are important to attract immediate responses from the Government. I am now going to give the Government or whoever is responsible for responding to this statement to make a quick response to that particular issue and then we see how to move forward. 

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it grieves all of us at the tragic circumstances of the death of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. 

I have listened to hon. Baryomunsi very carefully on the very detailed narration he gave. And if what he narrated is correct, that they agreed especially on the samples; that one to go to South African; another to London; and another to the Government Analytical Laboratory; and it was agreed in that meeting and Dr Sylvestre Onzivua was arrested in the process of going, when he was sponsored by Parliament, then it was wrong, if that was agreed. (Applause) And, indeed, from further confirmation of this, that was indeed what was agreed. 

But Mr Speaker, I have another difficulty; in the same meeting, according to this report hon. Baryomunsi read, on page 2, it states, “In the evening, a meeting was convened at the offices of the Executive Director of Mulago Hospital which was attended by 5 Members of Parliament; a team of Police officers led by the Director of CID; two pathologists who participated in the post-mortem; and a scientist from the Government Analytical Laboratory. And this is important. It was resolved that all forensic procedures be consolidated under the Government Analytical Laboratory and that Dr Onzivua would submit the samples in his possession to the stipulated procedures. (Interjections) This is what the Police statement is saying. (Interjections) This is the same statement which Dr Baryomunsi read. (Interjections)

So far, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am at a loss. I was not there in that meeting; I was actually upcountry. I am at a loss. My Police are telling me what happened in the meeting. Hon. Dr Baryomunsi has stated something else. What position can I take in the death of our sister here. (Interjections) What can I say? (Interruption) Help me out of this Mr Speaker.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. From the presentation of hon. Dr Baryomunsi, the facts of the meeting we had were made very clear. And it is very clear that the Police is coming up with a statement that is in contradiction of what we had agreed. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal presented a motion that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was not a motion. 

DR LYOMOKI: Okay, guidance, that can we continue paying tribute and at that stage, you allowed the honourable minister to make some clarification because there was a lot of disagreement. I had thought that the honourable minister was coming to clarify, but not to continue defending the indefensible. Because clearly, from that meeting, we agreed; what the Police is trying to adduce here is a total fabrication. 

In that meeting, the Police also agreed that they had wrong information. We were able to show them that the two samples were similar and both of them were sealed. All this was clear. And when that meeting ended, we agreed that the process should continue. So, what the Police have done right now is a total contradiction with what was agreed upon yesterday. 

The point of procedure I am raising is, is it, therefore, procedurally right for the Government to continue coming here to defend instead of giving us the rightful clarification; to even show us whether it is possible to continue with the process. Why can’t we suspend this process and we go back to the drawing board? 

Because, Mr Speaker, right now, we cannot ascertain the authenticity and integrity of the samples. Yesterday, one of the most serious issues we disagreed on was where Government was saying that we use the samples from the government lab. We said we cannot use those samples because we doubt their integrity. Now, they have arrested our pathologists and they have taken our samples. So, what is the rightful process with integrity? 

We have already subjected our fallen sister to formalin. Before we did the post-mortem, we had not subjected her to a process of preservation. What we should be finding out is whether these parts are of integrity to do a post-mortem on them, and can they give us the rightful results. That is the type of situation we are in. Because, the process is now messed up; we now have a body of our sister which has been tampered with. We are even not sure whether the government has not tampered with this body all these days. 

So, the issue now is, Mr Speaker, is to devise a process that will allow us to suspend this process; go back to the drawing board and analyse the facts; and then we agree on two things: First, whether we can continue with the tribute; and secondly, whether we can now continue with an authentic process of finding out the cause of death.

Under these circumstances, we cannot do it here. We have to adjourn the House; go to the drawing board and analyse these issues and then come back. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, isn’t it, therefore, procedurally right for me to move a motion that the House be suspended and we analyse this matter and then we come back to review this. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion before the House is duly seconded by basically the whole House; the Member for Kitgum; the Member for Mbale Municipality; the Member for Bugweri; and the Member for Rwampara. But the motion should be corrected; and the correction is technical. Because if you suspend the House, that means I pass from this side, the body cannot leave here, and several other things. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

What would be proper is for us to adjourn this debate. I adjourn this debate to allow other processes to take place and then at a convenient time or date, we reconvene. Would that be proper? Is that okay? (Hon. Members rose_) Honourable members, please sit. 

You see, it is very easy for you to just keep popping up but it is not very easy for me who is controlling this House. It is very easy for you to just jump up. Let us have some order. This is a serious matter, and we should treat it as such. And we are not going to treat it as such by just popping up like popcorn. No! 

This is what I am asking: Is there anybody who has a contrary opinion to what has just been raised by the House?  I am posing a question; I am the only Speaker in this House. (Laughter) If there is anybody who has a contrary opinion to the House adjourning to allow processes of consultation and other things to go on and to reconvene at an appropriate date, that person should stand up. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I stand here with a heavy heart. I am of the view that the House be suspended and we go for consultation other than adjournment. Because, if we say we are going to adjourn, we can adjourn and then come back next year; or two or three days after today. So, what will happen? 

Let us suspend the House for 20 minutes and we come back. If we have not concluded, then we can look at adjournment. I support what hon. Dr Lyomoki moved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, the processes that would follow from the suggestion from hon. Dr Lyomoki would not take 20 minutes. Let us be realistic. It would not take 20 minutes, and it cannot take two hours. There are processes that have to involve people. So, can we do it this way then? Let us first listen to His Excellency the Vice-President.

5.41
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, sadly our friend is now lying here in a coffin.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency, kindly use the microphone.

MR SSEKANDI: Okay. Today, we came here to pay tribute to her for what she did. A motion to that regard was moved by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and it was seconded. Other speeches were all made, to which we all agreed. But that process was interrupted by another subject, which is irrelevant – (Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS: Order! Order!

MR SSEKANDI: Let me explain my point.

MR SSEGGONA: I have been allowed to stand and present a point of order.

MR SSEKANDI: Let me explain my point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency, there is a point of order. There is a point of order.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have not betrayed the trust I have always had in you; you have guided well as ever.

The Vice-President rose to assist this House. Mr Speaker and honourable members, as we talk, some of us who met the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda during her adulthood are already hurt; what are the feelings of her mother who is seated right behind you? The Vice-President rose to use the word “irrelevance” even when the Speaker of this House, who is the final man in interpreting our rules, had allowed all the processes to go on. The Vice-President, having started as a backbench member, rose through the ranks to Deputy Speaker and Speaker of this House and now he is the Vice-President to Members of the Eighth Parliament. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are many ways of concluding debates on a matter. Debates can be adjourned also without conclusion. That is also within the procedure of this House. If you do not have the opportunity to exhaust some matter, you can adjourn it to another convenient date. So, it is within the procedure of the House, in instances where matters cannot be resolved, to adjourn. So I had asked whether there was anybody with a contrary view. That authority –(Interjections)– Honourable members, please listen!

What I was saying is that that authority was given out by the Speaker to get an answer as to whether there was any contrary opinion to what had been very popular in the House that we adjourn. The Vice-President rose to answer that or to give his contrary opinion –(Interjections)– wait! So, was he in order to heed to the Speaker and come and say if he had a contrary opinion? -(Interjections)- Let me process it step by step.

Was he in order to rise and give a view that was contrary to what had been proposed by the House? Yes, he was because I had asked whether there was anybody with such views. However, as to whether he was in order to rise and say that the discussions that were going on were irrelevant to the subject, I think His Excellency the Vice-President was not in order. (Applause) I say this because those discussions emerged from the debate on the motion. The statements came from the Members who stood to second the motion. That is how those issues cropped up into the debate. 

Honourable members, I think he has a way forward to propose.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us listen to him. The House has already taken a certain view, but suppose his is an improvement –(Interjections)- No, we cannot presume that, honourable members.

5.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Obviously, this is a very trying moment because of the tragic loss of our sister and in circumstances that obviously are suspicious, and for which I am sure all of us would like to see a clear answer.

It is obvious, Mr Speaker and honourable members, from the report as given by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, that the post-mortem in Mulago Hospital was not conclusive. So, there is need for us to go elsewhere and find a solution so that we all get satisfied by knowing what exactly happened. It is unfortunate that I do not have answers relating to the arrest of Dr Onzivua. Therefore, I cannot offer speculative answers. 

However, I would like to suggest that in order for all parties to be satisfied, we take action which ensures the integrity of the process of investigations. Therefore, in light of what has happened today, in the course of investigations of sending samples to South Africa which have not gone, but about which I want to assure this House we will certainly look into and find solutions for, my suggestion is that we go through the process again. (Interjections)

I am not an expert, unfortunately, and I cannot answer in this Parliament and I am not sure that Kalungu there can. I am not sure that I have a toxicologist here who can give me a final and conclusive answer. I am not sure that in the circumstances of the sitting of this House that we can find a true and correct solution. Therefore, I rise to suggest, depending of course on the technicality of the matter because I may be wrong –(Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, the Prime Minister as I have always said is my model in legislation. He is always calm, and that is very important. The information I want to give the Prime Minister is just a reminder that we have heard from the experts - in particular, I would like to refer to the hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki - that in light of the treatment so far given to the body, it is unlikely that we can have correct and authentic results arising from samples picked from the body now. That is good information. 

There is also a high likelihood that the Police have already and deliberately tampered with the samples in their custody. They have tampered with the chain of evidence, which the Speaker pointed out earlier, and with my agreement.

May I ask the Prime Minister to give us a solution with respect to those particular things that are still possible, because that one is not possible? In my constituency, for the record, the Government is already a suspect in this. This is the information I have and the instruction I have from the constituency. Can you continue trusting a suspect with samples?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I will give way to anyone who has some contribution to make. Take heart, I will give way but let me just say –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the issue we are dealing with now is not only about the body of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. Some wise man said, “Let a slave who sees a colleague being buried in a shallow pit know that he will undergo the same fate when his turn comes.” The Police, from yesterday’s meeting, were citing a law which was being breached but it was not quoted. So the integrity and right of people in future to seek private analysis is lacking in the country. This is an issue that must be addressed. 

The second is that the integrity of the body and whatever is there, we do not have capacity now in the House to determine anything. The only thing we can do is adjourn to enable experts consult. In so doing, we shall try to resolve the issue of the death of the late Cerinah Nebanda but also guarantee the rights of the people in future should such an investigation be required, and the people of Uganda know their rights under such circumstances. So, can the right hon. Prime Minister deal with the two issues so that he gives us confidence?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you so much right, hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, the bile which we got from the gall bladder we emptied it. So if you want to get bile from this honourable member’s body, it was taken out and the samples were apportioned; one went to the government laboratory and another one went with Dr Onzivua. The abdominal content which had things that were suspicious and smelly were all emptied and also apportioned. One part was given to Dr Onzivua and another portion was taken to the government laboratory. If we opened hon. Cerinah’s body again, where do we get these things from?

The body is already treated; from a science point of view, formalin has already made some of these parts actually change. That is why I am saying that the man who has arrested Dr Onzivua in Entebbe International Airport should be blamed because he has caused this mess. We talked about it last night. I did not sleep; I have a headache because I was in Mulago at midnight. We sat down and wrote and Madam Akullo was there. What has gone wrong with my Government?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I think there is something terribly wrong with this country. We had all restrained ourselves, knowing that there could be elements in our society who are potentially capable of this mischief of killing one of the youngest leaders in this country’s history without any remorse as we agonise and indeed suffer. What had earlier been established was passed on, but the facts were that she had ingested some toxic elements, which ordinarily you can call poison, which had led to her death.

The sequence of events - the procrastination - started yesterday when the custodian of those samples was being chased around for arrest. I was with hon. Abdu Katuntu in Kamuli yesterday; he left us behind with hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and rushed with hon. Baryomunsi, hon. Bitekyerezo, hon. Bahati to save the situation. Painfully, we thought that there could be some consolation not only to the parents but to all of us and Ugandans. Now, despite the agreement reached yesterday - We were actually cross with Abdu. I rang him to ask whether he had been abducted. He called me this morning and I did not respond. When he emerges, he tells the story he was involved in.

This is my Government because I sit on this side, Mr Speaker, but I want to say that I am ashamed that I belong to this Government. I want to say that I curse the day we castigated the Obotes and Amins of this world. I want to add that the leaders of this country, in my eyes, are murderers; they are killers because how else can they explain this? Where there is effort to go and calm Ugandans and tell them to rest assured because Uganda is in safe hands, and now you come and tell us not to comment about this cold blooded murder! Where are you? Can President Museveni come for me here, and I am going out? Let him come for me and I am telling him that he has intervened in this process; he is confirming that this girl has been murdered and murdered in cold blood. 

Unless we get a contrary view, now that the samples cannot be obtained and now that their authenticity cannot be ascertained anymore, is it in order for this House to continue deliberating when we know that all hope has fallen? All hope has been stashed away and we are at the mercy of killers. They have killed Nebanda; they will come for Ssekikubo; they will come for the Speaker and they will come for anybody. Are we proper -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were holding the Floor.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I can only say that I welcome all these pieces of information and clarification and actually, they reinforce the position I have. It is not true to say that it is too late to carry out a proper investigation.

Let me just remind my honourable colleague of Kalungu, who may not know this. The death of the leader of the Palestinian state, Yasser Arafat, was suspected to have not been natural and only two weeks ago, that body was actually exhumed in order to re-examine it. You know, DNA science has developed and it is possible. My proposal, therefore, Mr Speaker, was in light of these suspicions. 

I think we should go ahead with what hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki was proposing and what hon. Emmanuel Dombo was proposing. Let us go through the process, make sure that the process of investigation has absolute integrity and has the confidence of all the sides. That is what I would like to propose, and in order to achieve that, therefore, -(Mr Okupa rose­_)- Just a second. In order to achieve that, I, therefore, propose that instead of - because I do not understand the suggestion that we should adjourn or rather suspend and then I do not know what happens. Suspend for how long? How long will this take? So, we should go through one process and not mix the two processes because it is possible, in order to reach the final correct position on this issue.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, we were actually nearing a decision before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister took us to where we started. There are remedial decisions that this Parliament can make. First, this Parliament needs to resolve that the doctor must be released today. (Applause) Secondly, this Parliament can still resolve that we delay the burial of our colleague for the next three days. The reasons we are going to delay include allowing those who have been involved in the processes to make further consultations and then they can come back to Parliament after three days and advise us on two things - (Mr Katuntu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the Member rose on a procedural point. You want to give information on that?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On procedure?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member had risen on a point of procedure but there are some facts which he had raised that I thought I would give him further information on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that procedurally correct, hon. Katuntu? Why don’t you let him finish.

MR KATUNTU: You are the custodian of the rules so you are the one to guide us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let him finish his procedural point then you can raise the factual matter.

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was explaining that we delay the burial for three days to allow colleagues who are doctors and have been involved in this process to do two things when we reconvene after three days. First, advise whether it is still possible to carry out a process to establish what killed our colleague. At that stage, when they have advised Parliament, if it is still possible then we can pronounce ourselves on whether the process can go ahead. 

If they advise us that by tampering with the processes by Police and Government, we are no longer in a position to carry out the process to establish what exactly killed our colleague, then we will pronounce ourselves at that stage. Therefore, the guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is whether before we adjourn we cannot pronounce ourselves on those remedial suggestions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had guided on this matter and all that was left was to hear if there was a contrary opinion to this. I will have –(Interjections)- Please, this is no joking matter. Now that we seem to be in agreement that we cannot conclude this matter now, if we are to adjourn this House, we need to remind ourselves that it is a special sitting; Parliament is in recess. So, I will have to use the authority of the Speaker to call for another special sitting to which this matter will be adjourned.

That is why I say I am in charge of these processes. Please, respect this. If it is the agreement of the House, then we need to agree on what we are going to do and then come back. This is my guidance on this. If we proceed to adjourn today, this is what we expect: We expect the people who are engaged in these processes to reconvene and find the best way forward. 

Two, the people who are in these processes should engage more consultants in that area so that we can get a beefed-up team to look into this matter more clearly -(Ms Anywar rose­_)- Please, the Speaker is speaking  - and get back to us with this. Now, today is Tuesday; would it be possible for it to be done by Thursday?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So if it is possible, and I need some technical guidance on this - I will take it from Dr Sam Lyomoki who is a medical person.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. What I know is that it is possible for us to reconvene and bring on board other experts. Of course, the question we shall be discussing is: given the circumstances, can we get new samples from the body? That will be discussed in the meeting. So the question we shall be discussing is: given the situation and the changes, can we use the remaining samples? Of course, we cannot get some others but can we use the remaining ones. I would think that in two days we can be able to conclude that. The only scenario we shall have is that in two days, we cannot come with the results but we can be able to pronounce ourselves on the way forward. So, in two days, it is possible, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in two days -(Interjections)- We are trying to find a way forward here, honourable members. Please, let us have some order. If we adjourn and come back on Thursday or Friday, we will still not be able to come back with anything conclusive about what we want. Is that what you are saying? (Interjections) Please, first wait, let us clear these matters. All of you are lay in these areas with the exception of doctor-

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, what I was saying is that if we adjourn and come back on Thursday or Friday, we shall definitely come up with a way forward to resolve this matter. What I was saying is that we cannot be sure whether we shall have the results. We also have to analyse and agree on the various options on whether these samples that are currently available are useful. So, on Thursday or Friday, we shall definitely come up with a way forward so that we can continue with the process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So this special sitting of the House, honourable members –(Interjections)– You see, you should try to listen to the Speaker carefully. The words the Speaker uses are very loaded. Hon. Mike Mukula, raise your issue.

6.15
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I have been listening to this matter very carefully and I have been very calm. I have been chairing the whole process of the burial arrangements with hon. Dombo. We have two issues here. One, we have the burial of our colleague, which has got a programme that is on-going- (Interjections) - Just a moment. Allow me to get on. 

Two, it is important for us to learn one very important thing; the circumstances under which the late died have now become extremely suspicious. We can learn from our neighbours in Kenya, where the late Robert Ouko was killed and burnt to destroy evidence. Parliament, in a similar sitting like this, had a very acrimonious debate. Because government had been suspected and fingers were all pointing at the Executive - at that time there was what you call “mutual suspicion” - the only way Government of Kenya resolved the Ouko matter was by bringing in Scotland Yard. Even if you brought Uganda Police as it is now, nobody will accept.

This debate is live; it is being transmitted all over the country and people are listening, so it is important that we are sober. The judgment of Parliament, which is the supreme organ representing the people of Uganda and which is the voice of the people, is here. I would therefore like to say that we have got some options. One, we do not bury our colleague and all the burial arrangements be suspended. 

Two, it is important that now that Parliament appears to be unanimous and now that the process of due investigation by the Police is under suspect, the whole process now stops. Three, as we continue with this matter, the doctor who was arrested be released immediately and unconditionally. Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record and repeat the position; the doctor be released immediately and unconditionally because he was an agent of Parliament of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would therefore like to say that this matter is very delicate, very politically sensitive and needs to be handled very maturely. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member who has been holding the Floor has not said anything new; that is what we have been saying all along. This is what I am directing in the meantime: all the people involved in the preliminary processes should resume. What that means is that, that doctor who was part of this process must be there. (Applause) That is why I am saying you should listen to the Speaker carefully. (Laughter) Yeah! By simply saying all parties that are involved in these processes that have come this far must be there, it deals with that situation. So, it is the responsibility of whoever is holding anybody anywhere to make sure that that person who was part of this meeting is brought for that meeting and for that purpose. 

Now, it is also part of this that if they deem it necessary among themselves to co-opt and seek additional consulting support, it should be within them to do so. These are comprehensive statements. We shall then come back here on Friday, 10 O’clock, for another special sitting to deal with this matter that we have referred back to the parties that have been involved.   

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Mr Speaker, I appreciate how you have guided us through this very difficult moment but I am standing on a point of procedure. As the institution of Parliament, we are making this decision but we are aware that the family of the late Nebanda is here. It should be on record that as we conclude on this decision, the members of the family are in agreement; they should be consulted and should be in total agreement and it should be put on record. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker’s information is wider in the House than any other member here. The family has been duly consulted. So, the Speaker never makes these decisions in error. (Laughter)  It is after consultation that they said they would be prepared to postpone the burial. That is the information I have got. So, please, this special sitting of the House will be accordingly adjourned once the proper procedures of the casket’s exit have been followed. 

Honourable members, in the process of trying to fulfil this, the body has got to go somewhere. So, the body will leave before we adjourn and should go straight to the Mulago Medical School and the cost will still be borne by Parliament. That means that these matters can be handled because Medical School is the place where all these things can be done properly and the body can be kept and we know that the integrity of the body will be kept. So, the necessary means of keeping the integrity of the body should be maintained. The special sitting of the House is adjourned to Friday, 10 O’clock.  

East African Community Anthem (One verse)

The National Anthem (Three verses)

 (Exit of the late hon. Cerinah Nebanda.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for the concern and for being open about this. Let us look for a solution to this matter. So, the special sitting of the House will resume on Friday, 10 O’clock. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 21 December 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
