
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 11 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and thank you for the work you have been doing over the last few days.

First, I would like to report that the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games started on Sunday. Tournaments are going on, both in St Mary’s Kitende Stadium and the MTN Arena. If you find time, please pass by and cheer colleagues. The teams of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda are here. We are still waiting for Rwanda and South Sudan to arrive but we are playing. 

Secondly, honourable members, last week I went to visit my counterpart in Turkey and we signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Grand National Assembly. They are anxious to support us both in trade and agriculture; so, I look forward to more interactions between our two Parliaments. 

Thirdly honourable members, I do not know what to say concerning the issue of Murchison Falls National Park. As you recall, in August this year, a petition came to my office from a number of environmentalists, tour operators and so on urging Government not to interfere with Murchison Falls and we brought the matter here. After some dilly-dallying, we were informed on the Floor of this House that nothing is going to take place. 

Last week, I heard that a company called Bonang Power and Energy (Pty) Limited has been cleared to construct a dam at Murchison Falls. I would like to know what you are up to. If I may say it in Lusoga, “Muli kukyi?” What is Government doing? Why have you not said anything about it? This matter was published last week; so, can we know why the Government is provoking the people of Uganda on Murchison falls? Where is the Prime Minister? 

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister has not yet arrived but he is on his way. However, we discussed that matter in Cabinet. The Minister for Energy and Mineral Development made a statement to the country two weeks ago saying that we are still undertaking some studies regarding Murchison Falls. No concrete decision has been taken and that is the position of Cabinet. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to draw your attention to the Constitution and to the fact that the natural resources of Uganda are held in trust by the Government on behalf of the people. The people have continuously said that they do not want you to do anything or build any dam at Murchison Falls. What are you studying? You said the minister made a statement to the Cabinet. What about the country? Did she come to this House? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, she has not come to this House; she only made a statement at the Uganda Media Centre. We can ask her to come to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Is her reporting place the Uganda Media Centre and not the representatives of the people who are here?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we request to make a statement on that matter tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: It is urgent and the country wants to know. You cannot run Government by making statements at the Uganda Media Centre. With whom are you talking at the media centre? 

2.45
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, this issue is urgent. Since it is still early in the day, I propose that the Minister of Energy and Minerals comes and makes an explanation to the country this afternoon. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Call the minister. I think she is in the country so they must come and explain. As we wait for the minister to come, there were two issues of national importance. 

2.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising is in respect of the non-compliance by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the recommendations that were made by this House. 

Madam Speaker, you directed that the minister updates this House on the status of the investigations into the unauthorised printing of extra money by some officials in Bank of Uganda and how the extra pallets were imported or smuggled into this country. 

Secondly, in February 2019, this House considered and adopted a report by the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). Recommendations were made to the effect that the ministry was supposed to give this House a report after six months, which elapsed in August this year. 

Madam Speaker, you directed that within six months, the minister was to come back here with an action report from the ministry on the implementation of those recommendations. It is alarming and we are dismayed that up to now, the minister has not filed the Treasury Memorandum detailing the actions taken by the ministry on the recommendations made by this House. 

Madam Speaker, since the minister is here, my prayer is that you prevail over him to update this House on the status of investigations on the unauthorised printing of extra money that was smuggled or imported in this country and the whereabouts of this money. My people in Bududa are dying and require money for evacuation and emergency operations. 

Secondly, the minister should also file a Treasury Memorandum detailing the actions that the ministry has taken on the recommendations made by this House on the COSASE report on the closure of the seven commercial banks. I so submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the minister is here. Can you respond to those issues? 

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on the recommendations by the House regarding the commercial banks, we are sorry that we have not filed the Treasury Memorandum but we are working on it. We will be able to bring it after the recess because it has not been processed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you are aware of the requirements of the Constitution. It was supposed to be done within six months but now it is almost two years.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are processing it through Cabinet and we request for an extra month to bring the Treasury Memoranda on this matter. 

Regarding the second issue, I am not in position today to give a concrete answer on how far the investigations into the pallets that were allegedly discovered on the plane have gone. If you can give me up to tomorrow, I can give you an update on the investigations.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you may recall that you had undertaken to update the country every fortnight on that issue but we have never had a report. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, tomorrow, we shall give a statement on the update of this issue.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us get an update tomorrow. 

2.50 
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to a case of aggravated defilement. A child by the name Devine Nadunga, four years old and a resident of Nansana - Yesu Amala, was defiled by a one David Lubega, 22 years old. This incident happened on Friday, 6 December 2019, at around 1.00 p.m. 

The father of the girl came to me yesterday - he is called Sam Masinga and is a teacher by profession. His daughter was defiled at a time when they were marking UNEB exams at Kawempe Mbogo Mixed Senior Secondary School. At around 1.00 p.m., this child who had been left at home with the siblings, one of whom is a boy, was deceived by this defiler to go and buy water in the neighbourhood. As the brother of this girl went to buy the water, the girl was left unattended with this stranger who later deceived the young girl and took her to a nearby unfinished house, where they have been seriously defiling young girls. 

When the boy came back and discovered that his sister was missing, he alerted the neighbours. The neighbours mounted a search for about five minutes and later on, discovered this man with the girl in this unfinished building, one kilometre away from the location. They found the girl in a pool of blood and her private parts had been torn. As we talk, the girl is admitted at Mulago Hospital for professional handling.

This news has shocked many. When this man was arrested red-handed, he mentioned his second colleague with whom they have been doing this criminal offence. In the unfinished building, they found very many undergarments of young children meaning that they have been defiling kids in that building. The neighbours confessed that their children had been defiled in a similar manner but they had failed to find out who the culprit was.

In some instances, this very particular man named Lubega had been arrested on several occasions but had been released, meaning that there are some people at Yesu Amala Police Station who know him but he probably buys his way out of the cells. 

On that day, the people wanted to lynch him but he was arrested. The good news is that he is still in the hands of the police. However, the fear of the parents is whether he would still be kept in custody until the investigations are concluded and he is arraigned before court.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. To ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is here, to direct the IGP to follow this case through the established structures to the latter. We have had very many aggravated defilement cases that have not been concluded. This is one case that should be used to teach the rest of the defilers in this country a lesson.

    2. We appeal to the police to mount a search for the second culprit whom Mr Lubega reported. What was reported is that sometimes the police have been conniving with them; we found out that the second culprit is missing and we would like the minister to work with the IGP to ensure that the second culprit is brought to book. This case should be handled expeditiously.

    3. The Government, particularly the Ministry of Internal Affairs, should continuously sensitise the population now that our children are home for holidays with these kind of serial defilers at large. It is important that we embark on mass sensitisation about the safety of the girl child in our communities. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to pray. Thank you.    
     
THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Atiku. Minister of Internal Affairs, last evening, I also received an email from Buyende. A father wrote to me saying that a man called Abdullah Ntalo from a place called Ivugula in Irundu defiled his four year old daughter. He said, “I know the Speaker, you cannot arrest me.”

The father wrote to me saying that this man said that he knows me and that we cannot do anything to him. Can you imagine? Honourable minister, I would like you to help me with this case. CRB No. 123/2019, the accused is called Abdullah Ntalo. The father said that the girl has lost control of her urine and I think that the girl’s bladder is affected. Please help me. I wrote an email to him saying that I will ensure that this man is arrested. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this letter because it has the case number - CRB No. 23/06/12/2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the matter raised by hon. Atiku is a very serious matter. I one time sat and pondered the dilemma that parents have, especially when you produce a girl. It is no longer palatable to produce a girl; it is very sad. 

Recently, you constituted a select committee to investigate issues of sexual harassment in institutions of learning. I was one of the Members that you delegated to this committee. We traversed the entire country and came up with very practical recommendations that this august House adopted in entirety.

The Ministry of Education and Sports was supposed to take up certain actions. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to require the Ministry of Education and Sports to update the House on the actions they have taken as far as implementing the report of the committee is concerned? Maybe some of the recommendations can help to curb the magnitude of sexual harassment in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the minister in charge of education is here; maybe he will tell us how far they have gone with our recommendations on the report of the Select Committee on Sexual Offences in Tertiary Institutions and other Educational Institutions. I think we finished it before the budget.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is sad that we have such acts being done to our children. We will take all the necessary actions. I will find out, in the two cases, how far the police have gone in taking action on the matter. I assure the House that we will take every appropriate action to ensure those people involved and those who neglect their duty in respect to those cases are brought to book. I can guarantee that here.

We do not tolerate people, whether parents or not, making arrangements with suspects who have defiled children. This is a criminal matter and it is beyond the LCs and police. It must be processed through the courts.

Having said that, let me also use this opportunity to appeal to us all, including the community, to be conscious of the status of their children and not to hide such actions when they happen. I do not know why people hide it. Sometimes they think it is a shame. No, it is not shameful. When something bad has been done to your child, the best way to cure your child is to bring it out in the open and let the law take its course. 

My appeal is: let us be conscious of our children and take every action to make sure we know their status and whatever happens to them, let us expose and bring them to the process of the law. We will take the necessary action. Thank you.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I had forgotten one prayer – which came from the father of this girl, regarding remedial surgery. The girl’s bladder was torn and when they were referred to Mulago, I think the bill that was given to him was scary. 

Therefore, he appealed to us to see whether the Ministry of Health could do something. We have the specialised women’s hospital that was commissioned recently. He was seeking for commitment from the Ministry of Health to see if the child is maybe catered for as a special case.

THE SPEAKER: I will take it up on behalf of all the children because I think even the other father had asked us for support with medication. I will take it up with the Ministry of Health and update you.

3.08
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 4 December 2019, the people of Sironko experienced landslides and floods in the subcounties of Zesui and Masaba on the slopes of Mt Elgon. Zesui was the most affected subcounty where we lost four people. As I speak, we have got over 300 people in a camp. 

Besides that, our roads were also cut off because heavy boulders came down with a lot of mud and blocked off the roads. That means one cannot access some subcounties unless they go through the water, which is still very scary.

Madam Speaker, there are very many people who have been displaced and the slides are still coming down and the rains continue. This morning, I was told that another landslide occurred but fortunately, no person lost their life. However, a lot of property and crops were destroyed in the gardens. 

Madam Speaker, as I speak, we have not seen anyone from the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness. We have people in the camp but with nothing. As a Member of Parliament, of course, I did what we usually do which is to go with something to give to the people.

I appeal to the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness to act as soon as possible because our people are wondering whether they are still in Uganda or not. I also appeal to the Ministry of Health to intervene because these people are packed in a small place and I am sure more are joining because we have many people who are in landslide-prone areas. I took time and walked through the mountains and noticed that many of our people are still living in dangerous areas that have developed cracks. 

I appeal to the Government to do the needful. Our people accepted long ago to be relocated but the ministry needs to expedite this process because right now I am seated with my phone on to respond to the disasters that the ministry is supposed to do. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I think I heard the President saying that those people should move but I do not know whether there is any structure by the Government to help them to move; move to where? I heard him say, “You should leave those areas.” Is anyone able to tell us what the Government’s plans are?

MS NAMBOZO: Madam Speaker, the people of Sironko are wondering because we saw hon. Ecweru in Bududa but we have not seen anyone from the ministry coming to Sironko. As I speak, the people I am talking about are camped in a school. Fortunately, it is holiday time. We need help as soon as possible. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us ask the Prime Minster to come and update us tomorrow on what they plan to do about the people in Sironko who are camped there without any support. We also need to know the overall programme for helping Ugandans who are in danger to move. 

3.08
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, the situation is life-threatening. The rains are still pounding and the people are helpless, homeless and hopeless. As we talk, numerous cracks are turning into massive landslides. What should be done as a matter of urgency is to evacuate the people but there is nowhere to shelter them. It is only fortunate that schools have closed for holidays. Schools have been overwhelmed. Places of worship have been overwhelmed and even relatives who are hosting other affected people are also overwhelmed by the numbers.

What is also alarming is the fact that up to now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not released the Shs 20 billion, which this House approved from the Contingency Fund for these emergency operations. We wonder what the motive of the minister could be. Isn’t this an ulterior motive at the cost of the lives of the people?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have instructed the Prime Minister to come and tell us. Hon. Mungoma, you are also hosting people.

3.09
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, the people of Bududa have been relocated to Bulambuli. As I talk, they have constructed only 101 houses. 

As members of Parliament of Bugisu Parliamentary Caucus, we agreed that instead of Government relocating people at a very slow pace, we requested that the people who are badly affected should be compensated so that they find alternative accommodation quickly. Otherwise, majority of the people are badly affected and Government is moving very slowly.

THE SPEAKER: Let me task you, hon. Bahati, to ensure that the Prime Minister comes tomorrow and tells us what they are going to do about this situation. We really want answers. Thank you. 

MR TUMUHEIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter regarding the Sugar Bill, 2016. Madam Speaker, it follows your ruling on 5 November 2019 - when this House requested Government to present the Bill for reconsideration and they asked for one month, you ruled, citing unfairness to both farmers and investors in the sugar industry, that they should present the Bill within two weeks, which expired on 19 November.

This law is causing a lot of anxiety in the country because farmers are suffering with loans and debts and they cannot sell their cane. There is no crushing capacity in the country and I wonder whether we are proceeding correctly when Government said they are going to bring the Bill and you gave them a deadline of 19 November 2019 but they have not come. I wonder whether we should not ask the committee to present this Bill so that the House pronounces itself on the matter.

THE SPEAKER: The matter is on the Order Paper. It is up to us to move it up. It is on the Order Paper and we shall move it up so that we conclude it.

3.12
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the rampant killings of people in Wabigalo LCI, Wabigalo Parish, Wabinyonyi subcounty, Nakasongola Constituency in Nakasongola District.

Madam Speaker, on 5 December 2019, a man with a panga found a lady who was coming from Wabigalo Health Centre III seeking medical attention for her child. He grabbed the child from that lady, chopped off his head and killed that young boy in the presence of his mother.

Within the shortest period of time, this man moved to the neighbourhood and found a certain mzee by the names Loziyo Matovu aged 80 years preparing his lunch. He grabbed him and chopped off his head. He put the head somewhere and left the body somewhere else.

Madam Speaker, that man was also seen killing a young boy of 10 years named Ssekanza. He also cut off his head and put the head aside from the body. That very night at 11.00 p.m. when police were patrolling, they stopped a young man named Kevin Mutegeki, but he refused to stop. The police shot and killed him. Those are five people who died on the same day from 4.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m.

Madam Speaker, on Sunday, 8 December 2019, a man called Fred Bulega aged 43 years was also killed at 8.00 p.m. near Wabigalo Health Centre III in the middle of the road. Nearby, a man named Fred Mujuni, aged 40 years, was also killed near Wabigalo Health Centre III on the same day. They cut off his head and placed it away from the body.

Madam Speaker, this is what is happening in my constituency; the situation is very tense. We have tried to arrest these people by working with the police and the army but nothing has happened.

There is a rumour that two suspects were arrested and the police informed our people, during a meeting in Wabigalo, that they have those suspects. However, as a Member of Parliament, I am not sure of this unless these suspects are paraded before the public.

Madam Speaker, Nakasongola has a police station but no patrol car. They patrol on foot or on hired motorcycles. This situation is alarming and uncalled for. At the same time, the sniffer dog used by Luweero, Nakasongola and Nakaseke is stationed in Luweero. When you need it in Nakasongola, it is either at the extreme end of Nakaseke or in Kikyusa around Zirobwe. Therefore, we cannot access it. By the time it reaches, people have contaminated the crime scene and evidence cannot be collected.

My humble prayers are:

    1. The Minister of Security should come to this House and explain why this is happening to our Ugandans in Nakasongola and what the agenda behind this is. I have heard a rumour that it is also happening in other places.

    2. The IGP and the Ministry of Internal Affairs should work together to make sure that a brand new patrol car is provided to Nakasongola police station.

Madam Speaker, a sniffer dog should also be provided particularly for Nakasongola district so that looking for evidence can be made easier for the Police.

There are police stations in Nakasongola. However, when you go to Karongo, where I stay, the police station has only four policemen. In my understanding, a police station is supposed to have 30 to 40 personnel. However, when you go there, you find only three. Is that a police station?

My humble prayer is that the police stations should be equipped with enough personnel to manage our population. At the same time, some of the police officers do not have uniforms. When you ask them, they say, our consignment was taken to Masindi and we do not have uniforms. These police officers should be given uniforms. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for according me this opportunity. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. I do not know whether he has something to say or he can undertake to give us a statement.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mario Obiga): Madam Speaker, the killings did happen, regrettably, as my colleague has narrated here, except the first killings on Thursday were from 1.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m. and not from 4.00 p.m. and in the same village as he has stated here.

The ones on Sunday happened between 10.00 p.m. and 11.00 p.m.  They are regrettable; we offer our condolences to the families and we are trying everything possible to assure the community. We have deployed in the area. Our senior police officers, as we talk, are based there undertaking investigations. 

It is true some people have been arrested but they do not have to be produced at the moment because that arrest is part of the investigations. At every stage, if you keep showing to the public the people you have arrested, it is possible that you can jeopardize the investigations.

Having said that, at the moment - because investigations are going on - we are not able to say how many people were involved in the killings and the nature of those killings. It is part of the investigations, as I have said.

In the last killings, which happened between 10th and 11th in the same village almost near the same area, we do accept that the police officials were negligent because they were not at the police post at the time the other two people were killed. In addition, it took us some time to find where they were. They have been arrested and they will be processed through the disciplinary process of negligence in the Police Force.

Regarding the issue of uniforms, that is not correct. The police now has its own tailoring unit and every year, every police officer who is supposed to have a uniform, is given two pairs of uniforms and this has been supplied to all the police officers unless the police officer is on non-uniform duty. They all should be having police uniform.

Regarding dogs, we do not have enough dogs in the whole country. I cannot tell off head how many they are. However, I would like to tell Members that it is more expensive to maintain those police dogs than an individual police officer. It costs more to feed them, medicate them and they are just not any dog. 

Therefore, the number we have in the country is less and because of that, we have deployed them at the 18 regional police offices. The police have what we call regional offices and they are shifted to the scenes of crime as and when an investigation is required.

Once again, the killings in Wabigalo and Nakasongola are regrettable, they are subjects of investigations and at the moment, I cannot say more than that. Definitely, the police are doing everything that they can.

Regarding the issue of the patrol car, it is not correct to say that Nakasongola does not have a police patrol vehicle. I personally had a meeting with the Inspector General of Police about six months ago and a patrol vehicle was delivered to that district. 

It is at the district and since it is in the centre of Uganda, it serves so many districts in the country. People coming from the north, parts around the lake, people from the western part and so forth. Therefore, we do have a patrol unit unless it was not working that day. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Item 3(I)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE KENYAN LAND AMENDMENT LAW OF 2016 ON UGANDA’S PROPERTIES IN KENYA

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are expecting this response at the end of this week or early next week. We would like to request that we present a response to the House next Wednesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The matter will be reflected again on the Order paper next Wednesday.
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE ISIMBA PUBLIC ACCESS BRIDGE CONNECTING KAYUNGA AND KAMULI DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: They are not here. The matter will be back on the Order Paper tomorrow.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION FOR THE PERIOD JULY 2018 – JUNE 2019


THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, is the document there?

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Report of the Health Service Commission for the period July 2018 to June 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Health for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE UGANDAN DELEGATION TO THE IX WORLD AVOCADO CONGRESS 2019 – MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the committee or any member of the delegation?

3.27
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Ugandan delegation to the IX World Avocado Congress 2019 – Medellin, Colombia from the 21-30 September 2019. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Any highlights of the report?

MS LANYERO: Madam Speaker, this convention is held after every four years and the objectives were to help participants gain knowledge on the entire value chain of the avocado industry right from production, processing to marketing.

It was to enable countries share experiences on best practices and learn about new technologies in the avocado industry.

It was also to explore avenues of acquiring knowledge and skills that can propel the avocado industry to great heights bearing in mind the new challenges caused by effects of climate change. 

Finally, it was to provide an opportunity for participating delegations to get a broader understanding of the vision of leaders in the avocado industry. 

Findings

There is all evidence that avocado has become one of the world’s trendiest foods and its prices have rocketed, in recent years, to 12 per cent with the average standard price of a single avocado (Hass Avocado), whose price goes up to $2 in 2009. 

Avocado production requires multiple factors for it to flourish, which are: adequate water, soil fertility, proper care during pruning and thinning, pests, diseases control and the like. All these factors combined lead to higher chances of having very good quality crops of avocado and our land is very fertile and ripe. We can invest in this as a country and generate income from it. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you may recall that some months ago, I reported to you that I had visited a farm in Mayuge where they grow this Hass Avocado and the potential to earn Shs. 28 million per acre from that avocado. 

I instructed the committee to go to Mayuge to visit that farm and now that you have got that report, please go there and give us an update on what you find there and how we can move, as a country. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR AWARD OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

THE SPEAKER: As you will recollect, Members, hon. Lanyero had moved that motion and we wanted to check whether it had financial implications. I informed you that we had examined it and it does not carry any implications; so, she can proceed. 

3.32
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to just read the prayers for the purposes of those who were not present on 12th September, when I made the presentation.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the motion reads, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to extend the District Quota Policy for award of the Government scholarships to other lower institutions of learning.” These were my prayers: 

    1. That the Ministry of Education and Sports and all other responsible Government ministries, departments and agencies begin applying the criteria of district quota for admission on Government scholarship to these tertiary institutions, with effect from the Academic Year 2020/2021.

    2. That the Ministry of Education and Sports provides updates to this House on the status of Government scholarships on the annual basis, including but not limited to, laying on Table the list of students on Government scholarships in all institutions of higher learning and other tertiary institutions. 

I beg to move. 

3.33
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. Recently, we had the Government loan scheme and if you checked on the people, who took up on that loan scheme, they come to about 1800. 

Looking at what is happening with the poverty indices in the country, Butaleja, which is in Bukedi Region, is the second poorest in Uganda. We are 89 per cent poor, meaning 11 people are involved in the money economy. What does that mean? It means that our people cannot afford to pay school fees in these tertiary institutions.

I pray that this august House takes up this responsibility to ensure Ugandans from all the corners of this country get this education in form of Government scholarships in other tertiary institutions. 

The policy now focuses on Government’s interest in sponsoring only science students on scholarships and Government loan schemes. Our people cannot even afford to go to good schools where they can get the skills that can prompt them to get these science skills that can make them get these benefits from government. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should look into this issue so that we make sure that Uganda moves holistically with everybody to achieve the middle income status by training scientists everywhere in Uganda. I beg to second.  

3.36
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion urging Government to extend support to make sure some of these disadvantaged students from our areas - the rural constituencies that we represent and the districts - who may not be benefiting from the already existing quota system, also benefit from it. 

Madam Speaker, you realise that the quota system was designed some years ago and by then, the number of students that was sitting senior six exams and joining universities was small. Now, there are several secondary schools that exist in these rural districts. You find that the students that come out of there may not perform to the level of joining university but they could be good in some of these areas.

In the same vein, there are some technical institutions that have been established by Government but you realise students cannot benefit. They cannot be recruited or taken up because they may not have the money. Therefore, I urge Government to look into that. 

Some of these technical schools and institutions that have been established in these areas could take up some of these students that perform well according to the level in the rural constituencies. This is so that in future, as these ones who are taken up from Kampala and so forth graduate, the ones in the rural areas also add a brick to the development of the areas that we represent. 

Madam Speaker, we request Government to extend its support to those institutions so that these students, in whichever field they can specialise, also benefit and help the areas that they represent. 

3.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion so that we have equitable distribution of resources and that we are able to help those needy students, who normally drop out of school and cannot go to university. 

I wish to also add that it is high time we reviewed the entire Government scholarship system. This is because the students that are sponsored in universities are best performing students. Usually, the best performing students are those who have gone to the best schools and they are sons and daughters of the well-off in society. 

I think we should know the status of income of our people and households so that we are able to assist the needy students, rather than just picking the highest performing ones who are able to pay for their education. I would like to support the motion that the district quota system should be extended to lower levels of education. I thank you.

3.39
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to me to contribute to this motion. I would like to thank the movers of this motion and indeed to support the motion for the extension of the quota system to lower level institutions.

It was the commitment of Government initially to have BTVET institutions extended to every constituency. However, due to budgetary constraints, this has not been achieved. Most of our people would have benefitted from such institutions if they had been extended to constituencies. Under such circumstances, for this country to move forward, we need to raise our capacity to exploit our natural resource endowments in order for this economy to take off. This can only be possible through improvement in skills of the young people, which is currently not tenable. It is, therefore, prudent to undertake such a step to increase the number of students who can be in position to get such skills. 

Having this in place is one way of achieving the necessary skills. I, therefore, wish to support this motion wholeheartedly in order to take our country forward.

3.41
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, like my colleagues, I rise to support the motion. From the onset, I would like to state that a good policy is that, which has got the characteristics of universal application without segregating any section of the people.

When the district quota system was introduced, it was meant to address the imbalance in admitting students on the basis of general performance. You find that some districts cannot adequately compete to the extent that some students end up going to tertiary institutions. If this imbalance is to be addressed, it would only be fair that the benefit that would have gone to students who would succeed in going to university levels could as well be given to students who can access tertiary intuitions. 

This would give chance to students in districts that did not have students admitted to universities at all. The problem is that this chance is limited. Districts that have performed extremely well and have quite a number of students admitted to universities are also benefiting from the quota system. This is limiting the opportunity that should have gone to districts that have performed badly and preferably, to students who end up in tertiary institutions.

Madam Speaker, we have very bright students but they are financially disadvantaged. If this team could go to such students, we would have them graduate from tertiary intuitions and eventually, they would even –(Member timed out.)   

3.43
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support to support the motion and to thank the mover of this motion as it is very timely. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and I can reveal very fundamental information as far as Government sponsorship is concerned at the university level:

    1. Government sponsors about 4,000 students across its 10 public universities.

    2. There are two categories of people benefiting from the tax payers’ money as far as education is concerned. One category is that of the best performers - sons and daughters of the rich who actually go to private schools because their sponsors have money. When it comes to UACE, they perform best and Government adopts them. Students who go to Universal Secondary Schools are the ones that are left out. Government has failed them and is now adopting those from private schools.

The second category is the well-connected; those that benefit from State House scholarships. You must be known to the President; the Twalwana category and senior cadres of the NRM party. 

The rest of the Ugandans remain helpless. When we were passing – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KASIBANTE: When we were passing the Higher Education Loan Scheme Act, we made it clear that all these other Government scholarships would cease and all the money goes into this scheme. The Board would then determine because if a daughter of a Permanent Secretary went to apply for a loan, it will not be simple. Rather, they would look for a child of the poor. 

To date, State House scholarships still exist alongside the loan scheme. It is again the poor who go for the loans but Government can only manage 2 per cent of the would-be beneficiaries of the loan scheme. Thank you.

3.46
MR JACK-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some years ago, I was a member of the Central Scholarship Board where we used to give out scholarships to Ugandans. It is very unfortunate that students from the districts outside Kampala never benefitted from these scholarships. We know that most of the best schools are around Kampala. Most of the primary schools where children get 4 aggregates are around Kampala. 

Therefore, Government was giving these scholarships to children around here. What about the children of the poor from Bududa, Nakapiripirit, Kasese and Bundibugyo who were not benefitting at all?

I support the motion that the scholarship scheme should be extended to all schools upcountry. The Government came up with another scheme and said that they were giving scholarships to only science students. Is there electricity in Bududa where you can preserve a frog for dissecting? Are there laboratories with science equipment so that those students can pass sciences and benefit? It is very unfair that the children from upcountry schools in Moroto, Kapelebyong, Bugabula, Bududa, Sironko and Bulambuli cannot benefit. 

Therefore, these quotas should be extended to those districts so that our children can also benefit and feel that they are part of Uganda. Otherwise, leaving these scholarships to children around Kampala is very unfair to this country. The quota system should go round the whole country and target children from those poor districts around this country. I thank you.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whether we support the motion or not, I think we need to remind ourselves of the factors that led Government to come up with the loan scheme. 

There were two factors; I remember it was during Academic Year 2005/2006 and at the time, there were only two public universities; Makerere and Mbarara. Admissions in these universities could only be accessed by students from well-to-do schools around Kampala. That was the first factor. 

The second factor was the inequitable access to the two public universities. The third factor was that the other schools – the technical institutes and others – were very few and in a sorry state. 

However, as we talk, on the first factor of having only two public universities, we now have nine universities and they are spread all over the country. Secondly, these other lower institutions – the tertiary institutions – are very many and are all over the country. The Government has invested a lot of money in revamping the traditional schools and we have even built new ones. We have good secondary schools, which are well-resourced in almost every sub-county. 

The issue today is not about the quota allocation but the money. One of the solutions would have been giving more money to the loan scheme. The loan scheme is trying to address the issues raised by my sister here. Do you know how much money we have put in the loan scheme? The loan scheme has come to support our brothers and sisters who go to these tertiary institutions. The other issue is that right now, Government supports 30 per cent of the students who are admitted into those tertiary institutions all over the country. If you gave us more money, we would increase the percentage to 70 – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has emphasised the loan scheme. For the time I have been Member of Parliament for Bugabula County South – four years – at least the loan scheme has been in place. We are raising these issues based on what is happening in our constituencies. Is the minister in position to produce a list of one or two students from Bugabula County South who are benefitting from the loan scheme? 

When we say we need to extend the scheme to these technical schools, it is so that people, particularly from Kamuli, can benefit other than the loan scheme where we cannot know the figure that is centrally managed from here.

Honourable minister, are you conversant with the way the loan scheme is being applied?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, hon. Lanyero’s motion about the quota – the way we used to give 11 students per district – not at university but maybe at the National Technical Colleges or Uganda Technical Colleges. We are talking about the quota of students to be sponsored by the Government. 

The loan scheme is a difficult thing and I would really not want you to take us there. In this House, we have been begging the Government to give us an additional Shs 5 billion to take on a few more children and the Government has failed.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, what is important is that Government wants everybody to go to school and become a useful Ugandan. If it means distributing according to the quota system, I have no problem but that would not solve the problem. We need more money and that is the point I am trying to put across.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is an appeal from the people through their representatives. We are asking you to take this proposal to your ministry, discuss it on its merit and come back to tell us what you think.

MR MUYINGO: I will do that and get back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the motion as moved by hon. Lanyero.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, a few minutes ago, one of the Members raised an issue of floods in Sironko and stated that there are cases of cholera and other outbreaks that are coming up. Now that the ministers in charge of health are here, may I request that they come and give us a brief on what they are doing because some of the neighbouring districts such as Butaleja are also at risk of a cholera outbreak.

THE SPEAKER: I think they cannot just come in casually today. Can you give us a report on the state of cholera in the country, taking into account what is happening? I am sure I will soon come to tell you there is a problem in Kamuli. We have serious floods and facilities have broken down.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologise for having come in late. We were in a top management meeting that dragged on a little longer. 

The rains have been with us for some time and because of that,  we have been prepared and waiting for some of these incidences of cholera. We are aware that we have contaminated water sources because of the floods.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that Busia and Budaka have already reported cholera cases. Actually, Busia confirmed one case. There were four cases, all from Busia Municipality. Unfortunately, one woman passed on but the others are being managed. In Budaka, as of yesterday evening, there were about 29 cases in the isolation ward in one of the health facilities and we are still waiting for the confirmatory tests. 

The rains are still with us. All our health facilities are alert, waiting to deal with any of these cases. However, we have also been providing information to the population to ensure that the water that they drink is at least boiled and not the one just drawn from the water sources because the running waters could come in with faecal matters.
	
Madam Speaker, we have also been appealing to the population to promote hygiene – the issue of handwashing. Aqua tabs are also available in these areas. Therefore, we are prepared to deal with these cases as and when we get reports. 

We have also launched the cholera vaccine and we have given the second doze in a few high spot districts, where we have been. This is all intended to prevent deaths among the population because of cholera. We are prepared but the population should also take the health messages seriously.

I have been told that we need a detailed report. Maybe let us come with that later.

THE SPEAKER: Please, prepare a report for the areas such as Budaka which have reported.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE)(Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for bringing up this issue. I also thank the minister for giving a few highlights. Just to add on what she has said. Our ministry has been preparing all this time from last week. We had all the technical team out immunising and vaccinating people especially in 10 districts.

From Monday, hon. Sarah Opendi was in Bududa and yesterday, she launched vaccination. Hon. Jane Aceng was in Zombo and the honourable minister where they also launched the cholera vaccine. I was in Buliisa and in the entire Bunyoro Region on Monday. The minister was in the West Nile Region but hon. Sarah Opendi was in the eastern part of the country.

Therefore, we have tried and we are still keeping in touch to ensure that we contain the problem. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to make sure that you keep informing the ministry of where you hear of the outbreak. Please, let them know so that they can swing into action. Thank you very much, Minister of Health.

MOTION TOR A RESOTUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INQUIRE INTO THE RECENT REPORTED MISCONDUCT OF THE UGANDA PEOPLE'S DEFENCE FORCES DURING DEPLOYMENT IN CIVIL MATTERS

4.00
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to inquire into the recent reported misconduct of Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) during deployment in civil matters. It is moved by me under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and it is seconded by hon. Anthony Okello, among others.

“WHEREAS Article 208 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, l995 establishes the Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF) and stipulates that the UPDF shall be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority;

AND WHEREAS Article 209 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Section 7 of the UPDF Act mandates the UPDF to;

    1.  preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda; 
    2. cooperate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters; 
    3. foster harmony and understanding between the Defence Forces and civilians; and 
    4. Engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda. 

AWARE THAT Article 210 of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall make laws regulating the UPDF and, in particular providing for the organs and structures of the UPDF; recruitment, appointment, promotion, discipline and removal of members of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and ensuring that members of the UPDF are recruited from every district of Uganda; terms and conditions of service of members of the UPDF; and the deployment of troops outside Uganda;

FURTHER AWARE that in the recent past, there has been increased intervention of UPDF in civil matters notably regulation of the fishing industry and quelling protests by students of Makerere University;

NOTING THAT gross violations of human rights have reportedly marred the intervention of the UPDF in civil matters, which ordinarily should be a preserve of the Uganda Police Force as commanded by Article 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

WHEREAS Sections 42-45 of the UPDF Act provide for aiding of civil power by the UPDF, such aid is subjected to the invitation of the civil authority and does in no way over-ride the constitutional provisions on the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms as laid out in Chapter Four of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; 

COGNIZANT of the philosophical, historical, moral on legal obligations of Parliament to not only safeguard and uphold the Constitution but also legislate for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda as commanded by Article 79 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; 

AND FURTHER COGNIZANT of the importance of duly holding public officials and institutions to account for their actions and inactions as an integral canon of good governance and a possible deterrent from repetitive transgressions;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this August House that; Parliament institutes a Select Committee to inquire within 45 days of approval of this motion, into the reported violations of human and people’s rights by the UPDF with a view of establishing and apportioning culpability.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)Okay, it is seconded by several members. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Can you speak to the motion?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, I would like to say that the image of the UPDF is a good image. However, there are errant officers who, whenever they are deployed in civil matters, have abused their powers.

We have had a debate in this House as to whether the UPDF, for instance, can even intervene in fishing matters and our argument has been premised on the Fisheries Act that it limits intervention to the Uganda Police Force.  However, when they were involved in the sector - I do not want to go into that debate, their conduct has gone outside any permissible limits albeit the fact that I contend that they do not have mandate to intervene in civil matters of that nature.

Our people have met untold suffering on water bodies. For example, they interfered with the implementation of the mandate of the fisheries officer and they have been arresting our people on these water bodies, beating them up and incarcerate them even in illegal centres.

I will give you an example; in Masese constituency in Jinja, they rented a premise and they arrest people and whoever they find with fish, incarcerate them in those areas, not even knowing that they do not have the capacity to know whether the fish, which has been caught with these farmers is that prohibited by law or not, because they do not have the competence.

However, that notwithstanding, because we do not support illegal fishing as members of Parliament representing areas where there are these water bodies, they go at length to torture and beat up these people and violate their rights.

Madam Speaker, you have been watching on social media and all over when the army is beating up people. 

The other issue is that they have even abandoned the role that they were deployed to execute by the President on water bodies. They are now in the trade in this sector.

In my constituency, a one Major Sebukeera came into a force of these regulations as it had been alleged. However, he now deals in fish. He bought a vehicle and impounds fish from our people and he is now a trader.

Therefore, what I would like to end with is that when our people go to police to report these violations, the police are under instructions not to receive any complaints from them. People are tortured but have nowhere to go for recourse.

It is on those promises that I thought that the continued involvement and deployment of the army in civil matters, we need to set up a select committee, without necessarily targeting an individual, so that we interface with our people in the affected areas. And that the individual officers who have gone outside their mandate and want to tarnish the image of the UPDF, are investigated and brought to book. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Kalemba?  He is not here, hon. Okello as the seconder.

4.08
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion. The object of this motion is very clear; to institute a select committee to inquire into cases of violation of human rights.

A few months ago, this august House received a report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and there were several cases of torture and killings by the Fisheries Protection Force. For instance, in Namayingo District, the report was very clear concerning the death of Mr Omondi Fredrick. Even the Commander, Operations of the Fisheries Protection Force confirmed this death in the report of the committee. However, no known action has been taken against the perpetrators of such crimes to date. 

On 5 June 2019, Mr Edward Lutaaya, under the detention of the UPDF Fisheries Protection Force at Bangala landing site, collapsed and died. He was from Nakasongola.

On 3 October 2017, I rose on the Floor of this House and raised the matter of Mr Moses Ochieng in Amolatar Town Council who was arrested and tortured on 5 May 2017. He was detained, his health condition deteriorated and he was moved to Murchison Bay Hospital in Luzira. Unfortunately, he died on 25 June 2017. His family learnt about his death three months later, long after he had been buried in a mass grave.

Madam Speaker, Mr Ojok Emuga and Okello were gunned down by this team when they were doing their operations at Odyedo in Awelo sub-county in Amolatar District.

Arising from the recent operations, I have treated very many torture victims; the list is long. Uganda is a state party to the UN Convention against Torture. In addition, this country has the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012, prohibiting any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. It also provides for crimes of torture.

However, I have always wondered why the Fisheries Protection Force of the UPDF acts with impunity as if such a law does not exist. Arising from the operations of this team that has led to gross violation of human rights, it is my prayer that public officials and institutions should be accountable for their actions because this would promote good governance. This is what the motion seeks to address.

Madam Speaker, may it please you that you find the constitution of this select committee appropriate so that it can inquire into cases of abuse of human rights in this area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion for a select committee to be formed by this House.

I would like to talk about the very many impounded vehicles, which are parked in Nakasongola District. A number of motor vehicles, motorcycles and bicycles have been impounded from a number of districts but all of them have been taken to my district, particularly Budyebo County near Lwampanga.

We have been struggling to rescue these impounded vehicles for our poor Ugandans so that they can use them but it is all in vain. I even invited the Minister of State for Defence to come and address the people of Nakasongola, as you remember when I stated it here. He came and interacted with the people of Nakasongola who raised the same issue; that their vehicles, motorcycles and bicycles had been impounded and that they have been approaching Lt Col Namanya who always refers them to another person called Niwagaba. When they go to Niwagaba, he also refers them to other offices. You know that our people come from the villages and when you refer them constantly, they get confused. They then resort to their area Member of Parliament and other political leaders for help.

Madam Speaker, these people need to be helped. I would like to give an example of a man called Ronald Sebayoza who acquired a brand new taxi on loan from Indians. These Indians are demanding for their money but the taxi has been impounded for the last six months. I have his file in my car and I would like to meet the minister to see exactly what we can do.

They found wires in his taxi that were from a passenger he carried. He did not know this passenger and what was in his luggage. I cannot tell what they thought he was going to do with those wires but his vehicle has been impounded for the last six months. The man is looking for help. When I went to Lt Col Namanya, he told me that the file was taken to Niwagaba but when I called Niwagaba’s number, it was off and so, I cannot do much.

Madam Speaker, I would like to cite another example of a man called Bogere. When he heard of the operations on the lake, he had about 100 boats but knew that his boats did not measure up to the standards required. He dismantled them and heaped the timber at home. However, the soldiers went and burnt the timber. 

He wanted to open up a case in the courts of law but the courts asked that the district leaders should attest that the event happened. At the end of the day, the district leaders never wrote the letter that he was supposed to take to court and he is also there languishing.

Madam Speaker, I see it important that you constitute a select committee, which should look into this - (Member timed out.)

4.16
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, 
Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. However, I wish hon. Paul Mwiru could broaden it because we always assume that when we talk about the UPDF, we are also including the Special Forces Command (SFC).

We have seen how lethal the SFC has been on occasions when they are deployed in civil activities. We saw their footmarks in Arua and different parts of the country, even here. As such, we could probably broaden our understanding of human rights violation by bringing them on board.

Madam Speaker, this motion is timely because we are heading to the 2021 general elections and I am sure that the army will become very central in executing the activities of elections in a year’s time. Therefore, documenting human rights’ abuses is going to act as a very good mechanism to check excessive use of force in situations where it is not warranted.

I will also amend the motion a bit by saying that we do not necessarily need a select committee. We could entrust the Committee on Human Rights of Parliament to avoid duplication and issues of limited resources. Therefore, why can’t we task our Committee on Human Rights to interest itself in this matter with well-defined terms of reference or scope of work so that they are able to act in a timely manner? I thank you.

4.19
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in supporting the motion moved by my good friend representing Jinja Municipality East, that a select committee be constituted by this House to inquire into the misconduct of the men and the women in uniform.

Madam Speaker, the UPDF had won a reputation second to none as far as discipline is concerned. However, they eventually degenerated into monsters of sorts, especially when they were deployed all over the country to manage the natural resources. 

The gross human rights violation is on the water bodies, in mines like we have received live complaints and the aggrieved artisan miners in Kasanga and parts of western Uganda. 

There are also running battles in the communities of the people living around the fringes of Mount Elgon National Park because of the unbecoming conduct on the part of the men and women in uniform. They extort money from wanainchi and then allocate them plots within the National Park. Thereafter, they are transferred. These ones who allocate are eventually transferred. 

I do not know if it is stage-managed so that more money would be extorted from these unsuspecting poor peasants so these new ones who come – when the crops are about to be harvested, the leadership, including I, have been wondering and asking them questions like; if you say these people have encroached on the national park, which indeed is true, how did they get here? Why do you wait for crops to mature and they come and slash them? Where were you? 

However, it is all about extortion. They extort money and they have perfected that art of extorting money from the wanainchi. That is why you even realise that on Lake Victoria, after confiscating the fish, even the gadgets they use for fishing are sold off –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in Jinja, I understand, there is a big warehouse where people’s boat engines are kept and sold.

4.22
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I support this motion because the conduct and behaviour of UPDF is in question. 

The Constitution is very clear and it stipulates the mandate of the UPDF. However, right now, what our army is doing is not within the mandate that is provided for in the Constitution. We have received reports of unreasonable use of force by the UPDF. We have got reports from around Kyoga and even my constituency of abuse of our people and excessive use of force resulting into harm to our people. 

I would like to inform this Parliament that UPDF has destroyed properties in our constituency such as boats. They have also burnt the fishing nets that our people have been using. I have asked all the leaders in my district to collect this information. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to you to give me time next week to present a clear record of what they have done to my people. There are many boats that have been destroyed and my people have been using this to look for money but now, they cannot pay school fees and cannot even support their needs of food. Therefore, if it pleases you, Madam Speaker, next week, I will present a full record of what they have done to my people. 

We have respected the UPDF for a long time. They have been the bridge between the people and the army. That is why we have that representative in this Parliament because we thought they would stand in between Government and the people. However, it is now the same UPDF, that we respect, that are doing all these bad things to our people. 

I am in possession of a letter from the President copied to members of Parliament from Lango sub-region. I read this letter very many times and I wondered how a president can write such a letter. I think the letter was badly drafted; it was of bad intention and it is outside the law. The President cannot be the law. The UPDF are in this constituency in Kioga –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I received a copy of that letter, I also did not understand the circumstances under which it could have been written because it was a justification of what was happening. He even went on to say, “Let the cars remain there…” Mind you, these are cars and motorcycles of Ugandans. 

4.25
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I am discussing this issue but if we are really going to defend what is wrong in this country, we are likely to land in problems. 

I have seen that we have talked about these things. Today, we are talking about them and I am informing my friend that we are not safe because we have been discussing these matters here. I am very clear about it. 

Madam Speaker, the ministers concerned have always been defending these people and so, their presence will not help us. I have now seen that even when you go to Bukooli Islands, the issue of members of Parliament in the waters is now the song. We are not saying and I am not saying UPDF is wrong but there are individuals in the waters. They have immersed wealth and taken people’s money. 

You people, who are here and are saying that these things are not true, go to Port Victoria in Kenya and see people who have been given license to come into our waters. They fish and our people are refused. You now go in the waters and what they are saying now, they are de-campaigning us. They are telling people we are here but some members of Parliament should not come back. If we are here listening and people are saying that there is a lot of fish, how is Maganjo factory working? Is there fish in that factory?   

The issue here is that there is a lot of fish. Even tomorrow, you will see the newspapers stating that there is a lot of fish. Whenever we discuss this issue in Parliament, something is written. 

These people who call themselves Association of Fishers and Lake Users in Uganda (AFALU) have destroyed the operations. The AFALU is an organisation of fishermen doing business but now, they are the ones controlling these people here. What is right and what is wrong if some people who have stayed in the waters are transferred? They are very “big” and they say that they are not going to be transferred. Instead, they are promoted. When is Parliament discussing?

While we discuss this matter, I am worried while I support the motion. You have the authority and the powers; can’t you also give us time to discuss these issues with the President because he is being hoodwinked by some people that things are good? Things are not good. People have died and others have been tortured. My friend is talking about Omondi here - Omondi has a grandfather of 91 years - (Member timed out.) 

4.29
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Lira itself does not have a waterbody. However, very many people come to Lira to interact with us. We pass through Apac to come to Kampala.
 
We have interacted with our relatives and friends who live in those areas. They say that the UPDF go up to the extent of smelling their mouths, to check if they have eaten fish. They even search their plates and the worst thing that they do, they beat the husbands of the wives in front of their children and wives. This is unacceptable and I feel this motion needed to be supported. The UPDF should stop involving themselves in civil matters. 

There is this case of Maruzi Ranch, which was once a forested area and has several kilometres. However, the community there complain that UPDF do not allow them to hold pangas or even an axe. Remember we do not have electricity in the rural areas; it is still being installed. They do not have any means of cooking but they have to pick firewood. 

Madam Speaker, they are not allowed to hold any axe or panga. If they are caught holding it, they beat them up. If you went to Maruzi Ranch today, the place is plain without any single tree. I would like to interest this House to inquire about the trees that were once in Maruzi Ranch. Where have the UPDF put those trees? This is what we are talking about; it is about the involvement of the UPDF in a few things that are not within their areas.

Recently, there is fish being exported. They export fish from Jinja to Lira on trucks. I am wondering who has been authorised to do fishing? When they take the fish to Lira, instead of selling them in wholesale, they sell part of it in wholesale and they again retail some of it and compete with the people who are supposed to retail it, meaning that the people in Lira lose business. This is what the UPDF are – (Member timed out.) 

4.32
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The army is not trained to keep law and order. They army is trained to kill enemies of the country. They are supposed to be at the borders and attack enemies that are going to attack Uganda. Keeping law and order is entirely the duty of the Uganda Police Force. Since they have mingled into the works of the police, then it is the reason they are doing unprofessional work because they do not know what they are supposed to do with the communities and the public.

Unfortunately, they are now deployed in almost all departments of Government. They are distributing seeds and giving out passports. When you go to Immigration, they are there. They are deployed in Parliament and they are in universities attempting to rape students. They were in Makerere University and you are about to get the report. They are even grabbing land in many parts of the country, including grabbling people’s women. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. We have even seen them beating journalists on the streets. We need to investigate this matter and order that the army should go back to their barracks and wait at the borders. If Rwanda or Kenya wants to attack to us, they should be there but the matter of Ugandans in conflict with other Ugandans is entirely the duty of the Ugandan police. I would like to thank you.

4.34
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Mwiru, for moving this motion. On Lake Albert, they have gone so lethal that the UPDF now connives with the soldiers of Congo to come and rein terror on people on the lake. 

When people report to them that the Congolese are hijacking them and killing our people on the lake – the killings that you hear about, they okay them, themselves. That is how they have gone so dangerous. You go and report to them and they say, “no, those are just Congolese.” The next time you hear that they are having meetings with the same Congolese soldiers.

Brutality of the military men, especially in civil matters – for us, it did not even start with the fishery we are seeing here. At the time when we had National Forestry Authority (NFA) very active meaning the lives of the trees were still there and they had not finished our trees. People who would felly the trees were being guarded by the UPDF who would shoot at people. We have guarded these forests for all these years and you are now cutting them. At least, let us have some pieces that we can use as firewood. 

When you come to taxation, enforcement or payment of tax – for us who are at the border, if I am riding a motorcycle without a number plate, please, arrest me and enforce how I should pay but they are shooting these young men dead. They say that they have been given powers to work as tax enforcers. They shoot anytime they want. 

Madam Speaker, I think –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Anywarach, for giving me time to give you this information. The information I would like to give you is that Amuru District Council passed a resolution to stop commercial charcoal burning. As the chairman was trying to patrol, his car was knocked by one of the vehicles and the vehicle had guns. When we go to places where they are burning the charcoal, all of them are armed with guns. This is the situation that is happening. When you try to confront them, they are very rude. 

When I went to confront them, when I came back I found over 10 armed soldiers waiting for me. They asked me; “What were you doing in the bush?” I was in a place where I was elected by the people.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I think we need to take our army to Kenya and Ghana for benchmarking. They would understand how the military men are supposed to protect the country not just fighting or killing the citizens. Short of that, we will be very scared. 

There were statements made here when Parliament was biting very hard. An army commander said; “We can cause a coup d’état.” We said: “What?” Again, in this exercise of operation on the water bodies, when you hear the Chief-in-Command saying, “I would like to thank my people because they are doing a good job,” that alone is -(Member timed out.)

4.38
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Lake Albert, specifically in Kikuube District, we do not have this official deployment but the soldiers come occasionally. When they come, they do not have limitations on where to go. These soldiers enter someone’s home to search for a needle and may call it a fishing hook. When they find any fish in your house, you are beaten and told to go and burn the fish yourself. 

I used to hear that when they discover immature fish, they get a court order and give it to institutions such as prisons. However, these people work without court orders and the fish ends up in Bwera Market, at the border with Congo. These people are supposed to get search warrants. I wonder where they get immediate orders to come and search houses without search warrants.

Madam Speaker, last year, we had primary elections and I saw soldiers ticking all the ballot papers in Kikuube and by 11.00 a.m., they had finished voting. Good enough, the flag bearer is still carrying it to date and we have never carried out general elections. 

Bugoma Forest Reserve is guarded by soldiers but if you travel there around 10.00 p.m., you will find trucks carrying timber, guarded by soldiers. I think it is high time we investigated this. Of course, when they say they are helping their sister forces, it is normally that entry where they get – Under Item No. 9 on the Order Paper, you are going to see what soldiers did in an eviction where there was no court order.  (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, colleague for yielding the Floor. The information I would like to give is that the UPDF are not only good at guarding timber but they are also good at cutting it in the forests. In Mt Elgon National Park, a one Mwanje was shot dead in 2013. They had hired him to cut timber after felling trees but after a sharp disagreement over payment, Mwanje was shot dead in cold blood.

MR MUHEIRWE: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, it challenges my understanding when they say that they do not have fuel to go and guard against Congolese soldiers but they have fuel to patrol the lake, search and beat whoever they find on the lake.  (Member timed out.)

4.42
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. My constituency has four sub-counties on the shores of Lake Kyoga. The torture and mistreatment of the fishing community that Members have mentioned here is real. I personally had to transport fishermen from my constituency who had gone to landing sites in Amolatar District. It took two days for the lorries to ferry these people to safety in Kaberamaido.

Torture is against the law. What is even more serious is that the work that the soldiers were asked to do; to protect the fish and regulate the fishing communities is now defeated by these excesses and actions of torture. In my constituency, we have people whose vehicles were taken. I have a one, Mr Esimu whose vehicle was taken and it has been parked in Nakasongola. However, Esimu only hired out his vehicle for business. There is another gentleman called Abbas whose taxi was impounded and it has been parked near Nakasongola Army Barracks. The man followed up his vehicle, he was sick but no one showed him mercy. Abbas died without getting his vehicle back. His widow and brothers are still following up the vehicle.

The good news is that last week, the President was hosted in a sub-county in Kalaki and this issue was brought to the President’s attention. He asked all the members of Parliament of Kaberamaido and Kalaki to stand up and his message to us was, “Go and investigate – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what he wanted you to do. Okay, one more minute -

MS ISALA: Well, it was brought to his attention and he said that action should be taken. 

My submission is, let us ask the Committee on Human Rights to investigate this matter. They succeeded with Nalufenya, they succeeded with safe houses and I am confident that they will also handle this properly. Thank you.

4.46
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, before I came to this Parliament, I had a lot of respect for the UPDF. As I speak, I cannot allow any of my sons or grandchildren to join the forces. My sister, I request that you do not give any statement on the Floor today because they might not nominate you for the next Parliament and yet, we need you. (Laughter)

I believe that what is taking place in this country is a racket. That is why whenever we are discussing issues of the UPDF on the waters, the ministers concerned intentionally dodge plenary. Many times, when we have complained, the same ministers have kept on defending the UPDF actions on the water. That is why I believe that the ministers are beneficiaries of the extortion of our fishermen. 

I challenged one minister and told him, “If you are not a beneficiary, go and address a press conference and deny the actions of torture and extortion of our fishermen.” He has not done it up to now.

The East African Federation is just lip-service because of the UPDF. Our brothers and sisters from Kenya fear to cross the border because many times, they have been harassed by the UPDF.

Madam Speaker, I would like colleagues to agree with me that it is almost six months ago when the same UPDF marines crossed to Busia in Kenya and they were arrested in a territory, which is not ours. They were chasing people who were carrying mature fish.

Therefore, I support this motion and as I support it, I have a prayer. I would like to know under which law the Anti-Smuggling Unit is operating. Many times, our people have been tortured and killed on the border but these people have gone free without being charged before the courts of this country. 

Therefore, I support this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Mwiru for bringing this timely motion because the torture by the UPDF in local communities has gone beyond human imagination.

In Rwenshama fishing village in Rujumbura in Rukungiri District, they have even gone to the extent of allocating powers to themselves of giving licenses. They get the correct fishermen’s boats, burn them down, beat them up and then, they issue licenses to their preferred fishermen on the lake. They also accompany them on the lake. By that act alone, they are amassing wealth and have taken over people’s jobs.

I talked to the Minister of Security Gen. Tumwine personally when this was going on in Rwenshama. He only said “you are a civilian, what do you want us to do for you?” They claimed I do not understand military powers. That is the kind of arrogance attached to these operators.

Therefore, this torture has led people to flee their fishing zones, homes and they have come to Internally Displaced People’s Camps in their own communities without food and protection. We are now worried that as we go into elections next year, they are going to be deployed in the election processes. You very well recall that some time back, people died in Rukungiri during elections.

Therefore, as we go into the election year, this Parliament needs to look into these matters of UPDF and bring them to order so that we do not lose more lives and do not have continued torture of our citizens. Thank you.

4.51
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Protection from - as usual, I will begin with apologising for what is happening. However, I would like to address myself to the mover of the motion. He started by rightly stating, in his submission, talking about errant officers and he also talked about - he was a bit specific that the soldiers have been deployed but in the process of deployment, we have had cases of errant soldiers or officers committing some atrocities or torturing people or violence. That means that this is not - whereas these are members of UPDF, it is not UPDF as an institution or as force.

Madam Speaker, Members have demanded that we should pull out from operations in the nature of -(Interjections)- some Members have insinuated that we should withdraw from operations in regard to aiding civil authority.

However, this is a constitutional mandate that we fulfil. If there are some areas or things that have not gone well, it does not mean that we are irrelevant. We are very relevant, honourable members.

Madam Speaker, the other point I want to mention is, how does this come? We usually have a call up procedure; soldiers do not deploy themselves without being called by the other security forces. (Interjections) Yes, the call up procedure is there and where we are usually - in the wisdom of the deploying authority, I will not go into the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADs) or the different operations that we have been deployed. However, what-(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bridger, a serving Member of the UPDF, instead of taking notes and giving feedback is defending the institution of the UPDF while the ministers responsible are absent without official leave here. 

We have often been told that the army is in Parliament because they are supposed to act as a listening post. Is the Bridger in order to defend the institution?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she represents that institution and that is why she is here. Please, conclude. 

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. I would also like to- I am not just supporting or defending the institution. That is what I apologised about. That is why I would prefer an amendment. The issues of the human rights abuses should be handled by the Committee on Human Rights. 

However, I thought that we should demand for prosecution of the errant officers and not the institution. From the submission of Members –(Interjections)- Can I submit? From the submission of the Members, they have facts. According to their submission, they know the people, their names and where they are.

Therefore, from the time we have been talking about this, my amendment would be that we focus on those errant officers and make sure that they are brought to book. Otherwise-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byekwaso, who will make the complaints? To which court will they be tried? Will it be an open court? Because sometimes you have seen in the press that so and so has been arrested and after that, you never hear of the trial or conviction.  Give us some advice; how does a civilian from this House follow up this case?

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Madam Speaker, what I know is that we have working courts, where we prosecute people. We have the General Court Martial and other disciplinary courts. However, we have the General Court Martial, which is active and prosecutes every day and people are in prison but whoever has the contrary to that – 

We are a disciplined force. We do prosecute and condemn and pass sentences and have courts that sit every day. (Interruption)

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, first, the errant officers are known. Even in the letter that you wrote to the President, you mentioned them. The Maj. Sebukeera they are talking about has been on the waters for the last three years. He has done a lot of harm. The two army men who killed Omondi were said to have been taken to the General Court Martial but they never. Even the minister was here saying, “we are dealing with them.”

However, I agree with the brigadier. The ideas are bright. Is she in order to bring the issues back saying that the errant officers should be given to them when they were already given the names? The minister has the names. We have even written to the President. Where are we now going to take the names if we have taken them everywhere? 

THE SPEAKER: You know, I am one of those who complained on behalf of the people in writing. I named all the officers who were involved. What do I hear next? Sebukera is now a major, yet, when I reported he was a captain. He is now a Major and I am the Speaker of this country.

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Why I addressed myself to the errant officers is because of the submission of the mover of this motion, which was about the arrant officers. That is why I thought that we should amend because we are going to set up this committee. However, even if we constitute it, they will come here and recommend; what if they do not act? That is why I am insisting that you should give us the names of the errant officers because we have rules of engagement. 

When they are being deployed, they are told what to do. The mission commander will tell them “go and do this.” They will not tell them to go and torture. I am sure no one tells them to go and torture. That is why we should demand that they are prosecuted and followed up. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Are you aware that I have been threatened for speaking about those issues, me the Speaker of Uganda? - Yes, I have been threatened with death.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to give some clarification and information, as I know things. If anybody threatened you for what you have said here or outside, that person threatening you is what Brig. Gen Byekwaso is talking about. That could be another errant officer; threatening the Speaker of the Parliament. The official spokesperson of the army or the leadership of the army cannot do that. That is another possible arrant officer or solider for that matter.

Madam Speaker, on the question of voting, which hon. Muheirwe was talking about, a unit in an electoral area is allowed to vote. That is why those soldiers who voted, they must have been stationed in that area (Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Thank you, honourable minister. The information I would like to give you is that these were primary elections and soldiers are non-partisan.

Secondly, they were bringing pre-ticked ballot papers and taking away boxes, which were empty and bringing the ticked ballot papers; not that they were voting themselves. That is the information I wanted to give my senior member.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That information is totally wrong. Soldiers do not vote in party primaries. They can only vote in a general election. That is all -(Interruption)

MS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I am the one who did not pick the honourable’s statement right. He said it was primary elections, where the UPDF got involved when actually they are non-partisan.

The minister is saying the honourable member is totally wrong, yet, he was on the ground where the minister was not. Is he right to rule that the honourable member is wrong in his statement when he actually said it was in primaries and he himself was not involved and was not down on the ground. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you familiar with the facts of the primary election in Kikuube? (Laughter)

COL (RTD) BUTIME: I am familiar with that area. He is talking about Kikuube District. He is talking about the one who was standing and the relationship between that one and the other one. Therefore, I know what we are talking about and I am saying simply that in primary party elections, soldiers do not vote or should not vote at all. They are not supposed to vote. The returning officer should not allow them to vote and that is that.

Madam Speaker, the other point I wanted to comment about is the statement made by hon. Bichetero that regulation of fishing activities has been defeated. I think it has not been defeated because the harvest of fish these days - because of the involvement of the army, the breeding is high, fish is more available, it is bigger and larger than what it was that time.

This is an operation when the Government is satisfied that that the work done by the army - the army will be called. However, for the time being, Ugandans should really accept that ever since there was this deployment of the army on the lakes, breeding of fish has increased at a very high rate. Anybody misbehaving, these are the errant soldiers whom Brig. Gen. Byekwaso was talking about but we should appreciate. I go to the lake to buy fish myself. The kind of fish I am buying is now healthier, bigger and of course, expensive but –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. In countries where the lakes are allowed to rest for the fish to grow ad multiply, there is a specific period. They give a timeframe and not more than four months because of the rate at which the fish grows.

We had expected this - because no one is disputing that the lake was depleted; we agree to that. However, I think the fishermen must know that every year, from this month to this month, one is not allowed to fish.

However, in our case, the soldiers are permanently situated on the lake. Those who derive livelihoods from the lake, like some of us who went to school because of money got from fishing, find it a big challenge. If you ban fishing for a whole year or six months, how shall they survive? 

What the Government needs to do, which you need to clarify on or take to Cabinet is, they should specify the months in the year when fishing will be stopped so as to allow the fish to multiply and grow. 

Last week, we were told by my brother from Lake Kyoga that the fish are dying of old age because we have taken long to lift the ban on fishing. This is true because the life span of a fish is not a year, if you did not know. The life span of a fish cannot be a year. In that way, we shall be able to regulate and handle matters on the lake. 

We were in Cairo and saw fish floating on the Nile because they regulate the time for fishing on the River Nile, on the Egyptian side of the Nile. They have never run short of fish. They export and the fish is available all the time. Can’t we do that, honourable minister? 

THE SPEAKER: I would like the minister to clarify who clears the fish that the soldiers sell. They are the ones selling the fish now. Who clears them to say, “this one is okay and that one is not?” 

MS ISALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the minister has misinterpreted what I said. I had two situations; the excesses of the soldiers and the protection of the fish. I was saying that the excesses should not defeat the good purpose that the protection and the regulation were meant for. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: I have accepted the honourable’s clarification and I also made my point. Who clears the fish, which the soldiers sell? That is a commercial activity so I cannot really explain it. 

On the question of fish – (Interruption) 

5.14
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, honourable minister and my friend, for giving way.

Honourable minister, the Fisheries Act and the regulations thereunder stipulate the sizes for the fish. The best person with the competence to determine whether the fish is immature or mature is the authorised officer. In this case, it is either the fisheries officer or the district fisheries officers. Before the intervention of the army, the fisheries officers would have to move with their metre ruler because the Act talks about measurements and he or she would determine whether the fish is immature or not. 

Now that the Fisheries Department has been almost removed from this sector, who determines that this fish is mature or immature? The information I was giving you is that most of these officers on these water bodies are the ones now dealing in fish. They have chased away all our people. If you go to Masese Landing Site, Major Sebukeera now has a vehicle. They do not buy fish but impound the fish from people, put it in their cars and export it. That is why the Speaker’s question was, “Who clears this fish?” 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I am not going to answer every question. The most important point is that the fishing activity had become very dangerous to the country and to our protein depletion. That caused the Commander in Chief to deploy the UPDF on the lakes. 

On joining the army, there is a distinguished member here who said that he cannot allow his son to join. Well, that is his choice but joining the army is a national and patriotic duty. We are only lucky that there is no compulsory law where Ugandans would be required to join the army and undergo training. That kind of debate would not arise here if we had an opportunity of spending 12 months and two years of service. He would not be talking like that. 

Nevertheless, service in the army is a national and patriotic duty. Time will come when Ugandans will be required to go and do national service; join the army, be trained and then come here and be members of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have discussed this matter many times. We need to take a resolution on it and sit down and work out whether we will refer the matter to a select committee or to the Committee on Human Rights. 
I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The details will be worked out. Do you want to make closing remarks? 

MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the support but I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker. When someone’s right is violated on these water bodies and you go to a police station, they have directives not to take any complaint against those errant officers. 

In the interim, I request that the minister gives an order to police stations all over the country that if an officer violates someone’s rights, they should record the complaint against that officer. In Jinja, I have tried severally and even reached the regional officer but they told me that there is an order and they cannot take complaints of the community against those officers. We request for that in the interim as we deal with other matters. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, while we appreciate this ad hoc committee to do thorough investigation, I think it is important that this committee be reminded that it is not just a mere human rights abuse. The armed forces have been breaching the Constitution. 

Articles 208 and 209 clearly define what the Forces are supposed to do. They are supposed to be patriotic, professional and disciplined. It goes further to describe what the role of a UPDF soldier is. When they are involved with civilians, they should cause harmony. 

Madam Speaker, the reason I need your guidance on a procedural issue is where a minister serving in the Government would say that the UPDF is involved in protecting fish and making sure that they probably make a contribution in the economy. 

May I understand what the UPDF would be doing in wealth creation? What disaster do we have in the wealth creation sector? We have unemployed youth who are desperate on the streets and this is where we would have employed our youth but UPDF has taken over agriculture, water, forestry, mining and every place.

Madam Speaker, it is not just mere human rights abuse, but the UPDF invaded Maruzi Ranch and ensured that they forcefully took over Maruzi Ranch and they cut all the trees there. It is a matter of constitutional abuse and breaching the Constitution. Therefore, we cannot just handle it as mere diplomatic human rights abuse where Gen. Elly Tumwine would just stand up and say “Who is Speaker and who is Ogwal?” He shouted at me like a little child! Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza did the same to a woman on the streets. It is not just that. I can tolerate Gen. Elly Tumwine shouting at me but definitely, the Constitution has been breached and we cannot keep quiet on that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason I said that we need to reflect on what we need to formulate is because of the reasons you have stated. I would like to remind the House about Article 209 of the Constitution. The duties of the defence forces are as follows:

    a) To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda.
    b) To cooperate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters.
    c) To foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians.
    d) To engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda. Those are the responsibilities.

As I indicated, we shall come back to you with a way forward on this issue. Thank you very much.

Yesterday, we had a delegation from Tanzania Parliament which came to visit us on the issue of HIV/AIDS. The honourable chair has a question to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Where is he? Oh, he has gone. Ask your question, the Minister of Health will listen and answer.

5.20
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In July 2014, Parliament passed a law establishing the Uganda AIDS Trust Fund to mobilise domestic resources for the national HIV/AIDS response, and the law was assented to by the President in July 2017. Whereas all the regulations have been developed, its actual operationalisation still remains pending and the Ministry of Health is mute. 

Right now, our implementing partners are threatening to exit and we are talking about sustaining the HIV/AIDS response because the new infections are really very high. The statistics of the new infections are very scaring. I request that the Minister of Health tells this House and the country at large the status of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, may I add this before the minister comes on board?

THE SPEAKER: Is it on the trust fund?

MR OKUPA: Yes, it is on the matter raised by the chairperson. Madam Speaker, we were all taken aback when they recalled a certain batch of condoms last month because they were faulty. If it were in other countries, whoever was responsible for testing these condoms would have been hanged. Today, in one of the papers, they are telling people that if they used the condoms in that batch, they should go and test themselves. 

May we know, now that the chairperson has raised the issue of the HIV/AIDS infection rate and the prevalence – This could be the reason why the HIV/AIDS infections are increasing, because the types of condoms that are being used in Uganda are substandard and faulty. We would like to know from the minister what they have done to the officers who were supposed to test the condoms, whether they are from Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) or National Drug Authority (NDA). If we leave it at that, then we are not safe.

As the minister answers that, she must also tell us what the ministry has done to those who were responsible for testing the condoms before distribution and those who allowed the condoms to go into the market. In addition, have they succeeded in withdrawing the condoms from the market? I wish the minister would listen. What have they done to those people who allowed those condoms to go to the market?

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Florence Nambozo raised the issue of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. Allow me to start with that. 

I would like to state that we worked so hard to ensure that the regulations were in place. We tabled them in this House and they were approved. It is not true that we have been seated back. This week, we wrote a letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because it is their responsibility to ensure that this fund is in place and the money meant to be taken from the Consolidated Fund is actually channelled to this fund.

It is true that actually, there is donor fatigue and a number of our donors have indicated to us that slowly, they will be withdrawing support for the HIV/AIDS response in this country. Therefore, as a country, it is important that we have our own fund to respond to this challenge. We are waiting for the response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but we will also alert them so that they come and brief this Parliament what the problem is and why the fund cannot be in place.

Secondly, the issue raised by hon. Okupa was a matter that was raised here and I circulated a report that was uploaded on your iPads. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform honourable colleagues who may not have seen that report that it is true that there were condoms that were faulty and imported into the country by Marie Stopes Uganda. 

These were particularly two batches that were brought in and the National Drug Authority, as is the usual practice, has to test those condoms before they are released to the market. Unfortunately, one of the pharmacists at Marie Stopes gave false information to the stores that NDA had cleared all the condoms and they released the condoms to the market –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, can I make my statement?

THE SPEAKER: We will give you time to make the formal statement.

MS OPENDI: I thought it was read by my colleague.

THE SPEAKER: I am trying to check whether it is within the system of the clerks so that we can put you on the Order Paper tomorrow to formally respond. Please, crosscheck whether the report has been sent?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I gave a report and I also brought another - since we could not respond - about a week after. It was an updated version, which was also sent to the office of the Clerk. I thought my colleague made this statement last week because I was upcountry. If it was not made, I can make it tomorrow; there is no harm.

THE SPEAKER: Let us crosscheck whether the Minister of Health, Dr Jane Aceng, made the statement. We will check and then update you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE INVESTIGATION OF ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL ABUSE ON STUDENTS BY MEN AND WOMEN IN UNIFORM; AND THE MISMANAGEMENT AND ABDICATION OF DUTY BY THE UNIVERSITY MANAGEMENT

5.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the directive of the House to investigate allegations of sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform as well as the mismanagement and abdication of duty by the university management.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say, from the start, that we have a minority report and I believe the author will present it. Before I present the main report, I would like to lay on the Table records of the proceedings – documents obtained or supplied during the proceedings and a copy of the committee’s report.

Madam Speaker, as we may all recall on Thursday, 31 October 2019 the House passed a resolution that directed the Committee on Education and Sports to investigate allegations of sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform as well as the mismanagement and abdication of duty by the university management. 

The resolution came as a result of a statement presented on Wednesday, 30 October 2O19 by the Minister of State for Higher Education, the honourable Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo, on the students’ unrest at Makerere University, Kampala. The statement did indicate that the unrest at Makerere University was precipitated by the following demands from the students:

    a) Halting the implementation of the fees structure passed in July 2018, which involves a 15 per cent increment in tuition fees for new entrants to the university; 
    b) De-gazetting of the Makerere University Students’ Guild (Elections) Regulations No.1 of 2018; and
    c) Revoking of all suspensions and warning letters to students in relation to the unrest. 

Other demands included: 

(a) 	A swift and easy online access of students’ exam results on the university system; and 
(b) 	Extension of the registration deadline and applicable surcharges. 

The debate on the statement culminated into the moving of a motion in Parliament by hon. Mathias Mpuuga on Thursday, 31 October 2019.

Background 

The special meeting of the Makerere University Council that convened on 6 July 2018, under Minute 1.3.SP/7/2018, received and considered a report from the students’ guild on the tuition fees policy in which students proposed a reduction in the rate of the increment of tuition fees to 15 per cent across all academic programmes as opposed to the 49 per cent to 91 per cent increment as earlier proposed by council. 

During the said meeting, council noted, under Minute 2.1(c), that while student leaders had presented their proposal on fees increment, the decision on tuition fees lies with the university council, (Section 41 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, as amended) which considers the views of diverse stakeholders. Once a decision is reached, it shall be collectively owned by all council members.

Under Minute 4.0.SP/7/2018 of the same meeting, the university council agreed that – 

(a) 	fees be increased for all undergraduate programmes for first year students by 15 per cent beginning with the 2018/2019 academic year; 

(b) 	the 15 per cent fees increment be successively continued for each cohort on the fees for the previous academic year over a five-year period; 

(c) 	every cohort of students continues with the fees structure upon which they are admitted until they complete their programmes; 

(d) 	there will be no fees increment for continuing students; and

(e) 	management accordingly sensitises the students’ body on the new fees structure. 

The decision of the university council, under Min.4.0.SP/7/2018, followed a report of a seven-person special committee of the students’ guild representatives (Guild President, the Guild Speaker, the Chairperson of one of the halls of residence, the Vice-Chairperson, the General Secretary and others) in which the team recommended the following to council: 

(i) 	Instead of increasing fees to the tune of 49 per cent to 91 per cent as it were in the earlier management proposal, there should be a uniform and moderate 15 per cent increase in tuition fees across all programmes effective 2018/2019 for the next five years. This, however, means that a student who joins the university at a given fees structure that has the 15 per cent factored in shall continue to pay similar fees until he/she completes the course duration;

(ii) 	While the Visitation Committee recommended that public universities should charge a unit cost per programme, this committee only considered a reasonable and moderate 15 per cent to cater for annual inflation. This was mainly considering our unique social-economic conditions as a country; 

(iii) 	The increment of 15 per cent should only apply to first year students (effective 2018/2019) going forward and not continuing students; 

(iv) 	There should be a feedback framework where all matters/policies that affect students are discussed by student leaders beyond the two student representatives that sit on the council and its committees;

(v) 	The guild president and his vice should be allowed more participation in committees of council that relate to student issues, including the quality assurance and students’ welfare committees; 

(vi) 	The revenue accruing from the above proposal, if approved and implemented, should reflect a change in student services especially in the areas of student hygiene, laboratory facilities, teaching facilities, Wi-Fi, health services and customer care; and 

(vii) 	Part of the resources should be deployed in the renovation of Mary Stuart Hall before semester 1 commences. In addition, regular renovations on the halls of residences should be factored in in the university’s annual budget. 

In a related development, on 30 September 2019, the Speaker of the current students’ guild, Mr Ezra Byakutangaza, wrote to the chairperson of the university council and the Vice Chancellor communicating the resolutions reached at the Guild Representative Council (GRC) meeting held on 27 September 20l9 as indicated below: 

(a) 	That surcharges on late payment of fees be scrapped with immediate effect; 

(b) 	That the 15 per cent increment on fees stops with the academic year 2019/2020;

(c) 	That areas of students’ welfare being improved or to be improved to match the fees increment be communicated to the GRC and the student community; 

(d) 	That the above issues be addressed with utmost urgency and communication be made to the GRC and the student community;

A number of measures and efforts were instituted in vain between the university administration and the students’ guild to reach amicable solutions to the students’ demands and these include the Guild Representative Council meeting, which culminated in the guild speaker’s communication to the university council; the resolution of council appointing hon. Dan Kidega to head a meeting to consider students’ grievances against some university staff; and the emergency council meeting that dropped the 15 per cent increment on functional fees.

The delay in reaching consensus between the university administration and students’ guild leadership prompted 15 female students, who happened to be members of the female caucus of the 85th students’ guild leadership, to march peacefully on Tuesday, 22 October 2019 to purportedly present a petition to the Office of the President. They were contesting the proposed move to effect a l5 per cent annual increment on tuition fees. 

Acting upon a tipoff by the university’s security personnel, reinforcements from the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Military Police were called in to manage the protests. Eventually, some members of the 85th female caucus were arrested.

The news of the arrest prompted some members of the wider students’ community to swing into action contesting the arrest and apprehension of their colleagues. The volatile situation lasted for a period of over three weeks, which disrupted activities at the university - both academic and administrative – and also private businesses in and around the university, halls of residence within the university, affiliated/registered private hostels and neighbouring communities.

Madam Speaker, in considering this, the committee applied the following methodology: 

(a) We had a series of meetings with the following stakeholders:

    i) The Minister of Education and Sports, represented by the Minister of State for Higher Education;
    ii) The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs;
    iii) The Minister of Internal Affairs; 
    iv) Makerere University Council and management; 
    v) Makerere University Students’ Guild leadership; 
    vi) Hon. Mwiru Paul, Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality East and a team of aggrieved students;
    vii) Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Member of Parliament, Masaka Municipality.

(b) We reviewed relevant literature including: 
    i) The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; 
    ii) The Police Act; 
    iii) The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act; 
    iv) The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act; 
    v) The Makerere University Students Regulations; 
    vi) Minutes of the special meeting of the university council held on 6 July 20l8; 
    vii) A report and proposal of the special committee of the Guild Representative Council on the fees policy.

(c) 	We conducted a field visit to Makerere University to establish the status of the university after the unrest and appraise common user facilities, which the students’ community allege to be in deplorable shape.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, these are our findings, observations and recommendations as per the issues in the motion that was moved and passed here.

Issue No.1: The Management of Makerere University rescinds all expulsions, suspensions and dismissals of students and institutes mechanisms to resolve the impasse through civil and democratic means.

The committee established the following: 

(a) 	Whereas the students had valid causes and reasons to demonstrate and had issued notice of a peaceful demonstration to the Commandant, Kampala Metropolitan Police in a letter dated 22 October 2019, there was no evidence of feedback from the police on the course of action to take.

(b) 	Whereas regulation No. 8(9)(a) of the Makerere University Students Regulations, 2015 provides for demonstrations within or outside the university to be held only in accordance with the laws of Uganda, provided the Vice Chancellor is informed at least 24 hours in advance and police permission obtained, there was no evidence of notice of intention to demonstrate that was issued to the Office of the Vice Chancellor.

(c) 	The university students’ disciplinary committee, headed by Justice Precious Ngabirano and other members, has never convened to execute this assignment of handling disciplinary cases, thereby rendering the fate of the affected students uncertain. Forty-five students were reported to have received warning letters. The committee was informed that the disciplinary committee was given only up to two weeks to hear and determine cases of the affected students but to this day, no report has been filed with the university council.

(d) 	The university council, through the university students’ disciplinary committee, directed that the affected students should write their exams pending conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings that were instituted against them. The Committee on Education and Sports however learnt that the university management had contested the decision of the disciplinary committee and had wanted the affected students to be dismissed.

Observations

The committee observed that- 
(a) 	the demonstration led by the 85th female caucus was legitimate in nature as provided for under Article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and did not merit the brutal conduct of the university administration and the security operatives in managing the protests;

(b) 	there was lack of evidence to suggest that the university students’ disciplinary committee, headed by Justice Precious Ngabirano, had convened meetings to hear and determine allegations levelled against the affected students. The committee notes that it is now coming to two months without any report from the university’s disciplinary committee;

(c) 	regarding the notification of the intention of a peaceful demonstration by the 85th female caucus, the police never made any efforts to respond, either by clearing or advising the students against the demonstration, but instead chose to swing into action to suppress the chaotic situation;

(d) regulation 14 of the Makerere University Students Regulations, 2015 provides for general penalties for students found in breach of the rules and regulations. These include a written caution, demand for an apology, suspension from the hall or university, replacement of damaged property and/or making good of the loss occasioned, dismissal from the hall of residence/university, and/or referral to a competent court of law. However, it does not provide for a decision of the disciplinary committee to allow affected students write their exams pending disciplinary action;

(e) 	the security personnel that handled the demonstrations acted in a manner that is not professional and ethical, to the extent of breaking into students’ rooms and beating whoever they came across.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends as follows: 

(a) 	Management of Makerere University should review all expulsions, suspensions and dismissals of students and institute mechanisms to resolve the impasse through civil and democratic means.

(b) 	The military and other security agencies should always exercise restraint from physical approaches in managing peaceful demonstrations, like in the case of the students’ demonstrations at Makerere University.

(c) 	The university students’ disciplinary committee should expedite the process of hearing cases of affected students and file a report to the university council for further consideration. 

(d) 	The university council should review the regulations of the university students’ disciplinary committee to provide for a timeframe within which the different disciplinary cases should be considered and disposed of.

Issue No.2: The Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs and the Minister of Internal Affairs withdraw military personnel from the university premises and students’ hostels and direct the police to exercise restraint, observe human rights, and protect students’ lives and property.

The committee was informed by the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs that – 

(a) 	the presence of the various security agencies at the university was occasioned by overwhelming security concerns in the country and Kampala Metropolitan Area. The committee was further informed that the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces had been at Makerere University even before the strike to reinforce security in the Kampala Metropolitan Area. However, at the request of the Uganda Police Force, its role in the management of the students’ demonstration was done in accordance with Article 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 7 of the UPDF Act, 2005;

(b) 	the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, on 28 October 2019, withdrew the Military Police elements that were deployed at the university before Parliament passed the resolution on Thursday, 31 October 2019. 

Observation

The committee observed that the deployment of the UPDF to participate in management of protests at the university were not justifiable.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that – 

(a) 	the board of inquiry into the conduct of the UPDF during the students’ protests at Makerere University should expedite its investigations and present its report to the House through the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs;

(b) 	The UPDF should desist from interfering with or engaging in peaceful and unarmed civilian demonstrations;

Issue No. 3: Parliament investigates allegations of sexual misconduct meted upon female students by security personnel.

The committee established that – 

(a) 	the university’s policy on sexual harassment, the objective of which is to address acts and practices related to sexual harassment at all levels within the structures of Makerere University, only applies to members of the university community;

(b) 	the university council constituted a select committee headed by the vice chairperson, Rt Hon. Dan Kidega, to investigate allegations of sexual misconduct during the student’s demonstrations;

(c) 	Ms Siperia Saasirabo, who was earlier reported to have suffered sexual assault by security operatives, openly dismissed the allegations before the media. The committee was informed by the university administration that Ms Saasirabo underwent medical examination and the medical report revealed that she was not sexually abused;

(d) 	the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, hon. Adolf Mwesige, in a meeting with the Committee on Education and Sports held on Wednesday, 6 November 2019, admitted to errors committed by some members of the UPDF, which were outside the rules of engagement issued by the supported agency, which is the Uganda Police Force. 

The committee could however not establish the extent and nature of the errors committed by the UPDF deployed at the university. The committee was informed that the UPDF arrested the commander who was in charge of the troops operating at Makerere University at the time of the strike and detained him at the military barracks. The committee was further informed that a board of inquiry was constituted to investigate the details pertaining to the conduct of the deployed troops, thus were noncommittal on whether this was linked to sexual abuse or not.

Observations

The committee observed that – 

(a) 	whereas the university has a policy on sexual harassment, the said policy only applies to members of the university community (staff and students) to whom the university has control over and can issue sanctions to in the event of breach. The university cannot issue sanctions or penalties on persons who are non-members of the university community;

(b) 	the university has no authority or competence to investigate security operatives on allegations of sexual misconduct and could therefore not confirm allegations that some female students suffered sexual violence at the hands of some security operatives;

(c) 	despite efforts by the committee to identify students that were allegedly sexually abused, it was visibly noted that they were not ready to come out in the open. There was therefore no substantial evidence that came forth from any member of the students’ community to confirm allegations that security operatives were involved in acts of sexual misconduct against female students during the students’ protests at the university; 

(d) 	despite several calls and reminders to the witnesses to submit names of victims of sexual assault, this did not happen.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that – 

(a) 	owing to lack of substantial evidence, allegations levelled against security operatives that they sexually assaulted some female students cannot hold any further;

(b) 	the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should present to Parliament, by 17th of December, a report of the board of inquiry on the investigations carried out on the conduct of the UPDF troops during the students’ protests at Makerere University.

Issue No. 4: The Government halts the fees increment pending a sustainable remedy to the financing gap at the university.

The committee established that – 

(a)	 the 15 per cent increment was already included in the Makerere University budget appropriated by Parliament for two financial years so far – 2018/19 and 2019/20 - thus halting it now would distort the budget;

(b) 	the university council, under Min 4.0/SP/7/2018, upheld the recommendation of the report and proposal on the fees policy by the special committee of the Guild Representative Council of June 2018 to increase fees by 15 per cent and it be applied to only first year students;

(c) 	the process of the 15 per cent tuition involved the student guild leadership but was never concluded through the guild representative on council;

(d) 	there were power struggles and wrangles within the then guild leadership with allegations and suspicions that some members maintained secret links with university administration with intentions of suffocating the tabling of the report of the special committee before the Guild Representative Council for consideration before presenting of the same before the university council. 

Observations

The committee observed that – 

(a) 	the 15 per cent fees increment was appropriated by Parliament through the Appropriation Act of 2018 and the one of 2019. 

(b) 	the 15 per cent new fees policy did not receive full endorsement of the student leadership structures as should have been;

(c) 	the spirit of dialogue, mutual trust and consultation seems to have greatly shrunk at Makerere University with different stakeholders suspicious of each other;

(d) 	the university council and management have remained uncompromising to the concerns of the student community on the issue and process of the 15 per cent fees increment.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that – 

(a) 	the university management and other stakeholders should promote dialogue and consultation in handling and resolving issues at the university with emphasis on give and take in the discussions;

(b) 	the university management engages in regular student meetings to be able to establish in time issues that may cause unrest among students, instead of waiting for scheduled meetings; in other words, there should be effective communication between the students’ body and management;

(c) 	the university council should engage the students’ community and other stakeholders with the view of reviewing the fees policy;

(d) 	the university management should refocus their areas of expenditure with emphasis on improving students’ welfare;

(e) 	Parliament directs the Ministry of Education and Sports to implement section 42 (1) of the Higher Education Students' Financing Act, 2014 which provides that “All scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda, including bilateral scholarships, existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall vest in the Higher Education Students Financing Board.”

Issue No.5: The Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit on the management of finances at the university.

The committee agrees with the proposal of a forensic audit on Makerere University to clarify on accountability issues.

The committee recommends that the office of the Auditor-General should carry out the audit and submit a report to Parliament before commencement of the next semester.

Issue No.6: Government tables a supplementary budget request to ease the current suffering of students and their benefactors.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should table before this House proposals, plans and strategies for sustainable financing of university and tertiary education.

Issue No.7: Government meets the medical bills of all students who were assaulted by the security operatives at the university.

Observation

The committee established that some students, namely Mr James Ssebidde, a physically impaired third year student offering Bachelor of Industrial Art and Design and a resident of Lumumba Hall, and Ms Siperia Saasirabo were brutally assaulted. The medical documents are attached. Ms Saasirabo missed writing her end of semester exams and Mr Ssebidde was slowly recovering but still in pain.

The committee agrees with the proposal that Government meets the medical bills of all students who were assaulted by the security operatives at the university.

Issue No.8: Government compensates students who lost their property during the chaotic incidents occasioned by military presence at the university.

The committee recommends that the university council immediately puts in place mechanisms of identifying and compensating students who lost or had their property damaged during the scuffle.

Issue No.9: Parliament investigates the mismanagement and abdication of duty by the university management.

The committee was informed that –

(a) 	the university administration has an open door policy where student leaders raise their concerns. The committee was further informed that both the students’ guild president and the vice guild president are members of the university council, not as students but as members of council with voting rights and are bound by collective responsibility; and

(b) 	the university administration has ensured to respond to students’ concerns in a timely manner and has ensured student representation on all governing bodies;

The committee observes that there exists a communication breakdown between the university administration and the students’ community, where the latter accuse the former of being insensitive to their concerns. The occurrence and re-occurrence of student protests at the university are indicative of failure by the university administration to address the diverse needs of the students’ community.

We recommend that the university council, management and the students’ guild should establish and streamline collaborative structures with the view of establishing open, democratic and consultative methods of engagement in matters affecting them. 

General Comments

1. 	The State of the Infrastructure at Makerere University

The state of infrastructure at Makerere University is appalling and it requires massive investments that Government should prioritise.

2. 	Student Population versus the University Carrying Capacity

The committee established that Makerere University is operating beyond its carrying capacity, which affects the quality of services offered. The current student population is 38,000 students, which is far beyond the actual carrying capacity of 27,000.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the university management should restructure its academic programmes and enrolment in line with its carrying capacity.

3. 	Occupancy at the Halls of Residence
The committee established that rooms in some halls of residence were being sublet and occupied by former students and other unauthorised persons, thereby comprising the security of the university premises.

The committee recommends that the university council should, in collaboration with security, weed out suspicious elements residing in the different halls of residence.

4. Student Overstay at the University

The committee established that on account of bureaucracies in the university administration, some students have long overstayed on their course programmes at the university. 

Conclusion

Given the urgency of this matter, the committee urges all stakeholders involved to act fast to avert any demonstrations that may arise. The university council and management should genuinely engage the different stakeholders in decisions that affect them. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the committee. Can I invite the author of the minority report. 

6.04
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am moving under rule 202 (1) and (2) to present the minority report on the directives of the House to the Committee on Education and Sports to investigate allegations of sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform and the mismanagement and abdication of duty by the university management.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I beg that I move straight to page 3. 

Reasons for Writing a Dissenting Opinion

1. 	Failure of the senior Minister of Education and Sports to honour invitations to attend the committee's meetings to substantiate on the students’ unrest at Makerere University.

Here, we wish to report as follows:

(a) 	The committee on Education and Sports found it necessary to specifically interact with the senior Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni, but all efforts inviting her to attend meetings of the committee to substantiate on the matter of the students’ unrest at Makerere University went in futility. The committee asked the Minister of State for Higher Education during the meeting held on Tuesday, 5 November 2019 about the whereabouts of the senior Minister of Education and Sports; he responded thus: “the Minister of Education and Sports had other important engagements to attend to.”

(b) 	Whereas the committee had the opportunity to interact with the ministers of state, who included the honourable Dr John C. Muyingo (in a meeting held on Tuesday, 5 November 2019) and hon. Rosemary Seninde (in a meeting held on Tuesday, 3 December 2019), the committee still resolved to have the senior minister attend subsequent meetings in person to substantiate on most of the issues raised. However, all attempts to have her come and interact with the committee were in vain. An appendix of the communication from the committee has been attached as Appendix II. 

(c) 	Some of the key issues that the committee wished the senior minister to substantiate on the students’ unrest are contained in a post on her Facebook account duly signed by herself, dated 28 October 2019. Upon inquiry by Members, the Minister of State for Higher Education, hon. John Chrysostom Muyingo, said that he was not in a position to respond to the post but that the senior Minister of Education and Sports was. 

	Appendix III attached to the report is the post from her Facebook account. Her post incorporated allegations that some students who instigated the strike were drug addicts.

(d) 	We found that the senior Minister of Education and Sports was in breach of Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 205 and 221 of the Rules of Procedure of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda.

(e) 	We thus find the Minister of Education and Sports culpable of contempt of Parliament. 

Observations

Madam Speaker, in light of the above, without the input of the senior Minister of Education and Sports on such important issues in the education sector relating to the oldest public university in the country, we observed that the majority report is incomplete and lacking.

We further observed that the statements of the senior minister on her Facebook account referring to striking students as drug addicts were derogatory and tarnish the image and reputation of the oldest public university in the country.

Recommendations

We wish to recommend as follows:

(a) 	That the senior Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni, should prioritise parliamentary business since she is accountable to the committee and to Parliament.

(b) 	The senior Minister of Education and Sports makes a public apology in light of the statement she made depicting Makerere University as a drug infested institution. We presume that the statement is an indictment to the students and the university at large and her apology would restore confidence and trust in Makerere University.

2. 	Halting of the 15 per cent fees increment.

Madam Speaker, we wish to report as follows:

(a) 	Whereas the House passed a resolution on Thursday, 31 October 2019, that Government should halt the fees increment pending a sustainable remedy to the financing gap at the university, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) party caucus, during its meeting on Monday, 11 November 2019, discussed and pronounced itself in support of the 15 per cent fees increment. The appendix of evidence to such is shown as Appendix iv.

(b) 	Whereas the involvement of the students’ guild leadership in the decision to increase the fees structure was not legally binding, the university council largely depended on the report of the seven-person Special Committee of the Guild Representative Council to form its opinion on the same.

(c) 	The seven-person Special Committee of the Guild Representative Council had a duty to report back to the Guild Representative Council to generate consensus, which would be carried forward to the university council by the students’ representatives.

(d) 	The process and mechanism that the seven-person Special Committee of the Guild Representative Council would have used to report back to the Guild Representative Council was usurped by the university management. The report that the university council adopted was not processed by the Guild Representative Council.

(e) 	The report of the Directorate of Quality Assurance of Makerere University, May 2019, puts the student dropout rate at 1,500 students per academic year owing to inability to complete payment of tuition fees.

Observations

We wish to observe as follows: 

(a) 	The powers and functions of the students' Guild Representative Council were usurped by the university management in the process of generating the decision to increase the fees structure. This could be the reason for the students’ protests that ensued.

(b) 	The tuition fees at Makerere University, coupled with other requirements of the learner and economic conditions of Uganda, are already felt high.

(c) 	Party caucus positions or pronouncements cannot override parliamentary decisions.

Recommendations

We wish to recommend as follows:

(a) 	That Government honours the parliamentary resolution of halting the 15 per cent fees increment as was passed by this House on Thursday, 31 October 2019.

(b) 	Government should finance the funding gap of Makerere University.

3. 	Investigate allegations of sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform.

Madam Speaker, the House directed the Committee on Education and Sports to investigate allegations of sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform.

We wish to report as follows:

(a) 	The Committee on Education and Sports did not spare time to specifically inquire and interface with the alleged victims of sexual harassment at the Makerere University campus.

(b) 	Taking into account that sexual harassment is a very sensitive matter, making public confessions by victims in most cases is not easy. Most victims will suffer silently if a conducive environment is not accorded to them. It causes resentment and death although one could be seen alive.

(c) 	Among the alleged victims was the Guild President, Mr Julius Kateregga, who openly confessed that his genitalia were squeezed in the scuffle as they arrested him during the demonstration.

(d) 	One female student - names withheld - testified that she was subjected to verbal sexual insults inside the hostel at Makerere University and at Wandegeya Police Station after her arrest. A uniformed security officer called her a prostitute and even threatened to put his genitalia in her mouth.

(e) 	Despite efforts by a few of the students we interfaced with as the Committee on Education and Sports to disclose the agony and experience of sexual harassment, they eventually expressed discomfort at the environment at Parliament and decided to go back.

(f) 	In light of the above, some students who testified before the committee in camera requested for a conducive environment to further disclose their agony on sexual harassment but the committee did not accord them the same.

Observations

Madam Speaker, we wish to observe as follows:

(a) 	Only two students were able to testify about their agony out of the many allegedly sexually harassed.

(b) 	Female halls of residence were reportedly invaded by male security operatives, which put the students’ lives at risk.

(c) 	The Committee on Education and Sports did not substantively and conclusively handle the matter of sexual harassment.

Recommendations

We wish to recommend as follows: 

(a) 	Parliament should take interest in further investigating the allegations since issues of sexual harassment cannot be concluded in a short time.

(b) 	The university management should put in place psychosocial support mechanisms to address concerns raised by the alleged victims.

Conclusion

We wish to state that the success and achievements in the education sector have a multiplicity of interests and stakes that need to be considered when implementing Government policies. The recent students’ demonstration at Makerere University was indicative of the fact that some interests were ignored by the university authorities. 

The resolution passed by this House on Thursday, 31 October 2019 needs to be acted upon by Government and this Parliament awaits an action-taken report on the same.

Madam Speaker, the report has annexure appended. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, like I said, we had a minority report and it has been read. However, I must also state here that we did the main report with hon. Kasibante until the end. Our point of departure was when he put emphasis on the senior minister appearing in person. I want to put it on record that we did the report together.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he identified the areas of disagreement, meaning that he agrees with the other areas. I just wanted some clarification on the statement that the environment at Parliament was not conducive. Why was the environment at Parliament not conducive for these students? Is it true that it was not conducive? What constitutes that bad environment?

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I will ask the committee vice-chairperson to say something about that but at the point I was chairing, we asked to be supplied with the most convenient identities of these students. Even as a committee, we assured the students’ guild leadership and hon. Mwiru that we would put in place subcommittees - the ladies to handle the lady students and the men to handle the male students. We also asked for names or any information but we never got it. We even wrote a letter and offered an extra week. 

The vice-chairperson can comment on those who are said to have come but did not find a conducive environment. However, as far as I know, we never got any names to handle. Even when we say these issues are sensitive, just a while ago hon. Okello was telling us about how the students came to give information about sexual harassment in education institutions. Therefore, this becomes unique. I do not know what environment failed them.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to understand whether my institution is not accessible for particular reasons.

6.20
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that on the issue of sexual harassment, we gave enough time for the students to come up. There was a time when we took a full week without meeting. Our phone contacts were given to the student leadership and we were in touch with them. We went to the extent of telling them to get in touch with us directly without opening a lot to the public. However, the information did not come up. 

We went ahead, got in touch with them and they came here and we even tried to engage them. The student leadership, headed by the guild president, said that the environment at Parliament was not conducive for them to give information and some of the students left. We even tried to engage with them and sit in Conference Hall A to try and get information from the students but they insisted on the same and looked uncomfortable. We had to adjourn the meeting. Therefore, it was difficult for us to proceed with this. Since we did not have the names, it was even difficult for us to constitute who would meet these students. Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, when the guild president came here with the four female students, they were kept around for about an hour as the committee was meeting with other witnesses. When they eventually came in, the guild president mentioned that when the ladies spotted the CCTV camera system and the press around, they suggested that they meet at their campus. They said that from here, they would not distinguish between the internal CCTV and what was connected to the press. They wanted the committee to meet with them at campus. When the committee went, they interfaced with the university authorities but never had time to call the alleged victims to give their testimonies.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The students came to testify on sexual harassment. In fact, the guild speaker said they were many. One thing is that, that was also the time for examinations. Some of the students came out of examination rooms to testify and others were supposed to go back for examinations. They sat here for almost an hour and some of them had to go. 

Secondly, some of them said they were not secure because by the time they were supposed to come to us, the press was with us in the committee. For the few that had confidence to come to us, at least we sent away the press so that they could confide in us. That is when we got information from the guild president about his balls being squeezed and from a lady who testified that a man in uniform stated that she was a prostitute and that he would insert his genitals in her mouth. 

Therefore, we convinced these students that we would find a conducive environment. They said even the university environment was not okay. The committee chairperson then assured them that they would create a conducive environment for them so that we could listen to them but that opportunity was never availed to them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the way this report was written, it is as if the chairperson was oblivious of the situation and did not care that it was in public. If you want a camera hearing, you organise for it. You are saying they were doing exams and so could not stay here for long. You also said the press was present, but the press can be sent out and you have a camera hearing.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, for emphasis, I would like to say two things. Even when hon. Mwiru appeared with the students, we told them we had a mechanism of getting information without the media. I repeated what I had promised to the guild leadership that we would put in place subcommittees to discretely deal with this. Hon. Mwiru assured me that they were going to give us lists of students before close of business that day; it never happened. We sent a request for those names but there has been no response to date. 

When we were going to Makerere University, I remember proposing that we meet some of these students but hon. Kasibante said that Makerere University was not a good place to meet them from because everybody would see us meeting them. Now he is saying here that when we went there, we did not meet them. So, I am failing to understand how we should have handled this.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it looks like the chairperson of the committee is trying to come up with a second edition of the report. However, the first edition of the report has already been read and we have heard it. 

As you have rightly observed, Madam Speaker, this report leaves us hanging. As a woman, I must tell you that no girl of a young age would come and stand before you and say, “I have been undressed.” No girl! No girl would come and stand before her father and say, “I have been raped.” Therefore, please do not underrate these instances of a conducive environment. 

We should have gone an extra mile to provide a conducive environment. (Applause) It does not matter how long it would have taken - even if it meant finishing the exams and then a special committee would go and meet these ladies, women or girls in a properly secured area for them to speak without any camera recording.

Madam Speaker, if there is anything which has hurt me in what happened at Makerere University, it is the raping of the girls. It is very painful. None of us would want to imagine our daughters at Makerere University being raped by these men in uniform. It is very painful. 

That is something that is not only going to affect Members of the Opposition. I say this because some of these people think that if they are members of the Committee on Education and Sport and members of the NRM and they tell the truth, they will probably be blacklisted as de-campaigning the Government or whatever it is. The truth is that these are our children. They have been abused and there is evidence to prove that these girls were raped yet the committee has not conclusively handled that matter.

Madam Speaker, I would like to insist on procedure; what are we discussing? We already know about the indiscipline of these soldiers, but what are we discussing -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not yet started discussing anything. I only wanted clarification. This minority report said that the environment here is not conducive. I am the head of this institution and I want to know what it is in this institution that stops them from testifying. We had a committee chaired by hon. Rwakoojo and they spent some four months and they were taking evidence here.

MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also disturbed by that sentence because we sat here as the select committee investigating sexual violence in institutions of learning - primary, secondary, tertiary and university. We interacted with students at the university and they opened up to us in the guild meetings. They came here for a public hearing and they opened up. 

What is being said here, from what I can see, is that maybe there was not enough time, according to what she has said. Of course, if it is exam time and students have the obligation to pass exams, they do not have enough time to come and sit here and then also read. You have to divide time.

Also, sexual harassment or violence is not something that - You can get stigmatised. However, that does not mean that the environment here is not conducive. We got information out of those girls even within this very Parliament.

Therefore, if there were differences in the way the committee members understood the handling of the assignment, that should be blamed but not the fact that Parliament is not a conducive place. I disagree with that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Even the others were students. Hon. Rwakoojo’s committee talked to students from primary, junior, tertiary and university. All types of students were able to speak to that committee. Therefore, you cannot say that Parliament is not conducive. No way! Maybe you can talk about other things but to say that Parliament is not a conducive place for you to speak! This is a people’s House. 

MR NATHAN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am member of the Committee on Education and Sports. One time we had an in-house meeting but while there, one of the issues was about constituting committees to meet these students. However, when you look at the schedule which we had, we were meeting one group in the morning and another in the afternoon. Therefore, I personally think that the problem was time. I even remember the vice-chairperson came here to request the Speaker to give us more time to interact with these students.

Even when we went to the university, we did not have time to put these students aside and talk to them. We rushed to the buildings and elsewhere. The problem could have been that we did not have enough time. If Parliament was not conducive, they would have proposed another place. However I do not think that the problem was about Parliament not being conducive. The problem was about the time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want us to complete this exercise - the part which was not completed? 

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with you that this report is incomplete, because our interest is about sexual harassment and what happened at Makerere University. There is a difference between sexual harassment and rape; they are completely different. 

Therefore, now that the report is incomplete, let us request the committee - and we can add other senior women Members of Parliament - to go back and get a true picture of what is happening in these institutions. We are tired! Every now and then, there is sexual harassment by the lecturers or students themselves. We want to know exactly what it is.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request you, as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Rukungiri Municipality - we have students who are in those institutions and are our children - let the committee go back to discuss these issues further and return with a complete report. 

MS VERONICA ISALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I totally agree that this report is incomplete and I would call it premature or stillborn. What I would recommend is that this matter of sexual harassment, rape, sexual abuse, when it is done in our highest institution of learning like Makerere University, must be conclusively investigated.

The problem could have even been on the methodology. We could have got them and treated the matter as very serious and respected the students. They could have been boys or girls. Therefore, I ask that this report be taken back and we reinforce the committee with people knowledgeable in this area and people who care much more about this area and make sure that we come out with a comprehensive report for the nation of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would not want to think that there are Members who do not care. I think it was the timing, the deadlines of the House and the demands from us. I think we should allow them to complete that task before we debate this because it is a component that we want to tie up.

MS MILLY MUGENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues have said, there is a disease that we need to cure in this country. When some of us who are women in this House hear such things happening to fellow women outside there, we feel very touched.

Like hon. Mugume has said, the report seems to be half baked. The chair of the committee is my former secondary school teacher and I respect him so much. Perhaps he fell short - (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, protect me from my former teacher.

Madam Speaker, I feel that we have Members of this House who can help in these investigations and sit with the women. I know that the committee constitutes Members of Parliament who are women but there is something that we need to dig deep, which you do not know. Like hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said, she is a senior Member of this House and she knows exactly why these women refused to open up, especially to the male Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: There were also women on that committee.

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that we give more time to this committee to go back and sit with these students. I do not think that there is any environment, which is better than the Parliament of Uganda where they can speak about these issues. The chairperson of the committee has an office, which may be more comfortable than any other corner in this House. Therefore, I feel that we should give them some time to go back and carry out more investigations for the report to be complete. Thank you.

MR DAVID ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The members of the committee who have been speaking are all men and they are on the record. Matters to deal with women can be best understood when it is actually women who are talking to them. The approach in this case would be different. Remember, last time hon. Rwakoojo led a team that you appointed and they did a very good job. They went to all those places. 

I am wondering why the committee was emphasising that they should come here yet that matter is very sensitive. I have daughters and there are matters that they do not tell me but they tell their mother -

THE SPEAKER: But Parliament sits at Parliament.

MR ABALA: I agree with you, Madam Speaker. I am not questioning their being here but I am questioning the modality. In this case, I would even propose that female Members of Parliament should spearhead the cause to extract information from those girls so that we can get the right picture on what can be done.

Secondly, whenever we do research, we are not supposed to expose who our respondents are. In this case, it appears as if some Members were trying to baptise some things to cover up. Since we are talking about men and women in uniform, I was wondering what role the women in uniform played on matters to deal with sexual harassment in Makerere University.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now going into debate. What we are doing is deciding on how to move. Do not go into debate; we are not debating.

MR ABALA: Finally, I agree with you that the report is not properly set up. Professionally, they answered as if it was coursework. I have been a lecturer and sometimes, this is how students write their work and that is why it is a bit problematic. Therefore, I would like to request that they go back and produce professionally organised work. Thank you.

MR HENRY KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were at Makerere University, we used to say that Makerere University is the summarised Uganda. When we are here in Parliament, this is Uganda summarised. Every profession is here. Regarding the Members that colleagues are talking of, who could be experts in other fields, our rules allow every Member to go and sit on a committee and give assistance or guidance where required.

It is our duty to empower these committees that were established. It is our duty to make sure that these committees are functional. If there is anything that is not right in these committees, it is our role, as Parliament, to guide these committees and make sure that everything moves in the right direction. The more we continue punching holes in committees, the more we are making them fail to work and making them redundant. A time will come when people will start imagining that committees do not function and that they need other committees.

Madam Speaker, my argument is that this committee has people with potential to do the work that we wish them to do. Maybe they need one or two weeks to go and do what they did not do and request those that feel they have expertise in the areas that are required to come in. 

This concerns not only the Committee on Education and Sports but Parliament as well. Therefore, anybody who can give assistance where required can go during those sittings and add value. Help them so that we wait for a report from a committee and not from others who wish to do this and the other.

MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that in the Ninth Parliament, girls who had been trafficked to the Middle East managed to come back home and they petitioned this House. You referred that petition to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and I was on that committee at that time. We interacted with those girls but at some point, they said there were issues that they were not going to disclose to the whole committee. They wanted only the female Members of Parliament and they confided in us. We arranged a day, as the female Members on that committee, and met them and they opened up.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in this case of Makerere University, I believe that if these students are given more time, the female Members of Parliament can attend to the female students and the male members can attend to male students, so that they can open up. 

We, in the teaching profession, say that if a learner is given an assignment or task and does not do it well, they are given a remedial. In this case, I think we should give this committee a remedial to do, so that they come with better work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are really saying the same thing. We have agreed that we give the Committee on Education and Sports another fortnight to try and reach those children and file a report. We shall not add any other member but the chairperson and the committee will decide if they need additional resources. If they do, the resources are available. Thank you very much. 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a committee, we receive your instructions with humility. However, just for the record, I would like to emphasise that we will try the same measures we tried and failed; we shall try them differently. 

When we come to you, we will come for support, so kindly receive us. However, at the end of the day, let Members be ready to receive and deal with what we shall have found, not what they want us to find.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
