Wednesday, 7 December 2016

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to appeal to you to work expeditiously so that we can complete the matters which are on the Order Paper today. We shall soon be going for the Christmas recess and so we want to try and finish as much as possible before we take a break. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ELECTIONS FOR LOCAL COUNCILS AND COUNCILORS FOR WORKERS

2.21
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen.(Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my statement, I would like to apologise for my absence yesterday. I did not mean to vex the House but I informed your people that I would not be available. It seems there was lack of communication as they did not inform you. I am sorry that I was not here yesterday.

Madam Speaker, according to Article 181 of the Constitution, the five-year term of the lower local councils was supposed to expire before the 2006 elections. However, in 2005, by virtue of Article 290 of the Constitution, the term of the lower local councils was extended to expire at the same time as the term of the President in May 2006. The purpose of the extension was for the general elections to be held at the same time for the President, Parliament and local government councils. Article 61(2) and (3) of the Constitution were therefore amended to reflect this.

However, before any local government council elections could be held as envisaged by Article 61 of the Constitution, Constitutional Petition No.21 of 2006 was instituted by Rubaramira Ruranga, challenging the constitutionality of the laws relating to the conduct of the elections of local government councils. The Constitutional Court held that certain provisions of the Local Governments Act were inconsistent with the Constitution, especially those relating to the elections, since they did not reflect the multiparty political system. However, the court was emphatic on the need to amend the Local Governments Act before any elections could be validly held.

In 2007, following the judgment of the Constitutional Court, the Electoral Commission suspended the elections in respect of the administrative units (village and parish/ward) pending the amendment of the laws affected by the judgment of the Constitutional Court. The Local Governments Act was amended by Parliament in 2008 to address the matters declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court in Petition No.21 of 2006. 

Further amendments were made in 2010 to the Electoral Commission Act, which required the Electoral Commission to provide paper copies and electronic copies of the updated voters’ register to the political parties and organisations taking part in the elections (Section 18A of Cap 140).

The cost of complying with this provision was unbearable. Therefore, in order to reduce the cost of holding the elections, Parliament made further amendments to the Local Governments Act in 2013 and lastly in 2015 to introduce lining up behind a candidate at the time of the elections, which is one of the ways permitted by Article 68(6) of the Constitution. In order to facilitate the Electoral Commission to organise the elections, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has now released the required funds for the elections. 

As you are aware, Madam Speaker, under articles 61 and 67 of the Constitution, it is the mandate of the Electoral Commission to organise elections. However, the term of the Electoral Commission having expired, there is currently no Electoral Commission constituted to execute the constitutional mandate of organising elections. I must say I am very grateful to you, Madam Speaker, for approving the nominees and we are in the process of constituting the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, the President – this one has been overtaken by events – after recognising the importance of a fully constituted Electoral Commission and exercising the power vested in him by Article 60 of the Constitution, nominated persons to be appointed members of the Electoral Commission. The list of persons nominated by the President has been approved by Parliament before they can be appointed by the President in fulfilment of Article 60 of the Constitution. Now that they have been approved, they are going to be appointed. 

Since it is only the Electoral Commission which is mandated to conduct elections, the dates for holding elections at administrative units and in respect of councillors for workers can only be set when the Electoral Commission is fully constituted and appointed as required by Article 60 of the Constitution. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Yesterday we received assurance from the Ministry of Local Government that they are ready for those elections. Anyway, we have done our part, the rest is for the Government now.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. One, since the commissioners have been approved by Parliament, when does he hope that he can liaise with them to come up with a comprehensive timetable and furnish it to this Parliament?

Secondly, has he liaised with his colleague, the Minister for Local Government, to bring any regulations or amendments that are required in the law for us to have this exercise done once and for all? When he does so, can he again report back to this Parliament? 

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and I would also like to seek clarification. 

When he talks about local councils, does it also include the women councils? As we are all aware, women council elections have not yet taken place. We also have the youth, disability and older persons’ councils. Therefore, I would like to know whether this election will take care of the women councils. Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember in the Ninth Parliament, Members tried to debate the mode of voting. Some Members suggested that it should be done through lining up and the Electoral Commission said it was very expensive to use the ballot paper. 

I would, therefore, like to find out from the honourable minister if he can clarify that issue to this House. This is because our voters are asking us questions because they heard that the voting will be done through lining up. 

THE SPEAKER: I thought that was a settled matter. Didn’t we enact that law?

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out from the honourable minister whether we are going to have new LCI areas created. There are so many demands for more expansion and separation of some LCs; I wonder whether it will take place in the forthcoming LCI elections.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like to start with the last question. It is not prudent for us to start creating new administrative units at this stage, when we are about to hold elections. Once we start, then the division will be ad infinitum and we shall not hold the elections as required, considering the fact that they have been delayed for a very long time. It is expensive to start with the divisions and it may cause unnecessary delay, which is not envisaged.

Secondly, the issue of lining up has been sorted out by the law. Thirdly, as to whether elections for women and workers councils will be held together with the LCI elections, I will have to consult with my colleague, the minister responsible for those departments, and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I will consult with them to see whether there is sufficient provision for holding those elections at the same time. That is desirable, but I do not know whether it will be possible. 

As for the municipal councils, that is a major election which involves campaigns and it cannot be held together with the local council elections. An appropriate time will be set aside for holding those elections -(Interjection)- I have talked about holding elections of the women councils, PWDs and workers. I will harmonise them with the minister responsible for that portfolio and we shall see whether we can do it together. Like I said, it is desirable that those elections be put together so that we put them behind us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ACTION PLAN FOR THE MITIGATION OF THE DISASTROUS FOOD INSECURITY SITUATION IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture. He is not here. Let us go to item No.4.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I will not get tired of pointing this out: this is a Parliament of the people of Uganda, which has serious business to consider. The Order Paper is sent out in advance and I know the responsible ministers, wherever they are, should be in a position to watch and come in time. 

I can assure you and the whole House that not all members of Cabinet are in Cabinet. I do not want to be their spokesperson but what is true is that unless action is taken, this will continue to bog us down. 

Madam Speaker, do not allow this House to be taken lightly. If we proceed in this manner, we shall end up having no sittings at all. The ministers are always here and yesterday, you directed Members to be in the House today so that we can transact business. Where are they?

Madam Speaker, again- (Interruption) 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, whereas hon. Theodore Ssekikubo is justified to complain, allow me to inform you that today there is a Cabinet meeting taking place at Entebbe - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you directed the ministers to come to this House. Our Rules of Procedure stipulate that if the concerned minister is not present, your Office will be notified. 

Is it procedurally right for the minister, who is a veteran in this House and knows our Rules of Procedure, to attempt to inform our Speaker without following the right procedure? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not receive notification from any of the others that they are not coming. I, therefore, expect the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come to this House in the next one hour so that he attends to our business. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, as I speak, all the ministers are on their way to the House. I hope they will be here to answer for themselves. I thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the acting Leader of the Opposition to help me lay the papers on the Table. Can’t you lay the papers from the Government side? (Laughter)

2.37
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, the effect will be the same. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following subcounty reports and opinions of the Auditor-General for the financial years ended 2011 and 2012:
    i) Simu Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    ii) Namisuni Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    iii) Awei Subcounty, Alebtong District
    iv) Lusha Subcounty, Bugiri District
    v) Lwamata Subcounty, Kiboga District
    vi) Kapeka Subcounty, Kiboga District
    vii) Nawayango Subcounty, Kamuli District
    viii) Muwanga Subcounty, Kiboga District
    ix) Masira Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    x) Nyero Subcounty, Kumi District
    xi) Lodiko Subcounty, Kaabong District
    xii) Kapir Subcounty, Ngora District
    xiii) Acowa Subcounty, Amuria District
    xiv) Bulago Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    xv) Bumasobo Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    xvi) Wattuba Subcounty, Kiboga District
    xvii) Bwikhonge Subcounty, Bulambuli District
    xviii) Bukomero Subcounty, Kiboga District
    xix) Okungur Subcounty, Amuria District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. They are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. We will defer the Prime Minister’s Question Time until he arrives.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS AND PROPERTIES

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I remember very well that yesterday you directed the minister to come to the House so that this critical and important report is debated in his presence. This is why the debate yesterday stalled. I beg to draw your attention to the fact that the same thing is happening today; the minister is not here.

THE SPEAKER: We will defer it until they come from Cabinet. Let us go to item No.7.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST 	BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 64.44 MILLION (US$91.0 MILLION) 	FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UA 42.50 MILLION (USD 60.0 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND TO SUPPORT THE MULTINATIONAL UGANDA/RWANDA BUSEGA-MPIGI AND KAGITUMBA-KAYONZA-RUSAMO ROADS PROJECT

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, our business today is all based on the presence of our ministers. From the Front Bench, even after your directive yesterday, we are being told that the ministers are on the way and within 30 minutes they will all be here. I am wondering whether we will be proceeding well if we proceed in the absence of the necessary ministers, who are supposed to take note of the concerns and the debate in the House. Would it not be necessary that we adjourn the House for 30 minutes and if they do not come, we can then take other steps?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are here with our ears; let us listen to the report. If by the time the chairperson finishes reading the report they will not have come, we will then take a decision. Most importantly, we are here with our ears in this House. Please, proceed.

2.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow Units of Account (UA) 64.44 million, which is an equivalent of US$ 91 million, from the African Development Bank and UA 42.50 million, equivalent to US$ 60 million, from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Busega-Mpigi Road project.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:
    1. A copy of the signed report;
    2. The signed minutes;
    3. The brief on the proposal;
    4. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) report on the project;
    5. Complete file containing donor funded projects by UNRA;
    6. The National Transport Master Plan;
    7. The project and appraisal report;
    8. The project financial performance;
    9. The Project Implementation Plan;
    10. Project Procurement Plan.

Madam Speaker, by way of introduction, this loan request was presented to Parliament and was referred to the committee under rule 166 (2) (b) on the 20 September 2016. We scrutinised the request using the following methodology, indicated in paragraph No.2: We held meetings, we studied documents and –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, before you go on, I would like clarification on whether this is the Busega-Mpigi and Kagitumba-Kayonza-Rusomo project.

MS BBUMBA: Yes, it is part of it. This is the first phase – the Busega–Mpigi Express Highway. It is part of the longer route connecting to Katuna. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, by way of background, the provision of an efficient road network has been an important focus and key ingredient in the development efforts of African governments and the donor community in the recent years. Therefore, Government has accorded significant importance to the provision of a sound and a well-coordinated transportation system.

The Busega-Mpigi Expressway project is located in central Uganda and forms part of the northern corridor. The existing Busega-Mpigi Road is currently a two-lane tarmac road with one lane in each direction. It is highly congested, especially at Busega, with over 20,000 vehicles per day. The road links to Rwanda and Tanzania and will entail the construction of a new four-lane express highway of 23.7 kilometres, 20 kilometres of two-lane link/service roads, 12 kilometres of interchange loops and 8 kilometres of auxiliary lanes.

The project is aligned to the country’s strategy as indicated in paragraphs No. 4. Paragraph No. 5 gives the project objective. The sector goal of the project is to contribute to socio-economic development, poverty reduction and regional integration through an improved and sustainable transport system that links centres of economic activity.

The project objectives are: to contribute to improving road transportation and trade facilitation, and also to stimulate and spur local economic activities. The expected outcomes are given in the table under paragraph No. 5.1, and the project description and components are given under paragraph No. 5.2, where we have a detailed breakdown.

Under paragraph No. 6, we have the project cost and financing arrangements. The cost estimate of the Busega-Mpigi Road project is 136.13 units of account, which is equivalent to Shs 629.65 billion. The project cost by components and source of finances are shown in table 2 in the report. 

Financing

The Mpigi-Busega Road project will be financed by the African Development Bank (ADB), the African Development Fund (ADF) and the Government of Uganda. The financing from the African Development Bank of 64.44 units of account, equivalent to US$ 91 million, is going to cover 47.34 per cent of the total project cost. 

The financing from the African Development Fund resource under the ADF performance based allocation and the ADF regional cooperation envelope, of UA 42.5 million, equivalent to US$ 65 million, is to cover 31.22 per cent of the total project cost. The Government of Uganda will finance 21.44 per cent of the total project cost, amounting to UA 29.19 million. 

The sources of financing are itemised under table No. 3. Madam Speaker, the construction of the new four-lane Busega-Mpigi Express Highway takes the highest share of the total project cost, followed by compensations. 

Government of Uganda will provide counterpart funds equivalent to UA 29.19 million, which is 21.44 per cent of the total project cost, for implementation of the resettlement action plan in order to implement the entire construction of the new Busega-Mpigi Express Highway.

The loan terms are given under paragraph No. 7. The African Development Bank loan has a repayment period of 25 years with a grace period of eight years. The ADF loan has got a repayment period of 40 years with a grace period of 10 years. The interest is also indicated. The loan conditions are stated under paragraph 7.2. 

Paragraph No. 7.3 gives the effect of the loan on the current debt situation of the country. Madam Speaker, the loan will, without doubt, increase our total nominal public debt that is currently at US$ 7.4 billion as at the end of November 2016. External debt contributes 59.2 per cent of the total debt and the local debt contributes 40.5 per cent. The last debt sustainability assessment review revealed that in both the medium and long-term, Uganda’s public and publically guaranteed external and domestic debt is sustainable and is not under debt stress when subjected to the stress test.

Paragraph No. 8 is about the implementation arrangements. Uganda National Roads Authority will be the executing agency and the Executive Director of UNRA will be the accounting officer. The project will be implemented over a period of three years beginning 2018. It will be a toll road and UNRA will procure the operator under a toll arrangement.

Madam Speaker, paragraph No. 9 gives the observations and recommendations: 

1. 	The committee observes that the functionality and operation of Busega-Mpigi Expressway appears to be heavily dependent on the availability of the Kibuye-Busega section of the road. Otherwise, no traffic will be able to access the Busega-Mpigi Expressway since the existing Kibuye-Natete-Busega Road is heavily congested.

The committee recommends that the Kibuye-Busega section of the express highway be fast tracked to ensure that the two road sections are completed at the same time, to derive benefits from the high capacity Busega-Mpigi Express Highway and decongest the city.

Madam Speaker, as we all know, there is a lot of congestion from Kitgum House up to Busega and yet this road also joins in at Busega. We thought that there is urgent need for Government to decongest this part of the city in order to feed into the road that is going to be implemented in this project.

2. 	The committee further observes that it has been proposed that the project road is tolled in a bid to supplement the operation and maintenance costs, yet the study to assess the willingness of the road users to pay and how much they are willing to pay has not been concluded.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the study be expedited to provide guidance on users’ willingness to pay and how much users are willing to pay to enable proper structuring of the operation and maintenance arrangements and location of toll pay points.

3. 	The committee further observed that whereas it is proposed that the project road is tolled, there is no legal framework for tolling in the country, which is likely to create challenges in operating the new express highway.

This does not only affect the Busega-Mpigi Express Highway but also the Entebbe Express Highway. It is going to be a toll road and yet we do not have road toll legislation in place yet.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport fast tracks the preparation and approval of the tolling policy and tolling legislation to be brought to Parliament for consideration. Government should come up with a toll pay legislation to be considered expeditiously.

4. 	The committee observed that like the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, progress of works for this particular project are likely to be affected by land acquisition issues in the road corridor relating to delays in compensation of land owners.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that strategies for timely and expeditious land compensation, relocation of utilities and project affected persons on sections of the road be handled expeditiously in advance of the construction works.  This should be done to pre-empt any contractor claims of costs and time lost due to lack of unhindered access to the site.

Furthermore, the committee recommends that all valuation for project-affected persons should be done before the loan requests are made to Parliament. This is a general recommendation for all infrastructure projects. We are getting delays because the valuations are done late and compensations are not done in a timely manner, which affects the implementation of infrastructure projects.

The committee further recommends that all future valuations of project-affected persons should be done before loan requests are made to Parliament.

5. 	The committee observed that currently, there is weak local contractor capacity, which results in all the projects being executed by foreign firms and construction materials being sourced from foreign countries. This results in loss of jobs and increased unemployment in the country.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should put in place a policy to promote the development of the local construction industry through reservation schemes and/or prescriptions that all locally available materials should be sourced locally. This will enable us get reasonable local content from these projects.

The committee further recommends that the further training of Ugandan engineers and nurturing in ethics of business, to reduce reliance on externally sourced consultancy services, should be emphasised. Sources of long-term funding to facilitate acquisition of equipment should also be explored. This is because most of our local contractors are struggling; they cannot borrow money easily and even for those who can, the money on the market is not commensurate with the kind of assets they would like to acquire. 

6. 	Madam Speaker, the committee noted that there was a problem of lack of centralised planning where different infrastructure development initiatives by different ministries and agencies such as roads, water, electricity, etc. are executed independently without central coordination. The result is conflicts in designs and duplicate costs for land acquisition.

The committee recommends the following: 
    a) UNRA should complete the wayleaves acquisition process before engagement of contractors. This will minimise redundancy of equipment on site and possible interest charges on the idle equipment. 

    b) Government should consider acquiring a central corridor for infrastructure projects to reduce on repeated compensation whenever infrastructure projects are implemented to accommodate, among others, power lines, water pipes, communication infrastructure and road reserves.

    c) Furthermore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should expedite the rollout of the World Bank funded project on electronic land registry and preparation of standard valuations for different parts of the country. Valuation today depends on the mood of the valuer as there are no standard rates. 

    d) As a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should enhance the capacity of the valuation department, which is now too thinly manned, to cope with the demand for land valuation especially for infrastructure development. We are told that in the valuer’s office, there are only two other valuers and at the moment, there are so many infrastructure projects going on but the work is delayed because of lack of personnel. 

    e) Following what happened when the Government Chief Valuer and UNRA disagreed on the valuation amount along the Entebbe Express Highway, which led to the diversion of the road, Government should consider setting up a land ombudsman to arbitrate in cases where there is disagreement in land valuation. 

The Entebbe Express Highway stalled for about seven months while they sorted out the dispute on the valuation between what the Chief Government Valuer was giving and what UNRA felt was the reasonable amount.

    f) The committee recommends that the National Planning Authority should coordinate infrastructure development across the country, to ensure that all planned infrastructure development initiatives are well harmonised to avoid Government incurring unnecessary repeated costs.

7. 	The committee further noted that whereas land is acquired for various infrastructure projects, it appears there is no one taking keen interest in safeguarding Government property. This results into people encroaching on Government property and being compensated several times. 

The committee recommends that all land acquired by Government be titled to reflect that the land belongs to Government, and acquired land for infrastructure corridors be monitored to prevent encroachment. 

Madam Speaker, based on those recommendations, the committee has noted Government’s continued development of Uganda’s infrastructure with greater focus on roads. The status of Uganda’s infrastructure still requires improvement to meet the aspirations of Vision 2040. Government has undertaken reforms in the roads subsector, which are expected to lead to improvement in the state of national roads and better utilisation of resources allocated to the sector. 

The construction of the Busega-Mpigi Expressway, for which this financing is sought, will enhance regional connectivity, decongest Kampala City and accelerate economic growth. The committee, therefore, recommends that the request for Government to borrow UA 64.44 million, equivalent to US$ 91 million, from the African Development Bank, and UA 42.50 million, equivalent to US$ 60 million, from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group, for financing the Busega-Mpigi Express Highway Project be approved, subject to the above recommendations. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Honourable members, this loan request is from the Government but I do not know whether they are interested in it. The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Works and Transport are not yet here. Perhaps they have no interest in this loan request.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, the ministers you have just mentioned are expected to be here. There was a Cabinet meeting in Entebbe but they are on their way. However, we are here and since issues of land were raised, I am here. Let it not be said that there was nobody to answer some of the questions that have been raised. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is comforting to know that the honourable minister is saying he is able to answer questions, but we would like to know whether he is officially in position to answer on behalf of the ministries responsible for finance and transport as you had earlier proposed.

In the event that it is not possible, and which is the truth, probably we could go to the next item on the agenda and come back to this. Otherwise, the honourable minister just wants to comfort the House that he is able to handle all these sectors. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he said that he is available for his sector. However, let us receive the next report and if by then they have not come, we shall go for holiday. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$ 11.5 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND US$ 11.5 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE LUWEERO-BUTALANGU ROAD PROJECT

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow US$ 11.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and US$ 11.5 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) to finance the upgrading of the Luweero-Butalangu Road.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table the following documents:
    1. Signed minutes
    2. The valuation report and survey report
    3. The National Development Plan II compliance
    4. The RAP report
    5. The resettlement action plan; and 
    6. The project appraisal documents. 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with rule 166 (2)(b), this request was submitted to our committee for scrutiny. We followed the methodology indicated in paragraph No. 2 where we interacted with Government agencies and studied several documents, which are indicated there.

Paragraph No. 3 gives the background to this. It is more or less the same background for the loan, which I have just presented. Both of them are on the road sector. This proposal is also aligned to the country’s strategy. 

Paragraph No. 4.1 gives the performance of projects under UNRA. The performance has not been very good because of the slow absorption of loans due to delays in accessing counterpart funds for compensations as well as evaluation. 

Madam Speaker, following that, our committee has come up with very strict guidelines to be followed by Government whenever they are presenting loans for scrutiny: 

First, we want evidence from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the counterpart funds will be provided. We want firm commitment and even proof in the budget that this money has been ring-fenced. We also want evidence to show that they are in line with the national plan. We also want evidence to show that the evaluation, procurement plans and other plans are in place in order to minimise the delays which have characterised earlier borrowings.

Madam Speaker, we are very strict with those guidelines and that is why we have taken quite a while without bringing these loan requests. We had to make sure that all of them comply. We hope that these guidelines will cure those weaknesses. Paragraph No. 5 gives the project objectives, which are: to upgrade the road to bitumen level, improve access to economically productive areas as well as stimulate and support local economic activities.

Madam Speaker, the project outcomes are given under paragraph No.6 and the description of the project is covered under paragraph No.7. The key components of the project are given under table No. 2, where they are broken down into detail. 

Under paragraph No.8, we cover the project costs. Civil and ancillary works will take 76.68 per cent while consultancy services for construction will take 3.45 per cent. Project implementation unit support will take one per cent, land acquisition will take 5.84 per cent, physical contingencies will take six per cent and price escalations will cover seven per cent. Madam Speaker, from the above, the bulk of the money is going for civil and ancillary works. 

Project Financing 

As I have already indicated, this project will be funded from three sources: the OPEC Fund for International Development will fund 46.65 per cent of the total cost; the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) will also cover 46.65 per cent; while the Government of Uganda will fund 6.7 per cent of the project cost. 

The terms are given under table No.5. The loan conditions are clearly stipulated in paragraph No. 9.2. Paragraph No. 9.3 covers the concessionality of the loan. The BADEA loan is fully concessional and the OFID loan is near concessional.

With regard to project readiness, all these reports are pointers to the project readiness. Therefore, we think that the project is ready to move as soon as the loan is approved. The current debt status was already discussed in the previous loan request; I do not have to repeat it. 

The Implementation Arrangements 

Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is going to be the implementing agency, with the Executive Director of UNRA as the accounting officer.

Observations and Recommendations

The Cost of the Loan

The committee observed that part of the source of financing, from the OPEC Fund for International Development, is near concessional. This implies that the project must generate revenue in the medium term to Government, as required by the Public Debt Management Framework.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Government should, as much as possible, source appropriate financing consistent with the Public Debt Management Framework for projects whose financial returns are in the longer term. 

Effects on Debts Sustainability 

The committee recommends that Government should review its export strategy to substantially increase its export base in the medium term, to safeguard against external shocks and be able to increase its ability to repay external debt. In addition, Government should step up its efforts in domestic revenue collection.

Land Acquisition

The committee recommends that strategies for timely and expeditious land compensation as well as relocation of utilities/project affected persons be done expeditiously and a central corridor be acquired. 

The recommendations on the local contractor capacity and completion of wayleaves are the same as those we gave in the previous loan request. Therefore, the rest of the recommendations are the same as those given in the loan request which I presented before.

Madam Speaker, based on that, the committee noted Government’s continued development of Uganda’s infrastructure with more focus on the road infrastructure. The status of Uganda’s road infrastructure still needs a lot of improvement to meet the aspirations of Vision 2040. Government has taken reforms to restructure UNRA and we hope it will deliver results. 

The construction of the Luweero-Butalangu Road is one of the strategic focuses of the National Transport Development Strategy, meant to enhance socio-economic development and poverty alleviation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the request for Government to borrow US$ 11.5 million from the Arab Bank of Economic Development for Africa and US$ 11.5 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development to finance the upgrading of the Luweero-Butalangu Road project be approved, subject to the above recommendations. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy.

Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum of one-third. However, I note that the recommendations right from yesterday are basically the same. Therefore, let us have comments for about 30 minutes and go to other business. You can comment on either of the two loans but only for three minutes.

3.16
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report that has been presented. 

The issue of local content is always coming up and it is high time we began thinking about our people so that when these contractors come, they are able to train our people to maintain this infrastructure. This is because on many occasions when they leave, they leave with everything. They come with their people and everything. 

I would like to propose that we come up with a regulation or policy on local content that can specify the percentage or quotas of how many Ugandans take up jobs in these infrastructure projects. That is my proposal.

I also want to support the chairperson on the issue of Government’s contribution. Usually, these loans are passed but Government delays the whole project and we take long to complete, and yet we are supposed to pay back the loans. It is critical that Government takes its responsibility seriously.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson has just talked about the road tolls. We know that the construction of the Entebbe Express Highway is going on, but the policy about the way we are going to pay the toll on that road is not yet very clear. The minister responsible should come up and clarify immediately so that we can discuss this. This is because it is going to have a cost. Otherwise, I support the motion. Thank you.

3.18
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for the report. 

In the Eighth Parliament, when we passed the loan request for the Entebbe Express Highway, it was envisaged that it would come with two other projects - the Mpigi-Kibuye extension and also most importantly, the connection from the Munyonyo spur to Jinja Highway. Whereas I am happy it has finally come after 10 years, I am wondering what is happening to Jinja Road.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if Uganda does not build capacity for local content in terms of construction companies at this point in time when we have dams and roads being constructed by the Chinese, then we will have completely relegated that responsibility as a Government. If we do not use Muko now and we continue having steel, when we have the Standard Gauge railway and dams, from elsewhere, we will have abdicated our responsibility as citizens to have that capacity. You will never get it again and you will continue to look for the same companies to come and rehabilitate. Can we break down these contracts so that we can have subcontracting to a level of maybe 15 to 20 per cent? That is the way other countries do it.

The other point is about compensation. Government has up to now refused to work as one government. This has been mentioned by the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure many times: can we get wayleaves for multi purposes? You can see now in Kibuye direction from Mpigi, transmission lines have just been acquired and tomorrow it will be something else. Why don’t we do that?

Finally, and not on selfish grounds, I have seen all these loan requests for roads in Uganda but Buliisa, which has a road to the border and an alternative one to West Nile, where you are going to get the oil to pay off most of these loans you are borrowing now, does not have a road anywhere. We are going to pay a lot of money in recoverable costs. A container from Kampala to Buliisa is going to cost the same amount as one from Mombasa because we have done our own roads but forgotten the roads where you are going to get the oil from. 

Buliisa has given you timber, it has Kinyara Sugar Works and it contributes to fish exports; why don’t you make our road a priority? It is unfortunate that we are doing roads elsewhere. However, the tourism road to Bunyoro, the Lake Albert road, the alternative road to West Nile, the road to Congo, the shortcut if you wanted multi-module transport through Packwach to Nimule in Sudan is the Buliisa Road but Government has not found it a priority. Every time it comes, there is an excuse for not doing it. 

As a country, we will pay a very high price in terms of recoverable costs because we have not found it a priority to make a road where over 600 oil wells are located. We are instead making roads where people are drying cassava on the roads and cows are now moving on the tarmac. Can I make a plea to Government that we make Buliisa Road a priority? I will not support any other loan in future unless I see this road being done. Thank you very much.

3.22
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first appreciate the committee and more so the chairperson; I think she has enough experience because she has handled this well. Secondly, allow me to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Front Bench; from nowhere, the Front Bench is now full. I appreciate the fact that the ministers are now present to answer our queries.

Madam Speaker, I am here to support the recommendations of the committee but with a few observations to make. One, you talked about the safety zones with our borrowing. Earlier when I tried to rise on a point of procedure, I did not want to shoot down the report but to ask you to do one thing: You should always come with details in terms of figures. We should know if we are really safe to borrow more and by what figures or percentage. That is what I am talking about. The bar should be seen by everybody. If we are left with Shs 1 billion to borrow next, everybody should be able to know so that we are safe. 

We do not want to over borrow blindly. It is as if in Uganda everything is about borrowing time and again. When are you bringing a comprehensive report that will show us how much we have spent locally and how much we have got in terms of debts? Those are the details we want. Otherwise, the committee is doing its work; press on. I will be supporting you.

Madam Speaker, there is a road in Kumi, from Kumi Town via the new ferry at Bisina connecting to Toroma and Katakwi; that road needs serious tarmac. There are tourists who are warming up to go to those places but you are delaying with the tarmacking of that road. I also demand that you do something for us so that next time, we just support the loan requests, otherwise we shall lock up the gate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.25
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I moved to the Table because I have one or two documents that I would like to read to the House.

Madam Speaker, as you could be aware, the committee I happen to lead is currently dealing with the Auditor-General’s reports covering many entities including the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). What is going on in that committee leaves a lot to be desired on the part of the entire sector, especially UNRA.

Madam Speaker, we are dealing with Kampala–Entebbe Expressway, the most expensive road in the world - 54 kilometres costing us $475 million. Not anywhere in the world do we have that kind of costing for a road?

Madam Speaker, one issue which is relevant about this loan request – the rest will wait for the committee report – is that when we asked the contractors how they were procured, their response was that this process was approved by Parliament when approving the loan. We have found it very hard to reconcile with that response. Parliament is now being blamed by the contractors, saying that we actually knew, and it is on record. 

Madam Speaker, as we pass these loan requests, I would like to caution colleagues that we need to be sure of the procurement processes. We passed the loan request and eventually what Ministry of Works and Transport has been doing is actually turning into a procurement agency against all rules of procedure and against all rules of procurement. 

Madam Speaker, I have four documents here. There is a big war going on between Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA. Allow me to read one letter and the response so that you know the magnitude of this problem. 

On 18 April 2016, the Minister of Works and Transport wrote the following letter to the Executive Director of UNRA: “I refer to the meeting which took place at State House on Thursday chaired by His Excellency the President and attended, among others, by myself and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. 

The meeting agreed that the above captioned project - which is Kibuye-Busega express project - revert back to Export-Import Bank of China under the current upgrading of Kampala–Entebbe Expressway.

This is, therefore, to instruct you to start processing the addendum to the contract to incorporate the construction and upgrading of Kibuye-Busega Road.” 

There is a different project financed differently and the procurement has gone on, which is very irregular because it is the one we are now considering. Now the minister is instructing UNRA to amend the other contract and add on this particular project, against the rules of procurement.

Madam Speaker, on the 26th of April, the Executive Director of UNRA wrote back rebuking the Minister of Works and Transport. It is a very long letter. I do not know whether I should read it.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should read it so that we can understand where the problem is. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: It says, “Reference is made to your letter dated 8th of April. In the said letter, you raised the following issues: processing the addendum for the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway contract to incorporate the construction and upgrading of another road, the Kibuye-Busega Road; offer of CCCC to pre-finance land compensation…” – Can you imagine, now even for land compensation, the contractor is the one trying to do that; this is the sort of thing hon. Mukitale was talking about – “…and acquisition of the right of way for one year at the cost of $ 40 million. The contractor pledged to assist Government in securing $ 229 million from Exim Bank of China. 

Uganda National Roads Authority welcomes this report. However, I would like to draw your attention to the following legal challenges: 

1. 	Statutory Instrument No. 14 of 2014, the PPDA (Contracts) Regulations, rule 55, section 4 states that a single contract amendment shall not increase the total contract price by more than 15 per cent of the original contract price. Section 5 states that where a contract is amended more than once, the cumulative value of all contract amendments shall not increase the total contract price by more 25 per cent.

The contract for the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway already has two addenda - one signed for utility location of $3.5 million and the second is being processed for the Kakungulu interchange and lighting the remaining section of the express highway of $42 million. If the second addendum is signed, the cumulative increase of the original contract price will be 9.5 per cent. This means that 15.5 per cent is remaining on the contract for the addenda.

The proposed new addendum is $229 million, representing 48 per cent of the original contract price and can, therefore, not be processed because doing so contravenes provision of the PPDA Act as highlighted above. 

We have explored the use of direct procurement method, which is provided for in the PPDA Act. However, the law provides for stringent conditions for the use of direct procurement as reproduced below….” The Executive Director is trying to explain why they cannot go ahead with the minister’s instruction of direct procurement of this particular contractor. 

The letter goes on: “Direct procurement is a sole source procurement method for procurement requirements where exceptional circumstances prevent the use of competition. Direct procurement is only used to achieve efficient and timely procurement where the circumstances do not permit a competitive method.

The proposed procurement does not fulfil these above conditions neither the law because there are no exceptional circumstances to prevent competition, and sole sourcing is not the most efficient method of procurement. The fourth schedule of the PPDA…”  She goes ahead and it is quite long, honourable members. Let me leave out the law and go to substance, which reads thus: 

“The proposed procurement of Kibuye-Busega road works does not satisfy the requirements above. While subsection (1) (b) rules out the application of 2, 3 and 4 to justify direct procurement because the original contract of Kampala-Entebbe Expressway was not procured through competitive processes and value of additional work exceeds 15 per cent.” The point here is that even the contract they are wishing to amend and add as an addendum was not procured through a competitive process; it was just a boardroom award. 

The letter goes on: “The letter of CCCC to you and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, copied to UNRA, shows that the estimated cost of constructing the 9.1 kilometres of Kibuye-Busega Road is $229 million, which translates into a unit cost of $25.4 million per kilometre. This cost is two and a half times higher than that of Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, which is about $9.6 million per kilometre.

I am aware this section has major bridge structures as Kampala-Entebbe Expressway but does not and therefore there is no reason why the unit cost should be two and a half times higher. This further undermines the case of direct procurement and justifies the need for competitive bidding. Honourable minister, it is legally impossible to justify direct procurement of CCCC because there is no evidence to show that it is the only company that can assist Government to get funds from the Exim Bank of China or pre-finance land compensation for one year.

I recommend open competitive bidding for this project and indeed any other in order to get competitive rates and comply with the law.

Pursuant to section 8 of the functions of the authority, subsection (1) (c) of the Act, I would like to advise Government against single sourcing of this particular contractor because it is not consistent with the law. The unit cost is too high and it will discredit Government efforts to reduce the unit cost of road construction.”

As we do approve this loan request and get excited that there is another road coming, we need to take into consideration some of these things going on. Honourable members, this is real. I hope the committee took into consideration some of these issues when they brought this report. If they did not, have a second take and ask the relevant questions. This House should not just be a rubberstamp on loans until we examine these projects. (Applause) 

There is a lot of rot going in the road sector. The sector takes more than Shs 1 trillion of our national budget. It is the only sector that takes the biggest chunk of our national budget. If we rush through these processes to approve these loans, eventually the contractor can say, “After all, you approved this loan; even if we do bad things, you are the ones who contracted us.” Parliament is not part of procurement but now that is what they are claiming, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, for this particular one, we have taken it up for investigation. Madam Speaker, we should be ready with the report. The whole thing going on is a little bit more than we can chew as a committee. We have decided we need guidance now from this House. You need to have all the details and guide the committee. Even this small money we have so far recovered, around Shs 46 billion by today, is not the only money that has been misappropriated. Therefore, chairperson of the committee, are you aware that there is a big problem in the procurement of the contractors going to undertake this project?

The information we have, actually, is that the Ministry of Works and Transport has been awarding contracts but uses UNRA to rubberstamp them, like the example being given. This is now being resisted by the current management of UNRA. They have resisted this and they are on a collision course with the ministry.

Secondly, I think later on we shall have to address “Plot 1 Uganda”. “Plot 1 Uganda” is being pleaded in each and every problem: “we agreed at State House; we agreed to this with the President”. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to discuss this matter with the boss because every fraudulent contractor now is pleading “Plot 1 Uganda”. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, maybe eventually as committees, we may need to have audience with “Plot 1” because we have reached an extent where it cannot be explained. For a contractor to come to us and say, “Do not ask us how we got this bid; we did it with the President and we are just assisting you. We can even leave this country” on record, what do you expect a chairperson of the committee to do? What can the chairperson do when they are faced with such a contractor pleading that they got a contract from His Excellency the President? 

Yes, the President has this prerogative to make sure that his Executive runs properly, but let him not turn into a procurement officer because once things go wrong, they plead him and the fountain of honour is dragged into this sort of controversy. The Committee on National Economy, as you scrutinise this project, please take into consideration that the procurement goes correct. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, I am disturbed that it is being said that this House procured the contractor. How could we have approved that when it was not before this House?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, first of all, it does not make legal sense neither does it make common sense. However, what the contractor does is that once you approve this loan and they are the ones who have procured the loan, it is like you have approved their contract –(Interjection)– Yes! Let me tell you why and what is happening.

Madam Speaker, what Government has done and allowed, which is not correct, is having these contractors go look for the money. Once they get the money, they are automatically entitled to the contract because they have sourced the money. Once that happens, then the contract is already given to them. That is what happened with Kampala-Entebbe Expressway. On this particular contract, the feasibility study, the road design and the sourcing of money was done by this particular contractor. Therefore, the contractor to do the road was the same person. So, once you approve the first process, you have approved the entire chain.

There are things happening and you do not want to believe that they happen. That is why you find that this particular road that the Executive Director of UNRA is talking about is going to cost $25.4 million per kilometre. What is this that you are constructing? There is a big war going on.

Madam Speaker, I should have laid these on the Table. I will now lay them on the Table. There is a letter written by the Minister of Works, hon. John Byabagambi, on the 18 April 2016, addressed to the Executive Director of UNRA. There is also her reply dated 18 May 2016, the minister’s other reply dated 5 May and the Executive Director of UNRA’s reply again dated 18 May 2016. I beg to lay.

When you look at the figures - Madam Speaker, I request, and we have discussed this with you, that you give us some time next week at least to brief you on what we have so far done. However, my view about the road sector, honourable members, is that we should go slowly until this Parliament has heard a full debate on the issues, which have riddled that sector, and we will therefore have the necessary direction. (Applause)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is just a point of procedure. In light of the grave revelations by hon. Abdu Katuntu, which tend to show not only exaggerations in costing but also exaggerations in the loan being requested, is it not procedurally right for the chairperson of the committee, who has read the report before us, to clarify as to whether the committee considered the matters hon. Abdu Katuntu has raised in order for us to proceed to debate?

3.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, the sources of funding for the loans I have requested are different; they are from the African Development Bank and African Development Fund. Their procurement methods are different from those of the Exim Bank. They use international competitive bidding. So, there will be no question of a contractor coming and sourcing the money. It is going to be done through international competitive bidding. 

This can be checked with the many infrastructure projects, which are funded by the African Development Bank. On record, projects funded by African Development Bank are the least abused. The other fund from the Arab funders, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and the OPEC Fund for International Development are also subjected to international competitive bidding. They are not limited to a particular country or contractors.

We looked at the cost, especially for the Busega Express Highway, and it has taken us almost three months to discuss this project until we were convinced. The first impression we got without much explanation was that the project was going to cost like $ 5 million per kilometre. We said no, we went back and examined it further and got satisfied that the cost per kilometre would be between $ 1.4 million and $1.5 million. The one for the road to Butalangu is less than a million dollars per kilometre.
 
Therefore, on the basis of that, Madam Speaker, I request colleagues to proceed with these loan requests. The other sources have got their own peculiarity. I thank you. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we are the people responsible for passing loan requests constitutionally. Hearing from our colleague, I do propose that it is prudent that we do reconcile the facts mentioned in the information given before we pass this loan request. 

Isn’t it procedurally right that before Parliament appropriates another amount of money for the same sector, we crosscheck the figures and the statements given on the Floor? It does not take long. What does it cost for a committee to go back and reconcile those facts and bring a credible and comprehensive report before we pass the loan request? (Applause) This does not take long.

From the information given, if true, then we should not just pass this request because the public now perceives us as a rubberstamp institution. Parliament is the only body mandated by the Constitution to pass loans. So why don’t we reconcile these facts and we come out clearly? It takes between two to three days. (Applause) 

Since all the figures and letters are all here, why don’t we stop for two to three days and then we can pass the loan request? Otherwise, it will not be correct, going by the information that has been given, for us to proceed and debate the same and yet we already have some facts and concerns from this House. 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my good friend, hon. James Kakooza, for the proposal. However, as I stated earlier, these are totally different loans, their sources are different – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, can I be given an opportunity?

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS BBUMBA: The sources are different. How are we going to reconcile facts regarding the Butalangu Road that was never procured with the Entebbe Express Highway? These are completely different cases. Let us look at each case on its own merit because these are stand-alone projects. 

Madam Speaker, I beg my colleagues to – (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: My only problem is that the consumer is one – the Ministry of Works and Transport. This means that the same UNRA entity going to implement the project is the same entity complaining. They are saying, please – (Interruption)

MR MARTIAL: I rise on a point of information. Madam Speaker, the fact of the matter is that as our colleague has openly said, there is only one consumer. Now that there is one consumer, let us first have this Entebbe-Busega Road corrected before we can go into other recommendations. 

We have the same problems with Busia-Majanji Road. The construction time has been surpassed; the duration given by the ministry has elapsed and people have waited in vain. When we go on approving loans for the same ministry all the time, it makes the ministry delay the implementation of all these loans that are given out. 

Therefore, we would should give the chairperson and the committee time to go and finish up that matter for approval and then we can allow business to move. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you for that information. On the source of funding, even if I borrowed money from Standard Chartered Bank – (Interjections) - let me first finish my point - or even if I borrowed from Barclays, I will remain the same person going to pay back those loans and nobody else.

The implementing agency that we trust and we created for the purpose of managing that sector for best results is saying that they are being given money that they cannot consume. So if there is a concern, what does it cost to reconcile those figures or rectify that problem so that we all move at the same pace? It does not make a difference if they are loans from the East African Development Bank or the Exim Bank because this is the same Government that is going to pay. It does not matter because they are going to use it on the same road.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I would request - and we shall work around the clock - to present our interim report before the House can go into the business of approving other loans.

Let us consider the problems that have riddled this sector, including the current project, before we can embark on securing others. Otherwise, if we go ahead and approve this particular project, tomorrow they will be doing the same thing without the guidance of this House. So, give us a timeline within which we can produce a report. From there, we can go ahead and start considering further business regarding other new projects.

MR ROBERT MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am actually a member of the Committee on National Economy. 

The information from hon. Katuntu is very welcome. However, one thing that Members should agree with is that as a committee, we had done our work and we are not turning down information. It is wrong for a Member to suggest that the committee should go and complete their work or reconcile facts because that would mean that the figures that the committee is presenting are false. 

Much as we take the information for the sake of progress, Madam Speaker, to be sincere, we have spent three months purposely questioning different things. I will give an example. The brief that was given to Parliament indicated that they were borrowing money to do 23.7 kilometres, which made the unit cost rise to US$ 5 million per kilometre. We had over 10 meetings from which we received more information and documentation showing that there were another 20 kilometres of two lanes for service roads and 12 kilometres of interchange routes. 

We, therefore, appreciate the information given to the committee and I request my chairperson that we should not be seen like we do not want to consume information. Let us take the information, look at it and if it can create any change in our report, let it be so; if it cannot, then let us come back with the same report. (Applause) That is my prayer to the chairperson. I humbly request that we take up this information and we come back.

MR TONNY AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information from hon. Migadde is clear, that when they were given information, they went to the field and discovered that some of it was incorrect. They corrected the information including reducing the cost from $ 5 million to $ 1 million. 

I would like to plead with the chairperson of the committee; as we talk of passing this loan request now, there is a statement that there is a conflict between Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA. Our request is that we should first reconcile the two institutions on those conflicts because the works ministry is already showing conflict of interest in this very project. 

If we pass the loan request like this without checking what the intention of the Ministry of Works and Transport is in relation to reconciling their interests with UNRA, then we are going back to the same problem. We are going to end up with problems in procurement, delays and at the end of the day, this road project will be like the rest.

Therefore, we ask the committee to go back and sort out the confusion between the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA and bring a concrete report so that we know that after passing this loan request, we are not going to have the same kind of problems. This is our prayer and request, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The request by hon. Katuntu, I believe, is in very good faith and consent from hon. Migadde is also correct. However, I would like to make a request. 

Most of the concerns raised by Members have not been brought out. If you checked on the Order Paper, in the business to follow there is an item on performance of loans and debt stock. So, could we agree that before these loans are passed, this Parliament be privy to the performance of all the loans sector by sector? (Applause) The story in the works ministry is not very different from the story in the energy ministry. 

The committee has the report; it is a matter of allowing them one day to present their report and a lot will be revealed on whether there is a problem in the procurement or not. Part of the problem in Karuma was that the procurement was wrong. Do not expect the engineer to supervise a contractor he did not award in the first place. 

Secondly, the letters which have been exchanged here also indict the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The end-user ministry is not the borrower; Government of Uganda borrows through the finance ministry. If it is true that UNRA and Ministry of Works are the ones determining the terms and conditions of loans, that is not an area for the user ministry; that is the mandate of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and economic Development. 

Therefore, I would like the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the committee report on performance of loans, debt sustainability and debt stock, and confirm to this House whether they are still in charge. From what we are seeing, the Ministry of Finance is not in charge. I strongly suspect that it is these contractors who are abusing the bilateral agreements. 

In the Eighth Parliament, we supported bilateral agreements including those with China. However, these bilateral agreements have been abused to the extent that Ministry of Finance is the one handing over contractors to end-user ministries. That is why you are seeing collusion. Otherwise, a bilateral agreement means that Government of Uganda agrees with another government like China on how many billions we will get for all sectors and then the due process takes place. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that we allow the committee to update the Tenth Parliament on the performance of all loans in all sectors and the Ministry of Finance should respond to those concerns. We shall find the problem therein. However, dealing with only this loan will lead us to more mistakes and we shall not get a holistic picture of the mess in that sector. 

MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The request of the Chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) is that this House first receives an interim report on the road sector and probably the other sectors before we approve another loan. I am happy hon. Migadde, who is a member of the committee, concedes that they may need to receive the information being given. 

Let me give an example to support that proposal. The Busega – Mpigi Road project is 23 kilometres of two lanes, plus another 12 kilometres and compensation is going to be Shs 135 billion for this particular project. For the Entebbe Express Highway, which has been talked about a lot, – I remember this from when I was a member of the Committee on National Economy under hon. Mukitale – compensation was Shs 280 billion. For the Northern Bypass, where we are constructing another two lanes, I think compensation is over Shs 80 billion. 

Madam Speaker, before we approve another loan, this Parliament needs to examine the expenditure in the road sector. The funds used for compensation alone can be able to construct twice the number of kilometres being asked from this Parliament. 

In the recent case of Entebbe Express Highway, we learnt that the Government valuer had said we needed to compensate Shs 39 billion for a piece of rock. Even with this Busega-Mpigi Express Highway, I think if someone examines the compensation alone of Shs 135 billion, which could construct that highway, you would find that the beneficiaries in most cases are the same people. 

The owner of the rock on Entebbe Express Highway has already procured a big chunk of land just next to my residence in Bweyogerere where the Southern Bypass will pass and he is waiting for compensation. They told me that even in Jinja, he already has a piece of land within the road passage. There is connivance, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KUTEESA: I want to give information to my honourable colleague. This is not new and happens only in Uganda where land belongs to the people. I have been reading about many things, but people do not own land; they lease it. Three years back in Kenya, they were making a road and the Chief of Defence Forces then had land in a road reserve. They asked him to remove his house or they would remove it for him and send him the bills. The man had to remove it. 

In Uganda, people find a place next to the road and put up a hut, then ask for billions of shillings. Can’t we have a way out of this? Compensation is three times the cost of a kilometre. Those who want to can go and research on what I am saying. Thank you. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you can clearly see that there is connivance between those who design the roads and the Government officials. How can one person know that there is going to be a road project called Entebbe Express Highway, so he rushes to buy a piece of land and he claims Shs 39 billion in compensation and the same person already owns land in Bweyogerere where the Southern Bypass will be constructed, and he also has land where the Jinja Expressway will be constructed? How does he know that these projects are coming up and he begins acquiring land? 

Madam Speaker, until we sort out this connivance, and the report of COSASE will help here, we should temporarily halt discussions on these loan requests especially for the roads. Let us first deal with the report of COSASE and then we can revisit the loan requests. For this Parliament to keep quiet as people are stealing billions of money – Just imagine a piece of rock going for Shs 39 billion! If I got that, I would never need to work again; just one piece of rock! 

Madam Speaker, I stand in support of the proposal that we first receive the report of COSASE on this sector and then we deal with the sector before we send more money there. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you wanted to say something. 

4.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has been quite interesting to listen to this debate. In fact, I would like to share some information I have about some of these roads that are in controversy. 

First, there is the Entebbe Express Highway, the conflict between UNRA and the minister and the challenges of decision-making on contracts by “Plot No.1, Uganda”. (Laughter) I would like to inform my dear brother, hon. Katuntu, that the controversy of Kibuye-Busega Road and some of the letters you quoted were resolved long time ago, well after the date you have talked about. 

The President called a meeting specifically on this road about three months ago. The road was thoroughly discussed at State House in a meeting that was attended by the finance ministry, myself, UNRA and all the parties concerned. The decision was that because of this controversy and because of the exorbitant amount of money quoted per kilometre, Uganda should advertise this road. We did agree that because the money comes from China, it would be advertised among Chinese companies, instead of the road being tied to one specific company whose quotations were very high. 

Therefore, I would like to state, Madam Speaker, that the matter raised by Ndugu Katuntu is already a resolved matter. I expect advertisements to be running now, looking for a competent company to do the job.

THE SPEAKER: So you are going to advertise in China for Chinese companies?

DR RUGUNDA: I will answer that. Because the money is being got specifically from China – (Interjections) – It is a loan, of course. There will be competition amongst Chinese companies and we believe that will give us value for money. (Interruption) 

MS ANITA AMONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this information goes to you. We had a meeting with the contractors that we are talking about and these contractors believe that they are the legitimate contractors who were given that road. They were given the road by the Minister of Finance then and the Minister of Works. 

These contractors believe that they are doing the right work and that it is UNRA and the works ministry that are frustrating them. I do not see how you are going to get out those contractors when they believe that they are the legitimate contractors doing the work and they were given the work.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, let me just close that chapter by saying that no road can be done in Uganda without the people and the Government of Uganda deciding on who shall do that road. It is not for companies to decide; it is for Government and the people of Uganda to decide.

The second point that I want to make –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek clarification from you. Once a loan is agreed on, there are terms and conditions that are put in the loan. Is there a clause stating the terms that Chinese companies must be the ones to undertake the construction of the road? Is it explicitly – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the House is that Exim Bank is not only in China; Uganda has dealt with the Japanese Exim Bank before and that was when I was still in the private sector. The Chinese are only second in line. There is also one in India and many others. 

The principle of the Exim Bank is that it is an export-import bank, promoting their companies to get jobs. That is okay as far as their principle is concerned. What the Prime Minister is now telling us about is the innovation we tried under that first loan but we did not succeed as Parliament. Our argument then was that whereas money is coming from China, can we allow the Chinese companies to compete after all, most of them are government companies? We were not allowed to do this. I do not want to go into how many meetings we had even outside Parliament when it came to that.

The mistake made, as far as I know, in the processing of that loan, was that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance initialled a memorandum of understanding with the ministers on the other side – their minister of trade and minister of finance. That is why by the time these loans come here, Cabinet had already Okayed them.

The problem we have is that the loans of Exim Bank in Uganda are coming with a contractor for Cabinet approval. If the Prime Minister is saying that we have now corrected that, it would be a good improvement. If the Prime Minister is going to tell us – this was even our argument on Karuma and Isimba – that Cabinet is going to bring a loan request to Parliament without a contractor, which would allow for competition amongst Chinese companies, it would be an improvement. 

That is what we were fighting for when this bilateral arrangement came in. The abuse is actually around there. The moment it comes with the contractor, there is no competition and that company which –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully and apart from these other controversies, we have also raised an issue on local content. The Prime Minister has just disclosed how the Government has agreed to operate when we get this loan. If we got the money from China, it means that those who are going to manage the construction will come from China. How can our country build local content with this type of terms and conditions that we want to promote? 

My point of clarification is: Can the Prime Minister tell us, as we borrow and we return with pain, how we can build our local contractors? Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The most important person in any construction project is the consultant because he is the chief technical advisor of the employer, in this case UNRA. What happens is that this consultant is supposed to oversee all the construction works of the projects on behalf of Government or UNRA. However, like the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, the consultant engineer was also procured by the contractor. (Interjection) Do not ask how; the contractor got a Chinese consultant to supervise him and we are supposed to pay him. You cannot have this sort of situation where the contractor literally recruits his own consultant. 

What UNRA did as an innovation was to also procure another consultant. Therefore, on this project, we had two consultants doing the same job and both being paid in millions of dollars. Why? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether you will address that; is the consultant also supposed to be procured from China by the contractor? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our business here is done very casually. The other day, we were in a meeting somewhere and we found that the consultant for Isimba is the same consultant for Karuma. That is how affairs of this country are run. 

4.20
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion under rule 50 (k) of our Rules of Procedure. I have listened to the information given by our colleague, who works on behalf of Parliament, and after listening to the report as well as Members’ contributions, I do move a motion that the information given to us by hon. Katuntu be reconciled by the Committee on National Economy. They should give us a comprehensive report after three or four days of reconciling the figures so that we proceed to debate the report. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we are only 400 people planning for the 35 million people, including committing them for loans to be repaid. I think we are required to exercise a very high level of expertise and due diligence. 

I would like to propose that we defer our conclusion on this request and receive the COSASE report. Even if we are on recess, this House can be recalled anytime so that we complete this work. (Applause) Therefore, debate on this is deferred. If you are ready by tomorrow, I will put you on the Order Paper and give you time to report. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do pledge to consult with you, but can we tentatively agree that we should have that report ready, latest Wednesday. If it is earlier, I can consult with your office then you can give us a date. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall consult and I will give you a date. 

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.24
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on Budget. The other day as we were doing our parliamentary work in the natural resources committee, we visited one of the industries on Jinja Road called Tembo Steels. The conditions under which our people were being employed were very terrible. They had no working gear, their health is not catered for; some of you probably saw the stories in the papers.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is: what is Government doing to ensure that the people we call “investors” are quality investors and are not here as capitalists only after making money and mistreating our people? Thank you. 

4.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the concern of my colleague about the conditions of the workers in factories and other places is very important. Workers in Uganda and indeed workers of the world deserve dignity. They deserve to work in safe and healthy environments. 

This is a question of enforcement, to ensure that the existing laws for the workers are enforced. That information is going to be taken up. We shall ensure that the necessary steps are taken and the culprits are dealt with according to the law. That information is useful and appreciated.  

4.26
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three questions. One-

THE SPEAKER: No, ask only one question. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: They will be very brief. 

THE SPEAKER: No, one question. There are other Members who also want to ask questions. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Okay. I have been following the stories of the people from Kasese, who were buried following the attack on the palace. Among the dead, I did not see any child declared by the authorities. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister whether no child was killed during the palace invasion in that particular infernal or genocide. (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Could hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire be orderly and listen. Madam Speaker, the Kasese situation was obviously an unfortunate one. We are going to get the details that transpired after investigations. The findings will be made public and shared with colleagues in Parliament. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire will without doubt be a beneficiary of that information. 

4.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out if it is a Government policy to abandon the students they undertake to sponsor in the middle of their courses. I would like to focus on Walter Kibwota, whose parents gave land to Government for the construction of Tumango Health Centre but he has been abandoned in the middle of his course. Is it a Government policy and what are you doing about it? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Beatrice Anywar and I have been following the case of Tumango. Government, as you know, is very appreciative that the family made land available for the building of the health centre. If the sponsorship of this young man has been stopped, we are going to follow it up and I am sure we will get it corrected.

4.29
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Around 2015, Government identified some subcounties that had secondary schools that were not Government aided, and they were many. They said that they were going to take them on and fund them so that they become Government aided. May I know the schools that Government has identified to take on and which are going to be funded this year? Since 2015, I have not heard about anything; please inform me which schools you have taken on. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Madam Speaker, as all of us know, it is the promise of Government to have secondary schools aided by Government in all subcounties. However, it is a phased programme. By the end of this mandate of five years, all subcounties in Uganda will have Government aided secondary schools. The Ministry of Education has a detailed programme for that.

4.31
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the unfulfilled presidential pledges and it goes to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. When the President was in Nakasongola in 2011, he pledged to construct a bridge on River Sezibwa, which borders Kayunga and Nakasongola. 

A number of people have died on this river while using canoe boats. There was an accident where seven people were coming from a burial in Kayunga going to Nakasongola and all of them died on that river. I would, therefore, like to inquire from the Prime Minister what answers I can give the people of Nakasongola about when this bridge will be constructed on that river?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, presidential pledges are channelled for implementation and budgeting to the specific ministries. Particularly on the case of the bridge, the Ministry of Works will implement that. As for the details of the implementation plan and timetable, you can pick them from the Minister of Works.

4.32
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about the challenges surrounding the implementation of informal skills training under the Ministry of Education. I would like you to explain to this august House whether Government is still interested in the informal skills training programme. If so, why is such a programme being frustrated? 

Please, direct the Minister of Education and Sports to come with a statement on matters surrounding this training. The Minister of Education has been implementing this programme for the last six years. It targets the illiterate and semiliterate youth in the country - those who do not have any skills to perform any tasks in order to earn a living. 

At the moment, the institutions that are conducting that training are grumbling and crying because of lack of funding. When they get a little funding, it comes in phases and cannot meet the intended target. I would like you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to respond to those issues. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the honourable member. Government had intended to train about 60,000 Ugandans under that programme. However, because of resource constraints, we have been able to train only 10,000. Nevertheless, with more resources available, more will benefit. 

With regard to an update on the matter and more information from the ministry responsible for education, yes, the ministry will make a statement when Parliament reconvenes after the holidays.



4.34
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, you are aware that every year, there are new teachers who qualify - professional teachers - for secondary education. However, it is very unfortunate that they are never placed because of the ceiling. Can you explain to this House when the ceiling will be opened?

These people are suffering down there and yet we also lack human resources in schools. These people are just seated at home, unable to use their skills to teach our children. When are we opening the ceiling for these secondary school teachers? Thank you.

DR RRUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, that is a valid point. We would like these professional teachers to be recruited. The ceiling has remained tightly held due to resource constraints. However, with more resources, we will be able to recruit more teachers.

4.36
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier this year, the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) met at State House. During that meeting, the Chairman of NRM, His Excellency the President, made a commitment that he would commence dialogue headed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister before appointing the Electoral Commission.

Just the other day, names were nominated and have been approved by the Appointments Committee of Parliament. The question is: could you inform this House whether that commitment was a hoax? If the commitment is still on, how relevant is it because what he committed himself on has been overtaken by events?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that there was a meeting of IPOD at State House, which unfortunately was boycotted by the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), although it was one of the organising parties for that meeting.

Secondly, it is true that we agreed that political parties should dialogue, that they should talk to each other. Indeed, the President asked me to pursue this matter and we have been pursuing it. The political parties that are willing to talk have been talking. Those that are not willing to talk, have not come. 

Nevertheless, the governance of the country must continue. Therefore, the election or the appointment of the Electoral Commission was appropriate. The country could not be left without an electoral commission because of one or two parties that are not forthcoming on the issue of discussion. Therefore, the position as stated by H.E the President, that Government and the National Resistance Movement are always ready to talk to other political parties and other actors, remains firm, clear and consistent.

4.39
MS HOPE MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Bumeru Estates, Namayingo District, are now having sleepless nights having heard that no action was taken by Government to compensate landlords.

Mr Prime Minister, you stated early last year that the Government had already started the process of compensating these people. You were there even in August this year and promised people that the process was going on. However, when I tried to consult the ministry, I found nothing there. Therefore, I would like to know from the Prime Minister when this process is going to begin, so that these people can start living freely on their land. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government has been planning and working on the programme and it is going to be actualised in the forthcoming budget. Therefore, people should be told to settle down and wait for the budget and their issues will be addressed.

4.41
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in most cases we would like to access the Minister of Education just as we access other ministers. This is a very big ministry but there is no access, even when we try to go through formal communications; for example, when you write a letter, you do not get feedback and yet sometimes you have an issue pertaining to education. 

I request you, as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, to link us to that ministry like other offices. You write a letter to them and sometimes you even go to the waiting rooms and wait to have an opportunity to see the minister and still fail. We have issues that we would wish to pass on to the minister, but access is impossible.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I was not aware that some ministries are not accessible. Ministries are public institutions to serve the wananchi and therefore, they should be accessible to the people.

Fortunately, one of the ministers of education is here; I think it might be appropriate that after this session, you have a close interaction with him. If there are any roadblocks, they will be cleared.

4.43
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I want to know whether the Government has any plans to restore the demolished palace and other royal infrastructure and possessions in Kasese.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the immediate concern of Government is the Ugandans who have lost lives and their families, and investigating the issue surrounding this incident. When the investigations are over, they will give Government a way to end this type of situation.

4.44
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in 2013 Government recruited Parish Internal Security Officers (PISOs) to support Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) in boosting intelligence at all levels. Later last year, they advanced to village level officers. 

However, from 2013 to date, these people have not received any payment. Could it be the reason as to why we are seeing lapses in security intelligence, especially the killings we are hearing about everywhere? What plans do you have to make sure that these people are paid?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government recruits and pays people. If some people were recruited and not paid, then there must be something wrong. Therefore, with the information that I have received from my colleague, we will follow this up, find out what is happening and take the necessary corrective measures.

4.46
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the Government, under Health Sector Strategic Plan I, had designed provision of health services right from the parish level where they set up health centres II, then at subcounty level health centres III, etcetera. 

There are reports in the Ministry of Health that in order for Government to bail out the ailing health sector, Government is planning to close health centres II so that the little money saved can be used to recapitalize or revamp service delivery in health centres III. What is your comment, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on that strange policy that is in the offing, if at all it is there? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true it is a Government policy to have health centres III at subcounty level and it is true that Government stopped opening new health centres II. However, Government did say that those that were functional would continue serving the wananchi. 

However, the policy is not to open more health centres II and definitely, the policy is not only to equip and reequip health centres but also district hospitals, referral hospitals and Mulago Hospital as well.

4.48
MS KISEMBO NOELINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): My question to the Prime Minister is in respect to compensation for the people affected by the construction of the Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi Road. Apparently, the persons affected have no answers; they say that they have been made to sign papers acknowledging receipt of their compensation in respect of these works and the clearance of the road has started. 

I have visited the contractor’s site but they tell us that they are not responsible for compensation and that it is UNRA. Now, I need an answer for the people of Kibaale. When are they going to be paid? They have already signed papers acknowledging that they have received the money. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my sister has raised a legitimate point on behalf of the wananchi and you saw me conferring with my colleague, hon. Tom Butime. The assessment has already been made and payment is due to be made. We will find out when this payment will be made and indeed, we will insist on expediting the payments. 

It is true there have been rather grotesque stories concerning payment of the wananchi for compensation of land. However, Government is going to work to ensure that the lacuna is closed. So, assure them that they will be paid soon.

4.50
MR RICHARD OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the relevance of the portfolio of economic monitoring in Government? There are a number of Government programmes like Operation Wealth Creation, the construction of industrial parks and so many others that are not meeting the expectations of Ugandans and yet we know very well that that portfolio is not vacant. May I know the relevance of that portfolio?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, you may need to guide on whether the utterances of hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Tinkasimire are consistent with the normal conduct of this House. I expect them to be patiently listening to responses and questions when they are put. We will soon be getting guidance from the Rt Hon. Speaker on the matter - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I was attentively listening to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister as questions were being raised; instead of answering the questions put to him, he chose to take over the House and took over your role as the Speaker of this House.

Madam Speaker, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to attempt to take over your role as the Speaker of this House and start giving orders?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think he was giving orders. He was only raising concern about some noise from that general area.  (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for clearly ruling wisely on this very important matter. 

There was a question on economic monitoring that has just been raised by our colleague - Is the position relevant, is it doing its work? I must say the position of the economic monitoring minister is one of the very important positions. We have worked together with both the current and the previous ministers in charge of economic monitoring and they have tackled very critical areas that have helped Government to deal with some issues.

I agree that there are still some gaps, but the ministry portfolio of economic monitoring is very useful and needs more technical reinforcement. I believe that with technical reinforcement, it will even be more effective and will help the economy and the country to move forward. 

4.54
MS GRACE KESANDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My question is about wild animals. Two months back, I heard that elephants attacked the people of Kyabakara and their source of livelihood was destroyed. 

Whereas I recognise the fact that tourism is an opportunity for us to realise Vision 2040, as a country we have a big challenge to promote tourism and at the same time ensure that agriculture, which is the major opportunity for realising Vision 2040, is not affected. Looking at Sustainable Development Goal No.1, which is to end poverty, and Sustainable Development Goal No.2, which is to end hunger, how can we achieve them when wild animals keep destroying people’s livelihood? 

Secondly, how can my people of Rubirizi practise commercial agriculture as has always been emphasised by His Excellency the President of Uganda, and how can they realise a middle-income status income by 2020 when wild animals keep destroying their sources of livelihood? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let me know the Government’s strategy to address these challenges. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, ideally people and the animals in the park should have peaceful co-existence. However, it is true that animals have occasionally attacked people and people have also gone into the park. Therefore, it seems like there has been some tit-for-tat type of situation. 

However, on a serious note, measures have been taken; one, to plant tea along a number of national parks in order to block animals from leaving the parks, which apparently works. Two, fencing of the parks is also a programme that has been considered so that the population and animals can avoid clashing with each other. 

4.57
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that the Prime Minister stood here and promised that issues of connecting the wananchi to power will be harmonised. Also, aware that Uganda is undertaking rural electrification seriously and service providers, including Ferdsult, Umeme, are providing services. 

Further, aware that Ferdsult is connecting people at Shs 680,000 when the Government has provided a service pole and Umeme is connecting at just Shs 80,000, serving the same people. Also aware that you promised that those connection fees will be harmonised, I would like to know when you are bringing that harmony in connection charges to the people of Uganda. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Ugandans should enjoy similar rates in terms of charges. We will ask the minister responsible for energy to deal with this matter and report to this House.

4.59
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, with the discovery of oil and gas in Uganda, Government embarked on training Ugandans in petroleum-related courses. The first batch was recruited in 2009 and completed in 2011 at Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba. However, up to now there seems to be no clear pronouncement on when the production of oil and gas is likely to begin. 

These beautiful alumni have sent me to ask when the production of oil and gas is likely to begin and whether their continued stay at home will not affect their skills. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, in fact, the training of Ugandans in oil and gas started much earlier than what my sister has said. However, it is true that Kigumba as a national institution started recently and is making good progress. With regard to the details of the issues raised, I will ask the Minister of Energy to give a more specific timetable and information on that.

5.01
MR GENESIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, it is Government policy to construct health centres IV at constituency headquarters or upgrade health centres III to health centres IV. My question is: when does Government plan to construct health centres IV in newly created constituencies such as Kashongi, which has no health centres IV? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Government may construct entirely new health centres IV or III for that matter or may upgrade health centres III to health centres IV depending on the location, population and area needs. However, the details can be obtained from the Ministry of Health for particular areas that are of concern.

5.02
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, there is a serious land dispute between Yumbe and Arua. Failure by Government to solve this problem may cause serious insecurity in the near future.

Madam Speaker, when we met the President on 13th October, this matter was brought to his attention and he asked the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to peacefully resolve this matter. When will this matter be resolved? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will soon be sending surveyors to re-open the border areas. We think that will sort out the problem.

5.03
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the Prime Minister help me understand what the Government says about health workers who are employed by Government at Government health facilities but engage in running private facilities, which in some cases are even located just a few metres away from the Government health facilities? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, ideally, you either work for the Government or you are in private practice. We are, however, aware that there is a common practice where people work in both. The Ministry of Health is supposed to be regulating this matter and depending on the situation, the Ministry of Health can and will take the necessary measures to ensure that there is no conflict of interest.

5.05
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I hope you are aware that on 1 December 2016, some Congolese gunmen attacked fishermen at Kijangi landing site, Buseruka Subcounty, Bugahya County in Hoima District. They took 18 boats, telephones and even undressed these fishermen. What steps has Government taken to improve security along Lake Albert shores? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is the commitment of Government to ensure that every Ugandan is secure. Definitely, the provocation or cause of problems for Ugandans – arresting and taking boats, telephones and other issues – is a matter of concern. I will check to find out how far the security forces have gone in tackling this matter.

There are bilateral security and political meetings between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo and other neighbouring countries to ensure that such situations and skirmishes are avoided and when they occur, they are handled. However, we will get the details and we would be happy to follow up this matter with you so that you can in turn communicate to the wananchi concerned.

5.07
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last Thursday, the wananchi blocked the Committee on Agriculture of this Parliament from accessing the ferry to Buvuma for 40 minutes. The reason was that Parliament is responsible for the small ferry.

The Prime Minister is aware that six years ago, the Government promised a bigger ferry to Buvuma and, indeed, the people of Buvuma accepted to receive a refurbished old ferry from Kalangala, which had been at the dock in Luzira for the last five years. This issue has featured four times in the ministerial policy statement under procurement. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request an honest answer; when are the people of Buvuma going to have a bigger ferry? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that Government is putting more resources in provision of ferries in as much as we are putting more resources in construction of roads, so that people are able to move much more easily and more securely. 

As to the specific timing and availability of money, we will need to check the details of the budget and plan of the Ministry of Works and Transport. Nevertheless, the concern is well taken. My brother and I were with the wananchi in Buvuma recently and we witnessed the suffering of the wananchi.

5.09
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek for special permission from you that every Wednesday, for a whole year from now, you grant me permission to ask the Prime Minister the question I am about to ask. (Laughter)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is the constitutional responsibility of Government to ensure that there is balanced development in the country and to come up with deliberate action to bring up areas, which are still lagging behind. You are aware that the report from your office, which was brought here, indicated that poverty in Busoga was increasing while generally in Uganda, poverty is going down. 

You are also aware that this Parliament passed a resolution that Government was going to come up with a special programme for the development of Busoga. You are aware that several other places, in addition to the universal programmes that we have they have special development programmes to ensure that they catch up with others.

My question is: is it deliberate that Government intends to keep Busoga poor so that you can use us as tools for the longevity of this Government? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is it also deliberate that Busoga should be kept poor so that during campaigns, we get droppings from politicians? Can you tell us why Government has failed to come up with this special programme for Busoga, which may not even appear in the forthcoming budget?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is a policy of Government to ensure that every corner of Uganda develops and transforms. Busoga definitely is part of Uganda and, therefore, it will enjoy that programme.

Secondly, it is true that in the budget that will be coming in July, Busoga will be tackled as a special development area in order to ensure that this poverty can be dealt with and the people’s wellbeing is improved.

5.12
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are all aware that forest cover is going down day by day but I wonder if you are aware that charcoal is being used in the steel industry. You see so many lorries moving from northern Uganda to Jinja. Of recent, I have been handling some women from Gulu and Amuru whose money is with the steel industry. It is over Shs 32 million and it is not being paid by the industry. That is how I got to know that a lot of charcoal goes to the steel industry. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that the forest cover is going down day by day and desertification is a reality? What is Government doing about charcoal going to the steel industry? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is useful information from hon. Aol that charcoal is playing a very active role in the steel industry in Jinja.
  
With regard to deforestation, that is a very serious point and the answer is with all of us; Government, individuals, organisations, religious groups should embark on afforestation and tree planting. I believe that if each of us plays their role and we, the political and civic leaders, mobilise the population, we can cover Uganda again within a relatively short time. So, afforestation and tree planting must be the way to go in order to overcome the problem of deforestation and global warming.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can we know when you are going to establish the tree fund? Can we also know when the national tree planting day is?

5.14
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in this country we have some districts that benefit from hard-to-reach allowances. My people have always been asking about this. The President has been in the district on several occasions and has promised to include Kween District among the districts that are benefiting from hard-to-reach allowances. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is: what is the criterion of selecting these districts and what does the Government consider as hard-to-reach areas? I know you have been in my district and many of us have been there. The Speaker was there the other day. My district is actually hard to reach and even hard to stay in. (Laughter) When is Government considering Kween District to benefit from the hard-to-reach allowances?

Madam Speaker, when we raise these issues, we expect the Government to respond and put things right. The other time I raised the issue of resettlement of my people. Even after several attempts made to come to your office, Madam Speaker, nothing has been done for my people. You are aware that the people want resettlement. Can I receive the response? Can my people listen to what the Government is going to say?

DR RUGUNDA: On resettlement, we have had challenges in the Sebei region over resettlement. Government demarcated a piece of land from the national park in order to resettle people. Instead of settling the people who deserved settlement, more powerful people grabbed the land and unfortunately, those who should have been resettled remained landless. Government is now making additional efforts to ensure that the problem is finally resolved. That is the first point.

On the question of hard-to-reach areas, we would want the minister responsible for public service to come to this House after the holidays to clarify this position. This is because there are a number of additional controversies concerning the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas of Uganda and how to deal with the staff. Therefore, we would be helped by the Minister of Public Service with a statement after the holidays.

5.17
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. During the presidential campaigns, the NRM candidate and the current President directed for the distribution of 18 million hand hoes to homesteads across the country. In the subsequent 28 guidelines to Cabinet and civil service under kisanja hakuna muchezo, the same President did not mention the hand hoes any more but talked about mechanised agriculture.

Recently, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Vincent Ssempijja, requested for Shs 45  billion  to help farmers dig holes to grow coffee. That request is very frightening for some of us in a country where we think we have to be a bit more frugal and build the capacity of our farmers to take responsibility for their farming activities. What is the preferred delivery mechanism to help the population that is practising subsistence agriculture to improve productivity? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the promise of hoes for the wananchi made by the President during the campaigns still remains. It is being phased over this period so that that promise is properly fulfilled.

Secondly, on the issue of the Shs 45 billion for coffee, hoes and other things, really, the guidelines follow Operation Wealth Creation. Help the wananchi and guide them. Now they are going to get more extension support and we believe that the programme of Operation Wealth Creation, the inputs being made and political guidance by the elected representatives of the people at different levels will make a big difference and  enable the wananchi to earn more money and transform their lives.

5.20
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, formerly abducted persons by the Lord’s Resistance Army, especially from Acholi, Lango and parts of West Nile, some time back petitioned Parliament and Parliament came up with various resolutions. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, up to now, Government has not yet started implementing those resolutions. Many of the children born in captivity are home and are not going to school. The formerly abducted women are suffering. If you go to places like Amuru and other parts of northern Uganda, you will see this.

My question is: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is the Government going to start implementing the resolutions passed by Parliament to help the formerly abducted persons?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government has been having vigorous programmes for formerly abducted children and many of them are now big women and men. First, many of them were liberated and recruited into the UPDF. They are now playing a very important patriotic role in the defence of their country.

Secondly, many of them were brought out and put in schools. Some of them have completed university and technical institutions and they are now part of the society. The third point is that quite a number of those who required treatment, including plastic surgery, have benefitted. 

Fourthly, Government realised that this was a matter that required participation of the community, traditional leaders and religious groups. This co-operation has produced great results. However, ultimately, the key point is to integrate them into the society so that they can be part and parcel of the society instead of being looked at as a special isolated group. 

We should forget that era in as far as discrimination and stigma of the people is concerned. We should integrate them into the society as soon as possible and particularly you, the political leaders from the area, have a special responsibility in that respect.

5.23
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I am really perturbed by the issue of environmental protection. It looks like there is a selective method of evicting the “who is who”. We have seen in Munyonyo where Government had an interest, they even reclaimed land from the water. 

I have seen Entebbe Botanical Beach Hotel built with an extension into the lake. How can we convince the wananchi? Those who buy land on the riverbanks and lakeshores would like to put up hotels because the hotels near water bodies fetch more money. You do not buy land on the riverbanks to cultivate.

Now, if some people are allowed to do that and others have had big mark stones placed a hundred metres away as buffers and river reserves, how do we convince these people? When Government wants a road, for example the Northern Bypass, it had access to the swamp. Therefore, how are we going to convince the people who have land along the riverbanks and lakeshores and they want to put up such enterprises for money generation that will contribute taxes to benefit Government? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, our sister has a valid point. We should be consistent with implementation of environmental laws and we should not be discriminatory. One of the problems is that some of these laws came into effect when some of those institutions and structures were already in place. 

Secondly, there is what environmentalists call “vanquished wetlands”; this is where there has been so much transformation of a wetland that it has literally been transformed and used for other purposes. However, your point on consistency in implementation is very well taken. Government will lead by example to ensure that from now onwards, we do not allow violation of the law but enforce it.

5.26
MS JENNIFER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, Government commissioned new administrative units - districts like Kagadi, Kakumiro, Omoro and Rubanda. We are very grateful and that is why some of us are here. 

However, I have observed that these districts need some affirmative action from the Government by way of facilitation to acquire road construction equipment and upgrade health facilities as well as build the administrative units. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans does Government have to facilitate these districts to acquire these facilities?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the new districts will be sharing some of the facilities like road construction equipment with their mother districts. However, as you very well know, Government is importing new road equipment from Japan. This will take care of the concerns of the new districts. However, there is a transition process before the new districts will acquire all the facilities for themselves. Let them share the facilities or even personnel of the mother districts until their requirements are properly met.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used one and a half hours mainly because last week, the Prime Minister was not here. I do think we need to allow him go and do other work. Therefore, honourable members, I would like to thank you for the sitting. I would like to remind you to attend the workshop by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Songhai model at Imperial Royale Hotel tomorrow starting at 8.00 a.m.  The House is adjourned to Thursday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 December 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
