Thursday, 4 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Our colleagues, the parliamentary football and netball teams, are out of the country representing us in the East African Community Games. So, I want to inform the House that the following are officially out on duty: hon. Jalia Bintu; hon. Winifred Kiiza; hon. Mariam Nalubega; hon. Santa Alum; hon. Kabakumba Masiko; hon. Susan Amero; hon. Elizabeth Karungi; hon. Sarah Nakawunde; hon. Sarah Netalisire; hon. Brenda Nabukenya; hon. Veronica Kadogo; and hon. Florence Nebanda.

They are accompanied by a few members of staff. If I get the list of the football team, I will also inform you as they are officially representing us in Arusha. Please, pray for them and wish them luck so that they come back with more trophies. 

Honourable members, today is Thursday and we normally give priority to private members’ business. We shall start with those who have some urgent issues, especially those who came to me and identified those issues. I will start with hon. Lilly Adong.

2.48
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Gulu town is one of the towns, which are aspiring to become cities in this country but this town constantly has power outages. Gulu can hardly have 72 hours of power in a month. This situation is causing a lot of suffering to the business communities and the school going children. As I talk, the business community in Gulu is threatening to demonstrate and go on strike. The small businesses like computer centres are no longer running; they are getting out of business.

Many secondary school students have to carry hurricane lamps because there is no electricity at their schools. We are afraid that the results of the UNEB exams may not be good in Gulu because of the power outages. These outages are also affecting security. Whenever there is no electricity, burglaries and other crimes rise.

Madam Speaker, I tried to talk to the Umeme centre manager in Gulu and he attributed the power outages to constant maintenance. We normally receive messages about this on our phones; everyday, they give us excuses relating to maintenance between Lira and Gulu, or Lira and Soroti. This happens every day.

Secondly, the capacity of the transformers in Gulu is so small. Gulu has already grown into a big town and the transformers there cannot hold the present rate of power consumption by people in Gulu town. Also, the line from Lira to Gulu is shared by many other small towns. I believe if there was a direct line from Lira to Gulu, it would be better.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that if Ministry of Energy, through the electricity distribution company, Umeme and other agencies could get us a direct line from Lira to Gulu, it would minimise on the outages. Besides, we need a standby generator if we cannot get electricity direct from Lira. 

Gulu is also like other towns in Uganda. If other towns have constant electricity, why shouldn’t Gulu have the same? Our people are getting out competed. We need a generator of bigger capacity in Gulu town so that we also can enjoy electricity like any other towns in Uganda. Thank you.

2.51
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. 

Recently, a female patient was brought from Zombo with anaemia. She was admitted to Naguru Hospital after which it was found that she needed five pints of blood. 

Before she could get the blood transfusion, the staff of the hospital wanted the parents to pay Shs 1,250,000. The parents had to run around to raise that money in order for that girl to be given blood. If the parents had not got a Good Samaritan, I am sure the girl by now would be dead. 

My worry is: how about the poor people who come from up country? If they do not have that money, what happens to them? Therefore, I would like to know from the Government, especially the Ministry of Health, what the blood transfusion policy is? This blood is actually donated by our people. Is the blood for sale or it is supposed to be given to people for free? Can the Government tell us about the policy they have on giving blood to patients? Thank you.

2.53
MR SSEBAGALA LATIF (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Some months ago, this House passed the Anti-Homosexuality Bill and some of those who were against it went to court. The court then pronounced itself on it, on grounds that we had no quorum. When the court pronounced itself on that matter and the ball was thrown to us as Members of Parliament, I mobilised Members of Parliament to show our electorate, the ones who vote for us, that we cherish our cultural, religious and traditional norms. Members were very supportive and indeed everywhere in our constituencies, in mosques and churches, people viewed MPs as people who do not really support homosexuality despite what the court said.

After some time, some of our colleagues sat somewhere and discussed. I was informed that a committee of nine or 10 was put in place to harmonise and see what went wrong. That committee was given one month in which to handle each and everything. It is now approximately five months but they have not reported back. 

Madam Speaker, I have been getting a lot of pressure locally and internationally, including from Members of Parliament about what happened to their signatures. I had no answer because when Parliament opened, hon. David Bahati, who was the mover of this Bill, requested for leave to re-table this Bill and it was granted. I am also aware that even that committee which was set up somewhere else finalised their report. 

As we talk, I believe that people from all our constituencies have been demanding for this Bill. We had given it to them last year as a gift. Now that we are nearing Christmas and New Year, I thought we could again give them this Bill and give them some hope when we pronounce ourselves on it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know where we are as far as this Bill is concerned. What can we do in order to rejuvenate this whole august House and assure our electorate that we have not backtracked, that we are still on track and we still believe in what we signed? 

As the custodian of all the signatures, I have 256 signatures of Members of Parliament who support the re-tabling of this Bill. With your permission, - I have kept them long enough - allow me to lay these signatures of honourable Members of Parliament on the Table so that they become the property of Parliament. Also, I implore you tell us the way forward so that all members who have been asking where their signatures are and asking all those questions will get answers.

The ultimate question, however, will come if we go for Christmas recess without any progress on this Bill and yet outside there, people are saying the President did his work at the function at Kololo Airstrip; he appended his signature onto this Bill and he has been exonerated. It is now we back here who failed to do our work. So, it is time, Madam Speaker, for us to give the right information about this Bill and also to do the needful. If it means suspending our Rules of Procedure so that we deal with this Bill before we go for the Christmas recess, so be it, Madam Speaker.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to lay on the Table this book containing 256 signatures of Members of Parliament. If there is any member who said out there that he or she was coerced, let them stand here and withdraw their names and signatures. (Applause) That is my request.

THE SPEAKER: You can lay them on the Table.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me as the chief mobiliser of Members of Parliament who cherish our values, norms, culture and our religious beliefs to lay on the Table signatures of 256 Members of Parliament. If you allow me, I can read name by name – (Interjections)-Yes, so that everybody gets to know who appended their signatures to this list. If there is any Member who said they were coerced, let them stand up so that everybody gets to know them. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, with your permission, let me read out the names of Members who signed in support of the reconsideration of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2014: 

Ssebagala Latif Ssengendo, Kawempe Division North; 
Nakabira G. Lubega, Lwengo; 
Ebil Fred, Kole County; 
Achia Terence, Bokora County; 
Kitatta Aboud, Bukoto County West; 
Balyejjusa Sulaiman, Budiope County East; 
Naggayi Nabilah Sempala, Kampala; 
Nshaija Dorothy, Kamwenge; 
Lokii Peter Abrahams, Jie County; 
Dr Okuonzi Sam, Vurra County; 
Andrew Allen, Bugabula County North; 
John Ken-Lukyamuzi, Rubaga Division South; 
Lolem Micah, Upe County; 
Iriama Rose, Nakapiripirit; 
Badda Fred, Bujumba County; 
Baryayanga Andrew, Kabale Municipality; 
Musinguzi Yona, Ntungamo Municipality; 
Kabahenda Flavia, Kyegegwa; 
Migadde Robert Ndugwa, Buvuma Islands County; 
Jacob M. Oboth Oboth, West Budama County South; 
Iriama Margaret, Moroto; 
Ssemugaba Samuel, Kiboga West; 
Drito Martin, Madi-Okollo; 
Amos Lugoloobi, Ntenjeru County North; 
Obua Denis Hamson, Ajuri County; 
Mbahimba James, Kasese Municipality; 
Maganda Julius, Samia Bugwe County South; 
Aleper Margaret Achilla, Kotido.
Namoe Stella, Napak; 
Namayanja Florence, Bukoto County East; 
Lubogo Kenneth, Bulamogi County; 
Kyooma Xavier, Ibanda County North;
Kakooza James, Kabula County; 
Kusasira Peace, Mukono; 
David Bahati, Ndorwa County West; 
Joseph Matte, Bughendera County; 
Omwonya Stanley, Okoro County; 
Mujungu Jennifer, Ntoroko; 
Kahunde Hellen, Kiryandongo; 
Medard Sseggona Lubega, Busiro County East; 
Kabaale K. Olivia, Iganga; 
Baka Mugabi Stephen, Bukooli County North; 
Yokasi Bwambale-Bihande, Bukonjo County East; 
Hood Katuramu, PWD Western; 
Ochwa David, Agule County; 
Byarugaba Grace, Isingiro; 
Ajok Lucy, Apac;
Ssewungu Joseph, Kalungu County West; 
Sempala Mbuga, Nakaseke County South; 
Waira Kyewalabye Majegere, Bunya County East; 
Isabirye Iddi, Bunya County South; 
Auma Juliana Modest, Abim;
Dr Sam Lyomoki, Workers Representative; 
Mpiima Dorothy, Buikwe; 
Odonga Otto, Aruu County;
Mandera Amos, Kooki County;
Lubega Godfrey, Kassanda County North;
James Kabajjo Kyewalabye, Kiboga County East; 
Ekuma George Stephen, Bukedea County;
Kiyingi Deogratius, Bukomansimbi;
Kwizera Eddie, Bufumbira County East; 
Yorokamu Katwiremu, Sheema County South;
Ntabazi Harriet, Bundibugyo; 
Bangirana Kawooya, Ssembabule;
Sabila Nelson, Kongasis County;
Mathias B. Nsubuga, Bukoto South; 
Kafabusa Werikhe, Bungokho County South; 
Wamakuyu Mudimi, Bulambuli County; 
Gudoi Yahaya, Bungokho County North; 
Akol Rose, Bukedea; 
Kasamba Mathias, Kakuuto County;
Okello Anthony, Kioga County;
Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, Kyadondo County East; 
Ababiku Jesca, Adjumani;
Nansubuga Rosemary, Wakiso;
Magyezi Raphael, Igara County West; 
Wangolo Jacob, Bunyole County West;
Odoo Tayebwa, Ishaka Municipality; 
Nokrach William, PWD Northern; 
Kaahwa Tophace, Hoima;
Ekwau Ibi Florence, Kaberamaido; 
Dr Bitekyerezo Medard, Mbarara Municipality;
Kwiyucwiny Grace, Zombo; 
Lematia Ruth, Maracha;
Awongo Ahmed, Koboko County; 
Kabuule Evelyn, Luuka; 
Babirye Veronica Kadogo, Buyende; 
Byarugaba Alex Bakunda, Isingiro County South; 
Nakayenze Connie Galiwango, Mbale;
Bigirwa Julius Junjura, Buhaguzi County;  
Kafuda Boaz, Busongora County South;
Ogwang Peter, Youth Rep., Eastern; 
Muwuma Milton, Kigulu County South;
Namugwanya Benny Nalongo, Mubende;
Kwemara	William, Kyaka County; 
Makhoha Margaret, Namayingo; 
Mpairwe Beatrice, Buliisa; 
Amuriat Oboi, Kumi County; 
Nanyondo B. Caroline, Kalangala; 
Kase-Mubanda Freda, Masaka;
Katoto Hatwib, Katerera County; 
Nyakikongoro Rosemary, Sheema;
Kasule Robert Ssebunya, Kyadondo County North; 
Musasizi Henry, Rubanda County East; 
Kassiano Wadri, Terego County; 
Dr Francis Epetait, Ngora County;
Mwiru Paul, Jinja Municipality East;  
Lowila Oketayot, Pader; 
Kintu Florence, Kalungu; 
Mugume Roland, Rukungiri Municipality;
Lanyero Sarah, Lamwo;
Amoit Judith, Pallisa; 
Amero Susan, Amuria; 
Dr Lokii John Baptist, Matheniko County; 
Kyanjo Hussein, Makindye Division West;
Mawanda Michael, Igara County East; 
Mayende Stephen, Bukooli County South;
Nakato Kyabangi, Gomba;
Sarah Mateke, Kisoro; 
Kamara John, Bufumbira County North;
Mwebaza Sarah, Kibuku; 
Balikudembe Joseph, Busiro County South; 
Adong Lilly, Nwoya; 
Asamo Hellen Grace, PWD Eastern; 
Atim Joy Ongom, Lira; 
Sylvia N. Ssinabulya, Mityana; 
Ayepa Michael, Labwor County; 
Mugabi Muzaale Martin, Buzaaya County; 
Mathias Mpuuga, Masaka Municipality;
Ssasaga Isaias, Budadiri County East;
Nyakecho Annet Okwenye, Otuke; 
Akello Judith Franca, Agago; 
Asupasa Isiko, Busiki County; 
Bagoole John B., Luuka County; 
Chemaswet Abdi, Kween County; 
Lokeris Samson, Dodoth County East; 
Baba Diri Margaret, Koboko; 
Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Kinkizi County East; 
Fungaroo Kaps Hassan, Obongi County; 
Ongalo-Obote Kenneth, Kalaki County;
Nakawunde Sarah, Mpigi; 
Mbogo Kezekia, Budaka County; 
Kevina Taaka, Busia Municipality; 
Dr Twa-Twa Jeremiah, Iki-Iki County; 
Simon Mulongo, Bubulo County East; 
Nankabirwa Ann Maria, Kyankwanzi; 
Angelina Osegge, Soroti; 
Kabakumba Masiko, Bujenje County; 
Nsereko Muhammad, Kampala Central Division; 
Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, Bugangaizi County; 
Amongi Betty, Oyam County South; 
Sempijja Vincent, Kalungu County East; 
Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth, Mawokota County South; 
Lokodo Simon, Dodoth County West; 
Wafula Oguttu, Bukooli County Central; 
Atim Ogwal Cecilia, Dokolo; 
Nantaba Idah, Kayunga;
Ssemmuli Anthony, Buwekula County; 
Ochola Stephen, Serere County; 
Kamara John Nizeyimana, Bufumbira County North; 
Sabiiti Jack, Rukiga County; 
Oleru Huda, Yumbe; 
Bintu Jalia Lukumu, Masindi; 
Mukitale Stephen, Buliisa County; 
Emmanuel Lumala Dombo, Bunyole County East; 
Besisira Ignatius, Buyaga County East; 
Mutyabule Florence, Namutumba;
Amuge Rebecca Otengo, Alebtong; 
Nekesa Barbara Oundo, Busia;
Kataike Sarah Ndoboli, Budaka;
Ecweru Musa, Amuria County; 
Amongin Aporu, Kumi; 
Kyeyune Haruna, Kyotera County; 
Edward Khiddu Makubuya, Katikamu County South;
Kamateeka Jovah, Mitooma; 
Brenda Nabukenya, Luweero; 
Tete Chelengat, Bukwo;
Auru Anne, Moyo;
Bayigga Lulume, Buikwe County South; 
Opolot Jacob Richard, Pallisa County;
Kiboijana Margaret, Ibanda;
Ayoo Tonny, Kwania County; 
Anite Evelyn, Youth Rep., Northern;
Sebuliba Mutumba, Kawempe Division South;
Hillary Onek, Lamwo County;
Acayo Christine, Nebbi; 
Mulimba John, Samia Bugwe County North; 
Okot Ogong Felix, Dokolo County; 
Kasaija Stephen Kagwera, Burahya County; 
Nakabale Patrick, Youth Rep., Central; 
Safia Nalule Juuko, Female PWD Rep.; 
Maxwell P. Akora, Maruzi County; 
Muhammed Kawuma, Entebbe Municipality; 
Kiiza Winfred, Kasese; 
Nambooze Bakireke, Mukono Municipality; 
Nebanda Andiru Florence, Butaleja; 
Nabulya Teopista Ssentongo, Workers Rep; 
Mariam Nalubega, Butambala; 
Alum Santa Ogwang, Oyam; 
Mulindwa Patrick, Kasambya County; 
Cadet Benjamin, Bunyaruguru County; 
Okeyoh Peter, Bukooli Island County; 
Ayena Krispus, Oyam County North; 
Businge-Rusoke Victoria, Kabarole; 
Alex Ruhunda, Fort Portal Municipality; 
Kangwagye Stephen, Bukanga County; 
Emma Boona, Mbarara; 
Jimmy Akena, Lira Municipality; 
Omara Geoffrey, Erute County North; 
Jack Wamanga-Wamai, Mbale Municipality; 
Tinkasiimire Barnabas, Buyaga County West; 
Nabirye Agnes, Jinja; 
Okot John Amos, Agago County; 
Namara Grace, Lyantonde; 
Katwesigye Olivia, Buhweju; 
Kabasharira Naome, Ntungamo; 
Biraaro Ephraim, Buhweju County; 
Mujuni Vincent Kyamadidi, Rwampara County;
Kiwanda Godfrey, Mityana County North;
Komuhangi Margaret, Nakasongola; 
Muhumuza David, Mwenge County North; 
Obua-Ogwal Benson, Moroto County; 
Atiku Bernard, Ayivu County; 
Turyahikayo Mary Paula, Rubabo County; 
Bako Christine Abia, Arua; 
Khainza Justine, Bududa; 
Nabanjja Robinah, Kibaale; 
Mugema Peter, Iganga Municipality; 
Bakaluba Peter Mukasa, Mukono County South; 
Nsanja Patrick, Ntenjeru County South; 
Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County; 
Atim Anywar, Kitgum; 
Ssali Baker, Buikwe County West; 
William Nzoghu, Busongora County North; 
Chemutai Phyllis, Kapchorwa; 
Kafeero Ssekitoleko, Nakifuma County; 
Olanya Gilbert, Kilak County; 
Stephen Tashobya, Kajara County; 
Mary Tunde, Workers Rep.; 
Okupa Elijah, Kasilo County; 
Baliddawa Edward, Kigulu County North; 
Amongin Jacqueline, Ngora; 
Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad, Butambala County; 
Mbagadhi Fredrick Nkayi, Kagoma County; 
Namaganda Suzan, Bukomansimbi; 
Kasibante Moses, Rubaga Division North; 
Egunyu Nantume, Buvuma; and 
Saleh Kamba, Kibuku County.

Madam Speaker, there are 256 Members of Parliament who appended their signatures in favour of the reconsideration of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. If there is any Member who was out of the country but is now around they can, with the permission of the Speaker, append their signatures too.

Madam Speaker, allow me lay this “golden book” with all the names I have just read out on the Table. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Latif Sebaggala. The signatures are now the property of the House. 

However, you asked me two questions; the first was: where are we? I am not in position to answer that because this is a private member’s Bill. I think the movers will explain to us. About the other committee, it was outside this House so I cannot speak about that committee. For now, I can receive the signatures but I cannot answer the other questions. 

In the meantime, join me in welcoming members of the Traditional Healers and Herbalists Association from Iganga District represented by hon. Abdu Katuntu and hon. Olivia Kwagala. (Laughter) 

Let us hear from the backbenchers. I do not know what hon. Chris Baryomunsi wants to say. 

DR BARYOMUSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to comment on the issue which hon. Latif Sebaggala has just raised and also to answer some of the questions he posed.

He said that at the beginning of this session, hon. David Bahati, who is the mover of the Bill, made a request to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, who was in chair, assured the House that once we are through with the budget process the Chair would provide space for that Bill to be handled. When hon. Latif Ssebagala came to the Floor, I called hon. David Bahati who was not in the House and he requested me to communicate that he was ready and only waiting for the Speaker to provide space on the Order Paper for him to move the Bill for first reading.  (Applause) I just wanted to communicate that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as soon as I get the text of the Bill, it will be on the Order Paper. (Applause)

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a mater to do with the register of members who want the Anti-Homosexuality Bill to be re-tabled. Some of us were not there when they were signing this register; we are begging that we sign it now.

THE SPEAKER: The book is open; you can sign. Anyone who wants to sign can sign it. (Applause) Those who did not sign then can sign now.

MS ROSE AKELLO: My name is hon. Akello Rose Lilly, representing the people of Kaabong. I have signed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I have signed the register to re-table the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. Thank you.

MS BAKEINE: Madam Speaker, I am Mabel Bakeine, MP for Bugangizi East Constituency. I have signed in support of the reconsideration of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill 2014.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you

MS ALENGOT: Madam Speaker, I am Alengot Proscovia Oromait. I have signed the register to reconsider the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. Thank you. 

MR	SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, I am Ssimbwa John, Member of Parliament Makindye East. I have signed in support of the reconsideration of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. If there are others, they can sign from my office. Thank you, Members.

3.25
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Obongi County are getting drowned in floods that have hit the area. These floods are partly as a result of the heavy rains that the country is aware of and partly as a result of rains that are not necessarily in Obongi but in the highlands in Koboko, Yumbe and Arua. The streams that feed water into the River Nile and pass through Obongi are the ones responsible for the floods. In particular, there is one called River Kochi. When this river floods it bursts its banks, and these floods have been reoccurring from time to time. They have occurred again last month on the 20th of November. It was reported in the newspapers, particularly the Daily Monitor. 

Madam Speaker, the biggest point of concern right now, which has brought me here, is that raising this matter like this is not enough if Government does not act. When these recent floods occurred, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness was in Moyo handling the Uganda-South Sudan boarder disputes. He was distributing iron sheets for the people whose houses were burnt. He was given data by the CAO, which data had been collected with the help of the parish and sub county chiefs. The unfortunate thing is that no action has been taken up to now. 

Heads of cattle have been lost and houses destroyed. Health and sanitation still remains dire because latrines have been washed off. Worst of all, the Ministry of Works, where the solution should have come from, and the department of works in the district have not been supportive even when we tried to inform about what to do. No helping hand has come from the office of the government representative, the RDC - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: You spend so much time on preambles instead of going to the issue. What do you want Government to do? I think you want solutions, not so? Okay, one minute.

MR FUNGAROO: The one minute will be enough. We need construction of dikes. As a Member of Parliament, I have tried to mobilise the people to work, collect sand, but we need equipment from the district department of works. We need some empty sacks which will be filled by sand to stop the water from going into the villages. This is something we can do. We are ready to augment the assistance from Government, but it is not coming. I am appealing to you, honourable members, to prevail –(Interruption)

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Fungaroo, for giving way. The only and most important solution to that problem is the construction of Agbinika power station. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. The water actually comes from Yumbe; so he is the source of the water. (Laughter)

The construction of a bridge, of dikes and Agbinika Dam in Yumbe will control the flooding in the lower belt of the river. I am willing and ready to mobilise the people. The central and the local governments should support our effort to build the dikes. Madam Speaker, I wish to submit my appeal through you. Thank you. 

3.29
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the Mubuku Youth Institute, which is in Kasese District, Busongora County North. 

Madam Speaker, between 1984 and 1986, during the bush war which brought the NRM to power, Mubuku Youth Institute was actually brought to a standstill and the equipment was vandalised. Some of the equipment was taken by the NRA then, among which were a generator and a lorry. From 1986 up to date, the institute has not been operating. From 1986, the Kasese District local government has been asking the NRM to rejuvenate the institute but all efforts have been in vain.

From 1986 up to 2010, there were no results, so the Kingdom of Rwenzururu decided to elevate this institution to a university status. They want to start a university so that they are able to reinstate the courses which were being offered at that time and introduce new courses which are relevant for the social-economic development of this country. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you spend time meandering instead of going to the point. (Laughter) Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, since 2010 the Rwenzururu Kingdom has been trying to elevate this institute. They have been closely working with the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Education. Unfortunately, early this year, the IGP of Uganda visited the site and picked interest in this institute. He wanted to turn it into a police training school and yet the Rwenzururu Kingdom is already in advanced stages of establishing it as a university. 

The purpose I am here, therefore, Madam Speaker, is to bring this matter to the attention of Government. The needs of the people of Kasese are not about having a police training school in their place but having training in vocational courses that can transform them as a community.

Secondly, -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, four issues have been raised. On the power outage in Gulu, we direct the Minister of Energy to come with an answer on the questions raised. We also require the Minister of Health to come and answer on the policy of supply of blood in the government hospitals. 

On the issue of the dikes, we want the Minister of Works to come and tell us what he is going to do about the floods in Obongi. On the last one, the Minister of Internal Affairs will tell us whether it is true that he has intentions of taking over Mobuku Youth Institute and convert it into a police training school. So, we shall expect answers. We shall have one last one from hon. Ongom.

3.34
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate you for allowing the last issue of national importance to come from Lira District. 

Last week I met the district chairman of Lira and we were greatly concerned about the issue of NAADS. We know what NAADS is and we know how much the President has lamented about the non-performance of NAADS, to the extent that he has now assigned most of the NAADS’ projects to the army to boost its performance.

Madam Speaker, issues of NAADS need enterprise selection and they also go with the season. Money has now been sent to the district for the last quota but up to now, the money cannot be utilised simply because the conditions or the guidelines have not been given. The people who are supposed to help in operationalizing NAADS are not there. So it is an issue of great concern. 

I am worried because the money in the accounts of the district can easily be diverted, and also the season matters in doing enterprise selection. My request is that the ministry concerned should take this up as a matter of national importance and urgency. They should bring this matter to bring to Parliament for debate so that the money is utilised. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, about a month ago, the Prime Minister also received a complaint about how NAADS and the army are going to work. He said he was going to bring a statement to explain how it is going to work but it is now one month. I think it is important for him to come back and inform the House before we go for recess so that they can inform their population how it is going to work.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

3.37
MR STEPHEN MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This a petition to Parliament by the workforce at Kibimba Rice Scheme on the loss of employment and livelihood, presented under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. It is strictly one page, so I beg you indulgence that I go through it.

THE SPEAKER: No, just state the question and the prayers.

MR MUGABI: Madam Speaker, the petition is about loss of employment at Kibimba, which is affecting the livelihoods our people. This has been caused by the VAT that Government levied on locally grown, milled and produced rice in Uganda. Unfortunately, it has only affected the formal sector and only Kibimba was affected. 

The prayer, therefore, is that we, the humble petitioners of Bukooli North in Bugiri District, Uganda, pray that Parliament of Uganda expeditiously and with a sense of urgency addresses the matter of VAT imposed on cereals grown, milled and produced in Uganda to ensure an enabling environment, natural justice, equity and a level playing field in the cereal sector; also, to prevent the closure of Tilda (Uganda) Limited that will affect the livelihood and survival of thousands of families. 

The petition is duly signed by over 300 of the over 3000 petitioners who are at the risk of losing their jobs. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter is quite serious. The Managing Director of Tilda (Uganda) Ltd also came to see me about a fortnight ago. He told me that he is closing because he can longer operate. This forced me to write to the Ministry of Finance. I also discussed the matter with the President but it seems it has not yet been resolved. So, we ask the Committee on Finance to look at that matter and report back very quickly so that people can keep their jobs.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have ruled that the matter should be handled expeditiously. However, I want to seek your guidance because Tilda Uganda Ltd has said that in a week or two they would be closing. As you know, we are going away for recess soon - in the next two weeks. I would therefore think that for this matter to be useful to Tilda, it could be handled maybe in a week. 

Yes, you have referred the matter to the committee but given the way we work as committees and given the fact that we are going for Christmas recess, if you do not prescribe a timeframe, it will end up coming here early next year and by that time Tilda will have closed. This is true because they were really trying to work on their closure only that we have been assuring them that something will be done. 

My request, therefore, is: isn’t it possible for you to guide that this committee reports urgently, maybe in the next one week, before we go for recess?

THE SPEAKER: I am aware that the Committee on Finance does not have any new Bill. I do not think they have Bills under consideration. So, let them handle it very quickly and report to us next week.

3.40
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present a petition on behalf of the National Council for Traditional Healers and Herbalists Association. The subject matter of this petition is: 

There is no regulation of traditional herbalists and traditional medicine in Uganda. As a result, this field has been infiltrated by all sorts of impersonators and quacks. Child sacrifice has become rampant including many other heinous acts, which have been perpetrated in the name of administering traditional medicine. 

The National Council for Traditional Healers and Herbalist Association (NACOTHA) is desirous of having this industry streamlined and regulated. It is therefore, the petitioners’ prayer that Government is urged to have an authority to streamline and regulate the functions and the indigenous traditional methods and practices of traditional healing and have reorganised healers and traditional herbalists. 

This petition is supported by over 80 practitioners from different parts of this country. It is their prayer that this matter be referred to the right committee of Parliament to have an overview of this industry. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will send it to the Committee on Health but they can get support from the legal and parliamentary affairs committee and also the gender committee. Thank you very much.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 27/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

3.44
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, hon. Majegere was supposed to ask this question but he delegated me since he is away. The question is:

“i) Would the Minister explain to the House the regulations that guide fisheries enforcement officers while on duty?

ii) How can these officers be identified to minimize cases of impersonation?

iii) What measures has Government put in place to ensure the safety of fisheries enforcement officers while on duty?”

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Waira Majegere for presenting this question. However, I beg that I answer the question next week. As I informed you, I have just come back from Zambia, so I did not come with a written answer. There are two questions; I request that I handle them next week.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry that you have not been here but last week I gave notice that all the pending questions will be put on the Order Paper, starting with the oldest. These are the oldest questions in this Session to this ministry.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think we should not crucify the honourable Minister of State in charge of Fisheries because Ministry of Agriculture has very many ministers of state. The hon. Ruth Nankabirwa has been to Zambia but the other ministers were here. The essence of appointing so many state ministers and Cabinet ministers is to make sure that people are given good services. 

I do not know whether this congests Cabinet, but surely, there are four ministers in the ministry and then we start harassing a lady who has just come from Zambia; what about the others who have been around? Madam Speaker, that is why we should call up the senior minister.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Government has been here since 1986. This question, especially part (i), does not really require the minister to tell this House that she has just come from Zambia and that is justification for her not to give an answer. It just requires the guidelines. 

Madam Speaker, you know that for any ministry to be able to do its work efficiently and effectively there should be guidelines. So, it cannot be now that she is going to develop those guidelines. The guidelines should have been there and she should have got so that she lays them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Minister of State for Fisheries to run away from her responsibility and yet she is not going to develop these guidelines today or tonight?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules require that the minister gives a written answer to the honourable members, which I think she has not yet done. So, honourable minister, we want these questions answered on Tuesday because these are the oldest questions in this Session. Although Tuesday is not a day for questions, you will answer them.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to say something, although incomplete, on the issue of the resettlement of the Benet people in the Kapchorwa sub region. 

Madam Speaker, this problem has four dimensions. Historically, it goes back to 1972 when people were displaced from Mt Elgon forest as the boundary of the forest changed. Since that time, the problem of resettlement has been with us, and you know in that period there was no arrangement to solve problems.

Way back in 1983, this problem came up again. Though there was an attempt to address it, unfortunately it was not handled properly. Those who were supposed to be settled did not get the land that they were supposed to have settled on. I will give reasons for that in detail in future because now, I need more clearance from Cabinet so that we handle this matter once and for all.

This problem also has a social dimension, Madam Speaker. These people were displaced and they live in abject condition, which situation should not be allowed to continue. Nevertheless, you need also to study and clearly solve the problem without creating more problems. This is important because in 1983, for example, although efforts were made to solve the problem, some of the land which should have gone to the landless went to other people who should not have got it. 

Now some of those people claim that they have been on that land for as long as that period and that the land is theirs. So, the problem there is that in giving land to the landless now, you have a challenge of displacing some people on that very land. There is legality and politics involved.

The third dimension is political. As we get temperatures rising and politics comes into play for elections and so on, some of these issues pick political dimensions. I do not want to go into those details, but it is not unusual that people promise more than they can deliver. If you elect me and I tell you that I will get more land from the forest for your settlement and then that land is not availed, that creates a problem.

The fourth dimension, Madam Speaker, is technical. When you have landless people, you have got to establish their number –(Interruptions)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. I just wish to seek clarification from the minister on two aspects. First, he said there is legality and politics. I would like to understand what politics means in this context. Secondly, on the promises made by people, for example “elect me and you will get land”, I would like to be clear on who made those promises. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should allow the minister to make his statement. You can speak later.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What is politics? I do not have enough time to define that. People promise so much in order to get votes from voters, including some of us here, and we promise sometimes more than we can deliver. Elections promises include those made by all people in elective positions, starting from the President all the way down to councillors. All those can promise more than they can deliver.

The second aspect I was talking about –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his preamble, the minister said he is not making a full statement. When I tried to check my iPad, his “half” statement is not uploading. 

Madam Speaker, you guided that we allow him to make a presentation and clarifications and questions will come later. However, I will find it a bit difficult later on to seek clarification and to ask questions when his statement is not availed to us. So, where is the statement?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, you will recall that before we came to this House, I shared with you my position that given the short time within which I was informed about what happened in the House yesterday, having been away for a retreat in Munyonyo, I would only make a statement.

I am about to conclude. If you allowed me to conclude it, you will see what I meant when I said that there will be an occasion when a detailed statement will be made and you will be able to access it on your iPad. Madam Speaker–(Interjections) – Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House directed the Prime Minister to come and explain the failure to implement the President’s directive. I think that is what he is doing. That is what we directed last night.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Problem-solving needs a little more patience than sometimes we give it. The technical aspect is that we have to evaluate the claims of the landless people. I have a report here, which is not yet ready to be presented to this House. We even have photographs of people we have identified to be landless. 

This has gone to the point of setting up a committee, which includes the LC V chairpersons of Kween, Kapchorwa and Bukwo representing those district leaderships, the RDCs of the three districts and the regional police commander because of the security dimension. The committee is being chaired by a commissioner in the Office of the Prime Minister. This committee is being serviced by the technical committee, which includes people from Ministry of Lands and Housing, UWA, the President’s office, Ministry of Internal Affairs and our office, so that we comprehensively study and solve this problem once and for all.

Madam Speaker, the numbers that were supposed to have been settled in 1983 have since increased. From the time we went started going to the ground, every time we go back the numbers keep changing. There has to be a time when we stop and move on for this to be concluded.

We already have a Cabinet Paper, which is going to be tabled, which seeks a solution to fix the boundaries of the game park so that they do not change. Secondly, whoever gets a piece of land does not sell it overnight. We have situations where people sold the land and they are now landless again. So, we need also to establish legally that when one gets their piece of land with a title, they do not sell it in a given period of time. 

All these legalities need to be clarified. I can assure you, Madam Speaker, we have met the chairpersons, RDCs and MPs several times. So, there is no decision that will be made without their involvement. We promised the people that by the end of this month, we should have gone over this hump. 

Madam Speaker, that is as far as I can go. However, I promise you that maps will be shown. On the maps, we even have names of the people we are settling, so that in future somebody will know that on such and such a date, such and such a family was settled on this piece of land and nobody else will claim it. 

I thank those who raised the issue. I just want to assure them that a comprehensive solution to this issue is now here. I do not want to be associated with people getting land when they should not have got it or people getting land and selling when it is not supposed to be sold. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand, which hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere was required to clarify, was the presidential directive that was defied. 

I was under the impression that by the time the President made the directive, he was alive to the issues the hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere is trying to raise. However, from the way he is proceeding, it creates an impression that the President did not know what he was doing. I am only wondering, Madam Speaker, whether it is procedurally right for the hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere to come and tell us a story other than telling us why he is not implementing the presidential directive.

There is a presidential directive concerning the people of that place. They are saying the President has given them this and that but the minister, in a way, is trying to disobey that directive and solve the matter by himself. I am wondering whether he is not supposed to address us on the presidential directive other than address us on what he is doing. By the time the President made the directive, he was aware there was a ministry, which had actually done nothing and the people were suffering.

4.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to seek your indulgence so that I be allowed to comment at length on the submission by hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere. As we consider this matter, I want to beg that we have human feelings. We should have human feelings for those who are in weak positions and suffering. 

The impression the minister is giving this House is as if when we went there as a Committee of Government Assurance and Implementation, we did not have the opportunity to meet and discuss this matter with the RDCs, LCV chairpersons, CAOs, MPs and other political actors in that region. We met all these people and we have got pictures on our iPads to prove to you that the situation under which the displaced people are living is very inhuman. 

Furthermore, it is of no use for us at this stage to begin doing the historical perspective of 1972. When we were there, the displaced people sadly sang songs, which raised our emotions. They all pointed their walking sticks into the direction of the land from where they were displaced by Uganda Wildlife Authority. I do not think in 1972, Uganda Wildlife Authority was in existence; it was not there. These are not happenings, which have taken root very many years back. They still have the memories very fresh in their heads that once they settled there, that that tree was in their compound and they were dislodged. So, for us to come here, with due respect, to trivialise these issues is as if we are not concerned. 

Look at the Ndorobos - the 65 families who are all squeezed on two acres of land given by a Good Samaritan. The owner of that two-acre piece of land was even able to say, “Assuming I had rented out this land, how much money would I have got? However, because these are my fellow human beings and kinsmen, I could not let them suffer after they were dislodged.”

Really, Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business now, hon. Kabwegyere needs to be more serious on these issues. The issues we are asking the honourable minister to talk about relate to the implementation of the directive given by H.E the President. Whether it was during the campaign rally or during the campaign time, that is immaterial. That is why you are in government.

You are in government because of the same people. I am sure when you went there, you heard about how they love your party, the NRM and how they repeatedly kept saying that they vote NRM 100 per cent. Is that the best way you are going to pay these people? 

These are the people who have ably explained to the committee that they used to co-exist with the trees and animals harmoniously until when they were told, “from now on, you cannot be here.” That is the reason why the President, in his directive, asked the technocrats to re-examine this past good habitation of the humans, animals and trees. Really, you are about to go for campaigns, what will you tell these people? What new lie are you going to tell them, that they still love you and you still love them?

My plea, Madam Speaker, is that Government has to own up. By now, I would be expecting you to come up and that in the remedial, you have done this and that but there is nothing on the ground. People are dying of starvation and not even posho and beans can be accessed by these people. These are our citizens for whom we are supposed to be a government and whom we represent in this House and we have done nothing. This business of saying, “we shall, we shall”; how long is it going to take you to save those few lives there? I say this with a heavy heart because when we went there and saw the people, we could not believe that we are here as a government and we take pride in managing society when people are suffering.

Madam Speaker, the minister needs to be more serious. Government really needs to recommit itself to the suffering of these people and come up with something tangible. Can you promise something for these people for Christmas so that there will be a smile on their faces? Here you are, seated in an air-conditioned Chamber and you are all happy, wearing suits while people are suffering down there. I think we need to be serious on this. 

Honourable colleagues, if you took the trouble to go and see the suffering of those people the way we saw them and the way the other Members of Parliament have seen them, I do not think we would be here. I do not think hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere would be able to sit with us here and we look at him that way. Our tempers would rise.

Madam Speaker, let the relevant ministry officials who were directed by H.E the President to intervene in this matter come up with something solid that can be of help to these people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received this report and we concentrated on the plight of the Benet people; we did not talk about anything else. We wanted answers to the directive of the President of 25 February 2011, which has not been implemented. That is what we wanted to hear. 

Honourable members, we want answers to that letter. So let the Prime Minister come and answer, point by point. There were seven points in that letter. We want answers to each of those points and he should do it on Tuesday.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I would beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. Cabinet meets on Wednesday; by Tuesday, we will not have had the Cabinet’s imprint on this report. I would plead with you because I have also met the leaders - the chairpersons, CAOs and the RDCs - in Munyonyo and they are meeting on Monday in Kapchorwa. By that time, the work on the ground will have been concretised and these political leaders will be there.

On Wednesday, we will do Cabinet and I promise on Thursday, I will come to give you the most updated solution we are trying to provide. Madam Speaker, I plead.

MS TETE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Here with me are several documents, but I want to request the Prime Minister not to remote-control this matter like he has done in Bukwo. He has never been there. We only go to Kapchorwa and discuss issues of Bukwo in the hotels; he does not understand what my chairperson has seen. So I would implore you to go to Bukwo and solve the-(Interruptions)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the issue of settling the landless primarily means you find land, identify the people and settle them. Is it in order for the honourable member to think or even express that my physical presence in Bukwo will provide the land or identify the people? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the member is saying was also raised yesterday, that there is a tendency for people to go to Kapchorwa and think they have gone to the entire Sebei and yet there is Kween and Bukwo that have different problems. 

Honourable members, we want that statement, point by point, in response to the President’s directive from the Prime Minister because it was written to him. We will get the answers next week. Let us wait for the Prime Minister to come with the answers, point by point.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MOTOR ACCIDENT THAT RESULTED IN THE DEATH OF A CHILD IN KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY PREMISES

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY: (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I stand before you now, with pain and commiseration, to make a statement on the fatal accident that occurred at the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) headquarters on 18 November 2014.It involved a KCCA vehicle which knocked down a child called Ryan Ssemaganda, who later passed away as a result of his injuries. 

Madam Speaker, the background to this unfortunate incident is as follows: On 17 November 2014, the mother of the deceased, Ms Madina Namutebi, was arrested by the KCCA law enforcement officers for illegally vending goods on the streets of the city. She was held in police custody at the Central Police Station, Kampala and produced at City Hall Court on the 18 November 2014. 

On the day of her arraignment before court, two relatives of Madina showed up at the court premises together with Ryan. The child later on strayed away from these relatives and ended up in the parking lot for KCCA vehicles at the KCCA yard. That is where, unfortunately, the child got this accident, which robbed him of his life.

Madam Speaker, the police was duly informed and they immediately started conducting investigations. I am glad to say that the investigations are over and a charge of causing death by careless driving contrary to the Traffic and Road Safety Act was brought against the KCCA driver. The driver, as we speak, has been remanded in Luzira Prison and the case has been fixed for hearing on 16 December 2014 – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is reading a very important statement, which is so passionate to some of us, and we would have loved to follow it word for word. However, we are not able to locate it anywhere on the iPads. Can the minister circulate copies of what he is reading to the members so that we are able to follow? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you bring some copies?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, we sent a copy to the office of the Clerk. Unfortunately, belatedly-

THE SPEAKER: Is it a very long statement?

MR MURULI MUKASA: No, it is not a very long one; it is just a two-page statement, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Remember we demanded for it and it has been pending since the other week. Members, do you insist that you want the hard copies?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, it could be uploaded on the iPads of the members.

THE SPEAKER: Can you listen?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Yes, there is no problem.

THE SPEAKER: After this, the Clerk should ensure that it is posted so that Members can access it on their iPads. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, by the time KCCA arrived at the hospital, the baby had passed away.

The KCCA management availed both moral and financial assistance to the family of the deceased to meet the funeral expenses. At the moment, the KCCA administration is engaged with the family to resolve the question of compensation for the loss of the child.

Madam Speaker, we agreed that this is a very sad and unfortunate incident, which we earnestly pray and wish should not recur. Certainly, law enforcement in the city is necessary and by arresting the mother of this child for violating the existing city laws, the enforcement team were indeed doing their job. However, time and again, we have required the law enforcement team to perform their duties responsibly. 

The death of the child in a way was an act of negligence on the part of the persons under whose care this child was and indeed it also shows there was a lapse in concentration of those in charge of security at the KCCA premises. These are issues which we do not take lightly. Whether the child had an attendant or not, there was, and indeed there is, a need to have the capacity to detect any movement, especially of minors like Ryan, within the court premises, offices and the entire precincts of KCCA.

I wish to most heartily offer my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and as well to offer an apology on behalf of the KCCA political leadership and the management of KCCA for this unfortunate accident. I have –(Interjections)– I mean the MOP - KCCA falls under the Ministry of the Presidency and on behalf of the Minister in charge of the Presidency, I wish to duly offer –(Interruptions)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we are talking about an agency that has a law in form of the KCCA Act. It defines the political leadership of that authority in form of the Lord Mayor and his council. This same minister and his colleagues have maintained that despite the existence of a court order, there is no Lord Mayor and therefore no political leadership. The minister is now telling us that he is speaking and apologising on behalf of the political leadership of the Authority. Before I answer the likes of hon. Kakooza, is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the minister who speaks for KCCA in this House. That is what he is talking about.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much. I directed the KCCA management to write me a report on the measures that must be put in place to avoid the recurrence of such incidents in future. 

I have further directed the KCCA management to take action against whoever is culpable and could have been negligent in the execution of their duty. Indeed, I have been duly informed that the two law enforcement officers who are there have been interdicted pending the completion of the investigations.

Madam Speaker, I am mindful of my duty to this august House when called upon to make a statement on any matter especially an important matter like this one. I would like to also make a request; since this matter of the accident is already in court, it is therefore rendered sub judice. So, I will beg that debate on this matter be set aside. I so pray. Thank you.

MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, I sympathise with the statement of the minister. However, if I can vividly recall, here in Parliament we demanded for a more comprehensive statement, not only about the death of Ryan but about the entire law enforcement agency in KCCA - how they recruit, their command, how law enforcement is administered and how they are trained. This is because every day we see a lot of brutality and abuse of human rights and we want to know who these officers are. That is the kind of statement we demanded. 

I recognise that the part as regards to the death of Ryan has been handled, but we demanded a more comprehensive statement. We wanted, as Parliament, to re-examine that agency because it is at the forefront of abusing human rights in the city. Therefore, I do not believe that the statement we have received is comprehensive enough. So, are we procedurally right to receive a half and incomplete statement from the minister in charge of KCCA?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that the statement is not adequate; it is not what was requested for. We still demand a statement on the recruitment, composition and management of the law enforcement agency of KCCA. As for the one about the death, we can wait, but we want a statement on the other aspects. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am told the boy who died is not called Brian. The name is actually Ryan. So, that actually means that the minister went and fetched this information from elsewhere.

Madam Speaker, I was actually so perturbed when the minister said that this matter is in court. I was forced to think that perhaps KCCA did it purposely so that Parliament does not pronounce itself on this matter. The circumstances that took place on that day were really pathetic. For this poor woman to get arrested and although the child is breastfeeding he is denied access to the breast was so bad. 

First of all, don’t we have provisions within the court premises that would allow the child to be with its mother? I think that there is something fishy regarding this matter and we should not take it lightly. It is unfortunate that the minister is here and without shame, he is telling us that the matter is already sub judice. I know we are going to get another report next week, but this business of saying it is sub judice should stop. We should be allowed to debate this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you will stop at- Suppose you start suggesting a heavy sentence like death? That is the difficulty I have.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The case that is in court is about the death of Ryan; it is not about the harassment that Ryan got before he was killed. They denied him from breastfeeding and yet he was hardly two years old. 

When this matter was brought on the Floor of this Parliament, it had three major components. One is what hon. Muwanga Kivumbi stated, that is, about the law enforcement agency at City Hall. Two was about harassment - how could a baby of that age be denied the chance to breastfeed? The third was how he was killed eventually. What the minister has talked about is just one component, which could be in court. However, even before Ryan was killed by a vehicle, he could have died of hunger. I rest my case.

MS AJOK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed all of us, including KCCA and the vendors on the streets, have to abide by the law. As law enforcers in KCCA, I would like to see their child protection policy in law enforcement and also the policy for the protection of vulnerable people as they enforce the law. I really want to know about that. 

They are saying that they arrested this woman vending on the streets. That means that at some level, she is vulnerable and that vulnerability was not assessed yet they kept her overnight. Worse still, there is the vulnerability of the baby she was in charge of.  

Often, this country has let down children when they believe that there is a relative, whether that relative is capable of looking after that child to acceptable standards or not. It would appear that KCCA just abandoned that child because they thought there was a relative. Whether that relative was also struggling or not, whether they were capable or not of looking after a baby in the city environment, this was not assessed. The fact is that they took the mother and so they were directly responsible for the child. 

I would like to see KCCA’s child protection policy and their policy for protection of vulnerable people that is used while KCCA enforces the law, which is part of their duty. When you enforce the law, at the back of your mind you must protect vulnerable people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult to talk about this subject without talking about blame and responsibility. So, honourable minister, we want a statement on the recruitment policy, management and supervision of those people. That will give us an opportunity to speak without touching on the death. We want to know how they are managed, who they are, what their qualifications are and what their instructions are. I think that is what we want to hear without touching on the issue, which is in court.

4.29
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Mukasa Muruli): Much obliged, Madam Speaker. The baby is indeed Ryan and I thought that I pronounced his name properly. He is not Brian but Ryan. Therefore, I think I got the name right.

Indeed, it is the wish of honourable members to know about the recruitment policy, the type of people we use in law enforcement and so on. I will oblige, Madam Speaker, and come back with a comprehensive statement next week about the recruitment and the whole exercise of law enforcement in KCCA. 

Briefly, however, these people we use in the law enforcement department are recruited through an elaborate -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minster. We want a statement properly done, not from your head. It should be circulated in advance to the members so that they are able to debate from a point of information. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON STOLEN IVORY

4.31 
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a statement on the alleged loss of ivory from UWA stores. I trust that my statement was circulated and Members can access it on their iPads because I had been directed to present on the 25th and I made sure that on that day it was ready and submitted. Also this afternoon, I was assured by my director that it had been re-submitted. I hope that honourable members have it.

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, about two weeks ago on the 21st of November, following the media reports of the alleged loss of 1.3 tonnes of Uganda’s ivory stock piles from the Uganda Wildlife Authority strong room, I received communication from the House directing me to give an updated report on the 25th November on the loss of ivory and the action so far taken. This is what I am doing today.

Following the report that came out on 11 November 2014 regarding the alleged loss of ivory from UWA stores, I called the executive director who was on his way to Sydney, Australia, for the World Parks Congress. He assured me the investigations were on-going and somehow I thought that was fine. 

The following day, 12 November 2014, was a big day for us in the tourism sector; that was the day of the launch of a big conference, the 39th Congress of the Africa Travel Association (ATA). So I did not do much on that. On the 13th, I investigated further only to be told that actually, this was a theft and that neither the ministry nor police had been notified.

On the same day, I wrote to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, copying to all other relevant security agencies and offices requesting the minister to cause an investigation into the alleged loss of ivory. As I said earlier, I had come to learn that it had not yet been reported to the police and that the on-going investigations were internal.

On 14 November 2014, I received a report from the board chairperson giving details of the genesis of the media reports and the response and actions taken by UWA management. The chairman indicated, among other things, that the UWA intelligence unit, while on routine operations, had received information indicating irregularity in the management of the UWA strong room where ivory is stored.

I was further informed by the UWA board that earlier on, on 24 September 2014, UWA management had constituted an internal committee comprised of staff from the law enforcement unit and the internal audit unit to carry out stock taking of the ivory stockpiles in the stores. The committee that had been put in place presented a preliminary report to the management - and we believe that the contents of this report leaked to the press - raising various concerns regarding the operations of the storage room.

The preliminary report noted a variance of close to 1,335 kilograms in the actual stock of ivory compared to the records. They recommended for detailed investigations to determine the variance and circumstances under which this could have happened. 

When the UWA board received this report on the alleged loss of ivory from management, the board noted that the report had inconsistencies, which made it unreliable, in respect of the ivory stockpiles at UWA. Accordingly, they made the following resolutions and decisions:

1. 	To further conduct thorough investigations by the UWA board audit committee and to report to the full board by 30 November 2014.

2. 	To encourage experts to conduct a thorough ivory inventory and develop appropriate records of ivory stockpiles.

3. 	The locks to the ivory storeroom were to be changed and the new keys be given to three identified staff who should be present whenever the ivory room is opened.

4. 	A set of spare keys be kept with one of the UWA bankers.

5. 	Electronic locks be installed on all corridor doors of the UWA building.

6. 	Management should conduct annual stocktaking of ivory in all stores, including conducting spot checks whenever need arises.

7. 	That ivory stockpiles be separated from guns.

8. 	Disciplinary action be taken against all staff suspected to have been involved in the alleged loss of ivory. 

9. 	At the end of the investigation, all the ivory stockpiles should be burnt in public view.

10. 	The three UWA staff who were directly responsible for management of the ivory store, together with the two intelligence staff implicated in the report, be sent on suspension. These were: Moses Olinga, warden law enforcement; Moses Sikuku, head ranger; John Lapeyo, clerk to the armoury; William Echenyu, intelligence ranger; and Louis Muhumuza, intelligence ranger.

On 17 November 2014, after getting that report, I replied to the communication of the chairperson of UWA board, proposing the need to have the executive director and the internal auditor take leave in order to pave way for an independent investigation. On 19 November 2014, a special board meeting was convened. At the meeting, the board recommended to the minister to have the executive director go on leave and the two UPDF officers be recalled by their parent ministry.

On 21 November 2014, I wrote back to the chairman of the board upholding the board recommendations. I also requested the chairman to oversee a smooth transition from Dr Seguya to Mr Raymond Engena as acting executive director. 

The Board implemented the directive on 24 November 2014 and Mr Engena took office on that day. In my letter, I had also communicated that the chairman of the board should supervise the investigation exercise and make sure that we get the report.

With regard to conservation trends, the board submitted the current stock of elephants in the country, which I have in my office. However on 30th of November, as had been requested, a special meeting of the board of trustees took place but again, unfortunately, the report produced by the audit committee was disputed and the investigation team was directed to go back and verify further.

It should be borne in mind that on 19th November, again through the media, it was reported that the IGG had been directed to investigate this same case. I now know that the IGG officers reported to UWA offices yesterday and I trust that they have started their work. We are waiting for the outcome of the investigations and those who have been sent on leave will only be called in to testify as to what they know about the loss of the ivory.

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, that is what I can say as of now. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Members, that is the update on what is going regarding the issue of the ivory. I think the matter is under investigation. 

4.41
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for that statement. I have observations to make about the management of these institutions.

From the report, the minister has indicated that ivory was under the custody of a specific body. Looking at the management of the Uganda Wildlife Authority, this Authority was set up by an Act of Parliament but they have brought in the UPDF and the police to work within the Authority. I want to get your comment, honourable minister, on having UPDF and the police working in the Authority. 

Also, look at circumstances that have been happening, like in Ishasha where a UPDF officer who was attached to UWA was caught stealing money at the gates of Uganda Wildlife Authority; do you want to imply that Uganda Wildlife Authority has no capacity to manage wildlife in Uganda? Is this the reason why we have to get other arms of Government to assist us?

Does the army have the same competence as Uganda Wildlife Authority? Do they go to the same training institutions so that they can manage the Uganda Wildlife Authority? Have they got the same qualifications? I want your clarification on that. 

Here you indicate that UPDF was there. They could have connived. With my little experience, other than in situations of war, UPDF are supposed to be in the barracks but now you are bringing them to manage animals in the national parks. Police is supposed to be keeping order but you are bringing them to manage wildlife. Is this the way Uganda should move? Thank you so much.

4.43
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister because from her submission, she has vigilantly come out to do the needful. 

From the minister’s submission and suggested measures, it is clear that the controls were weak. It is after this that she is suggesting putting controls in place. I do not blame her because it is never too late to do the right thing. However, this should also apply to other ministries; controls should always be strengthened so as to avoid such. I thank you for the actions you are currently taking, honourable minister.

4.44
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. With a lot of positions, I believe that there is a lot of contradiction. With our eyes, we get a lot of sensory data and that brings in the question of physical objects. 

The issue of ivory is one issue, but there a lot of things to it. We have many things that are happening within UWA. In fact, regarding the issue to do with forests, especially Kapkwata Forest, your people of UWA have been cutting down these trees and selling them. Timber is always taken to Kenya through Suam border. Even in Bukwo, in Suam, they have been cutting this timber and selling it to Kenya. There is a lot of corruption –(Interruption)

MR SABILA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to give some information. Today we are talking about ivory but as my colleague has rightfully said, when you go to the national park, which is being manned by Uganda Wildlife Authority, to whom we allocate a lot of resources for enforcement, the forest is more degraded than it was when it was still maintained under collaborative management. This time we have a lot of uniforms and guns but the forest is now degraded. 

All the natural trees - the big Elgon teak trees - have been cut down. If you want to bear witness, go to Mt Elgon National Park and then you will wonder whether the people who are supposed to conserve are the people who are supposed degrade. I think we should get another name for these people. They tell us they are conserving for generations but they are destroying the forest cover dangerously. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

4.46
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report.

Looking at the ivory that was stolen, most of it does not come from old elephants that have died naturally. These are elephants that have either been killed by poachers or by the neighbouring communities. The animals normally stray to the communities so there is always that conflict. 

To solve the issue of ivory being stored at UWA prematurely, the best solution is to control the human-animal conflict. My question to the minister therefore is: when are you putting up the electric fence in the most vulnerable game parks that have got these elephants? Thank you very much.

4.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, BUSONGORA COUNTY NORTH, KASESE): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to explain to the people of Kasese and to Ugandans why Uganda Wildlife Authority unilaterally annexed land, which the people of Kasese were occupying. The land is called Kyabatukura and it lies between Kibaale National Park and Ibuga Prisons. There were communities staying there and the mark stones and boundaries for Kibaale National Park were well known. However, out of the blue, Uganda Wildlife Authority annexed that area and placed it under Kibaale National Park. Eventually, the people were evicted. 

Can the minister explain the circumstances under which that inhuman act was done? Two, what will you do about the people that were evicted? We petitioned your ministry and UWA but nothing is forthcoming. What is the reason?

4.49
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the report but I have a few issues to raise. 

One, this ivory has been tempting as it is being kept in UWA’s custody. Where do you take it finally? Some countries like the US and Tanzania that used to sell the ivory also started destroying it after some time. So, how do you dispose of this ivory? Why do you keep it in your stores for a long time and yet the boys who are guarding the ivory are poorly paid? Eventually, they are tempted to sell it. Why don’t you get a solution on how you can eventually dispose it? 

Secondly, animals are still disturbing peasants in the villages, for example along River Muzizi; hippos are always invading people and destroying their crops and these people are tempted to fight and kill them. Why don’t you come up with some measures on how you can control these animals so that they do not stray from the parks to the wanainchi’s land? I thank you. 

4.50
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM,	District Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The story we read in the papers about the officers implies that the officers know the value of ivory more than any other person. They also count the ivory when they are storing it and I think they keep checking on it so they know the inventory of the ivory. From what I know, much of this ivory is from animals that have been killed by the poachers. That is why, as my fellow MP has said, we normally see many other countries destroying this ivory. 

I was trying to see if I could access this report on my iPad; unfortunately, I cannot access it. However, I do not see any reason why this ivory is kept to pile up for so long because this eventually leads people into temptation. If it is supposed to be destroyed, I do not think it would take so many years to do so. If it is to be sold, then it should be sold. For a custodian to be sitting on billions for years, even when he is not a sinner he can be led into temptation.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to tell us why she stored the ivory for so many years and now she is looking for it and it cannot be traced, when it should have been retrieved and turned into money or destroyed. I do not want to say this, but it seems there are many accomplices in this trade. My concern, therefore, is: how much have we lost as a country through this careless custody? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to record my attendance on the Hansard. 

Secondly, I want to thank hon. Boona because she has expressed my concern. We are not told how this ivory accumulated. It seems to have been a big chunk and certainly the officers knew the value. So, why keep the ivory in the stores over a long period to tempt people? 

According to the minister’s statement, she did not seem to be in control of the officers who were guarding either the stores or whatever other stations. She does not seem to be in control. Wherever she was, she should have got this information and acted immediately, well knowing the value of the ivory. 

I think what we want to see is stringent measures and controls in the ministry to ensure that whatever ivory is kept in the stores or other ministry inventories is safe. I know that the matter is under investigation and that the culprits will be brought to book and punished by the law. However, the actions taken by the ministry do not seem very convincing. We want to see stringent controls in place to ensure that similar cases do not occur. We would not want to see more robberies either of ivory or any other ministry inventories. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you come up, there is a recommendation here that at the end of all investigations, stockpiles should be burnt in public view. You know you are a very poorly funded ministry; don’t you think you should get authority from the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) to sell and get money officially for your ministry. (Applause) You are so poor; you need this money.

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Members for the concerns and questions raised. 

I will start with why we engage UPDF and Police in UWA affairs. Definitely, this was a new development, which came up a few years ago, and this was because of the terrorist threat. You know parks are quite wide and spread out, so these are areas that are most likely to be utilised if they are not well guarded. Therefore, it was found necessary at the national level to have the UPDF help to pacify with us. 

While UWA focuses on conservation, we had to involve UPDF and the Police in pacification of the areas. I think that in terms of pacification, they have tried because now we can respond immediately. They have also helped to train our people - the rangers and other intelligence networks. Of course, there are always shortfalls but that was the main reason why we went in for UPDF.

Another question that was asked was about timber and the forests. Yes, we have a lot of products for which we are responsible. Two years ago, I was on the other side - the forests - and we were in charge of 70 per cent of the forests and UWA, where I am now, is responsible for 15 per cent of the forests in Uganda. 

As far as I know, UWA forests are supposed to be a no-go area. We are not supposed to cut trees or do anything in those areas. So if there is a report to that effect, I really want to follow it up and find out what damage has been done. Definitely, that has not been brought to my attention. Maybe it came up earlier but I have just heard it from here. I promise to come back here and tell you how much damage has been done and what measures can be put in place.

On the issue of conflict between man and wild animals, immediately after this I am going to read another statement where I will give some proposals on the human-wildlife conflict. I will also seek your support to make sure that we synergise in finding a solution to this conflict. 

A question was asked as to why we do not dispose of the ivory. When URA made these arrests, my immediate reaction was that we should burn the ivory. However, looking at the CITES provisions and international practice, not so many countries have destroyed ivory and I do not know why. What I know is that we have got strong and strict measures on how to control stocks of ivory and these are supposed to be in appendix 1, where trade in any of those is prohibited. 

Last May, there was conference in London, which was supposed to be attended by heads of state and the G8 heads of state proposed to finance the 14 African countries to see how to handle and stockpile all the ivory in these countries. So we are still waiting. In fact today, I was supposed to meet one of the ambassadors of those countries again with the proposal. As it is now, the practice is that we are not actually burning. Even those who have pretended to burn have only done it half way. Some have tried to destroy it but they only crush it and keep it. So, there is something that we are trying to unearth. 

Globally, we go out and agitate because definitely, ivory does not add value to life and we spend a lot of money to protect it. This is international politics, so we have got to make our voice heard and we have got to make our contribution.

Another member asked how much we have lost since that time. As you have heard, there has not been an inventory of stockpiles in the country for quite some time. The reports I am getting is that there was one in 2012 but before then, there were no inventories, although they started recording ivory recovered in 1990. So between 1990 and 2012, there was no record. We have got the record there but there was no inventory taken after every quarter or after every year of ivory we have in stock. 

As we speak, we have over 3000 kilograms in store. We have also got other stocks with Uganda Revenue Authority, immigration department and upcountry. So we believe that with the IGG’s investigations, together with the experts that have been proposed, we should be able to have a real statement of what we have in this country at the end of this exercise. Definitely, I would love proposals from Parliament on how they think we should handle this.

There was another issue about Kyabatukura. This is a case about land between that community and the Uganda Wildlife Authority. It is a court case in Fort Portal and we are waiting for the outcome of that court case. 

However, as you have heard from the Prime Minister’s Office, there are many conflicts all over the country. What I have proposed with my team is that we should actually go back and engage the stakeholders. If it means coming back to Parliament and recommending de-gazettement, that will be done by Parliament. However, I would not recommend that to Parliament because the moment we start de-gazettement of parks, we shall end up with none because everybody wants more land and yet we know that tourism is contributing 9 per cent of our GDP. Madam Speaker, I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will keep us updated on the progress of the investigations and the sale when it is done. We shall want to know the outcome of these inquires that you are doing.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to give a statement on the destruction of lives and property by wildlife in the country. In order for us to be on board, I want to give a little background so that you can appreciate the problem as it stands. To understand these challenges caused by wildlife destroying property and lives in Uganda, we need to look back at the history of wildlife conservation in Uganda. 

Prior to independence, many areas in Uganda were unoccupied because the human population was very low. Uganda had a bigger area under wilderness and wildlife used to roam in extensive areas; for instance, the whole area between the current Murchison Falls National Park, through the areas of Amuru and Adjumani up to South Sudan, was unoccupied and records indicate that elephants would migrate between Murchison Falls National Park and Nimule in Sudan. It was therefore a normal practice for wild animals to migrate through wide areas, sometimes crossing borders, as wildlife knows no political borders. 

However, between the 1980s and 1990s, most areas that used to be wildlife migratory routes had been reduced to create room for human settlement and conflicts between humans and wildlife started emerging. A case in point is Lake Mburo National Park where an honourable Member of Parliament has been asking me for electric fences and definitely, we are going to work on it. At the time of its creation, the national park extended 700 square kilometres up to the main Masaka-Mbarara Road but it was reduced to about half that size to pave way for human settlement in the late 1980s. Unfortunately, despite the reduction in size of the park, the wildlife did not know about this reduction and they continued traversing these areas. To date, we have plenty of animals in this area that were born after the 1980s and are resident outside the park and the problem is escalating.

The major causes of human-wildlife conflict around the country can be summarised as: one, the increasing human population against the static land size. That means every remaining wilderness has been and continues to be used for settlement and cultivation. As animals trace their historic migratory routes by instinct, they destroy property and sometimes lives. This is unfortunate but true. Even where efforts have been made to block such movements, wild animals force their way and even try to move around obstacles thus spreading the conflict further.

Two is the lack of a buffer zone to protect the areas. At the creation of the first national parks in Uganda, areas around the national parks were gazetted as buffer zones between the national parks and people. Today, there are no more buffer zones and almost all protected areas are directly neighbouring local communities who are cultivators or pastoralists. In most areas around Bwindi Impenetrable National Park, Queen Elizabeth National Park, Kibaale National Park and even Murchison Falls National Park, gardens of local communities extend up to the park boundary pillars and sometimes they extend inside the park boundaries. When people cultivate right up to the boundary, they even attract wild animals and this causes a direct conflict between man and animals.

The other factor has been the over fishing that has increased the risk of crocodiles attacking people. Crocodiles have lived in the waters of Lake Victoria and other bodies from time immemorial and their main source of food is fish. However, due to poor fishing methods that have contributed to over fishing, the crocodiles in the water bodies have less food and when the humans get into their water to fetch water, bathe or even fish, they become easy prey to the starving crocodiles.

Another reason is bush destruction. Bush destruction all over the country has made the habitat of snakes disappear and now they have become a problem to people. This is because all their habitats have been invaded, including wetlands.

What are the key problem animals in Uganda? The problem animals differ from place to place. In areas surrounding Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls National Parks, the main problem animals are elephants and also buffaloes. Around Lake Mburo National Park, it is buffaloes and zebras. Buffaloes are dangerous to people but zebras are mainly destructive to fences, water dams and pasture. They also bring ticks to the ranches. 

In Karamoja, the main problem animals are still elephants and buffaloes in the Karenga Corridor. In areas around lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, Edward and George, crocodiles are the big problem. Occasionally, there are reports of carnivores that include leopards, hyenas and sometimes lions in the cattle keeping areas. The communities retaliate by poisoning these carnivores that are on the verge of extinction. 

I want to inform Members of Parliament that we have got so many complaints about lions. People come to Uganda to see the big five but lions are becoming less available. This is because they are being poisoned by pastoralists who think that lions are eating their animals. So, this is a big threat and I really intend to engage with the communities around there to see how we can repopulate our lion species. 

The Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, under which the Uganda Wildlife Authority falls, appreciates the concerns of the honourable Members of Parliament and the general public on matters of the human-wildlife conflict. We acknowledge that some Ugandans have indeed lost their lives at the mercy of wildlife, and crop destruction by wildlife is a key challenge for communities living near the wildlife and those living near protected areas.

On the other hand, however, we recognise that wildlife is a key ingredient of our tourism in Uganda as Uganda’s tourism relies significantly on wildlife and visitors to protected areas. Tourism is now a leading foreign exchange earner for the country, contributing over US$ 1 billion in 2013 in form of foreign exchange to the national economy. We cannot, therefore, afford to do away with the wildlife as this can have significant impact on the economy. 

Many countries, particularly in southern Africa, have realised that wildlife is a resource that can be utilised for economic development even when this wildlife is outside protected areas. Many land owners in these countries have gone into wildlife ranching and are reaping big. Maybe this is what we need to do, especially for some areas around Lake Mburo National Park, the Kafu Basin and in Karamoja where there is significant wildlife on community land.

What has Government done to address this conflict? One, we have tackled the policy framework. The Uganda Wildlife Policy was reviewed, revised and approved by Cabinet in March 2014. The policy is aimed at enhancing wildlife contribution to national growth, employment and socio-economic transformation.

The policy has identified the mitigating of human and wildlife conflict and enhancing positive attitudes towards the conservation of wildlife resources as a key to be addressed by Government. Several strategies have been developed to effectively mitigate the human-wildlife conflict, including provision of compassion for loss and injury as a result of wildlife damage. The enabling legislation is also soon coming to the House as the Uganda Wildlife (Amendment) Bill.

The Wildlife Act has already undergone a technical review and is currently before the First Parliamentary Council for drafting. From there, it will go to Cabinet and then Parliament. I urge the honourable members to support the proposals in the Bill when it comes up for debate to ensure that the issues of human-wildlife conflict mitigation are well addressed and revised in the law.

We have had specific interventions apart from legislation. One is that we have put specific interventions to minimise the human-wildlife conflict and these interventions vary from one area to another. There is no single intervention that can be taken as a 100 per cent effective, but at least each one of them helps to reduce the impact.

One of the interventions is digging of trenches around the protected areas. The trenches measuring seven feet wide, five feet deep have been demonstrated as a blockage for non-jumping animals, especially elephants, buffaloes and others, from crossing into communities or shambas and gardens. The intervention has been implemented in Queen Elizabeth National Park, which has a total boundary perimeter of 188 kilometres suitable for trench construction, of which 109 kilometres have been covered, leaving 79 kilometres to be covered. 

In Kibaale National Park, a total perimeter of 158 kilometres is suitable for trenching but so far we have done 58 kilometres, leaving 100 to be covered. Around Murchison Falls National Park, we have so far done only 46.5 kilometres and the total boundary of the suitable trench-able area is about 200 kilometres. Some of the areas, which have not been covered, are those within the swamps and water bodies. In some areas, beehives are being used in combination with trenches to deter the elephants. In order to cover the remaining areas with trenches, we shall need about Shs 10 billion for all those areas I have mentioned. I would definitely rely on the support of Parliament when it comes to budgeting, to make sure that this budget line is not struck out.

We have also come up with another measure, which is planting of a thorny plant along the boundary of the park or around the garden. If properly maintained, it forms a thick hedge with thorns thereby preventing jumping animals from crossing into community land. This is effective against baboons, monkeys, antelopes as well as bush pigs. The method has been used in Bwindi Impenetrable National Park with 77 kilometres planted, Queen Elizabeth National Park with five kilometres planted and Kibaale National Park with six kilometres planted.

We have also constructed stone walls. In places where stones are readily available, they are carefully piled to form a wall measuring approximately one metre high. This is called a buffalo wall and in some areas, it has been effective against buffalos. The method has been used in Mgahinga Gorilla National Park.

We also employ direct scaring of animals. In some situations, UWA deploys rangers to do scare shooting in the air to chase away elephants and hippos from community crops. This is a reactionary measure but is the quickest way to address immediate problems when animals cross the park and raid people’s gardens. This is a temporary measure since bullets are expensive and the limitation of staff members in some areas makes the intervention not very effective.

We have also tried the use of beehives. In some areas around Queen Elizabeth, Murchison Falls and Kibaale National Parks, beehives have been used as a means to keep the problem animals away. This strategy is not effective against elephants but is also an economic venture. We are trying to do this at a commercial level so that we can support the farmers to add value to their products. Through tourism, we will be able to market the honey to various hotels and lodges within the parks.

Another area is direct capture and translocation. Some animals are physically captured and translocated to protected areas. This has been applied to wild animals such as pythons, crocodiles and even some antelopes and carnivores that stray from their protected areas. However, translocation needs big investment into inputs like transportation platforms for big animals, a large vehicle for transporting the captured animals, traps for leopards and other big cats. Uganda Wildlife Authority is in the process of acquiring specialised equipment for this exercise.

We have now moved further into collaborative wildlife management and sport hunting. In order to give immediate and direct benefit to the communities from wildlife, UWA has started collaborative wildlife management in 10 areas in the country. In these areas, sport hunting has also been allowed, based on quotas issued annually to the sport hunters. The proceeds from the trophies give the community direct benefits. This has improved the relationship between the local communities and the wildlife, which are resident on their land or near their dwelling places. This is the best intervention Government can give to the people around Lake Mburo National Park and Karamoja. We are expanding this programme to cover other aspects like wildlife ranching and other wildlife enterprises.

The other day I was talking to hon. Kamuntu who has got lots of zebras on his farm and he was complaining that they are eating his salt. I told him if he can look after them, from every zebra that we can permit to be sport-hunted he will earn at least US$ 30,000. I am sure he does not earn US$ 30,000 from a cow. So I think that is something quite attractive but we are still experimenting. We need to see how better to improve on that.

In order to save our people from crocodiles, we are building water points. In areas where crocodiles have been attacking people going to fetch water like in Lake Katwe Town Council and Apac, Government has built cages where people go to fetch water to reduce the chances of crocodiles attacking them. This has been effective as they have reduced the incidents in these areas. More cages are planned for Mayuge as we call upon the district local government and other government agencies to support this initiative. This will save our people from the menace of crocodiles as you cannot capture and translocate all the crocodiles in the lakes that are even interconnected.

Compensation or compassion: Most times when something happens, everybody wants to have compensation but I want to assure the august House that definitely, the moment we start saying that we are going to compensate, we shall not win; we shall lose out because we do not have that kind of money. So we have agreed and recommended in the Bill that is with the First Parliamentary Council that instead of compensation, we look at humanitarian compassionate assistance. In very unfortunate situations where we have lost lives and suffered injuries from wildlife attacks, Uganda Wildlife Authority provides humanitarian assistance to the affected family as a form of compassion but not compensation. The revised law will make this a mandatory compassionate support.

Fencing: A number of colleagues in Parliament have been asking for fencing and indeed, we would love to do that if we could afford it. The honourable Member from Nyabushozi asked why Government has not fenced Lake Mburo and my brother has also repeated it here. I want to assure honourable members that fencing may not solve the challenge of wildlife outside Lake Mburo National Park. Fencing will make the problem worse as it will cut off so many animals outside the park that will lose the connectivity with the park. Some of these animals were born and have stayed their entire lives outside the park. It is not necessarily true that these animals leave the park and come out to destroy people’s farms and lives; these animals are resident outside the park and the best approach is to make them beneficial to the land owners through collaborative management arrangement.

Government has seriously considered fencing and engaged the French Development Agency to undertake a feasibility study for fencing Lake Mburo National Park. We hope to use the results of the feasibility study to take appropriate decisions.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I want to assure the Members that Government would like to work with you and other stakeholders to mitigate the human-wildlife conflicts in the country. The pressure to de-gazette protected areas will not solve the problem of human-wildlife conflicts but will make it worse. 

The way forward is to provide an enabling environment for people to benefit directly from wildlife conservation programmes so that they can take on wildlife enterprises as an alternative source of livelihood. This has worked elsewhere, including for our brothers in Kenya, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana and South Africa. So it can work here and we can learn good lessons from these countries and replicate them here.

I want to reiterate that I really want to engage the communities living next to the parks so that we can brainstorm together and come up with permanent solutions that we all understand. Otherwise, solutions that we may be proposing from our point of view may not be necessarily appropriate for the locations that we are talking about. A programme is being drawn up and we will be interacting with each and every community that has got a problem so that we find solutions together. Madam Speaker, I want to submit. Thank you.

5.24
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the good statement as well. 

My issue of concern is mainly monitoring. In your statement, you said you will be coming back to Parliament to get some money to construct trenches and a few other things. You also claimed that you have 3,000 kilograms of ivory somewhere that you have not put to use. Can you tell us, if this ivory is equated to money, how much would this be? What would the actual monetary value of this ivory be? We could help you to get the money without coming here to disturb us. If you have it there and you are just stealing it, what value are we looking at? 

I am sorry to go back to the first statement but I think it would be very important for us to hear from the minister on this. When you talk about ivory, I am sure most of the members do not know its worth as well. How much have we lost as a country if equated to money? We can then know the gravity of the problem and how to find solutions instead of keeping trillions of shillings somewhere that have not been put to use just because we want to follow international protocols that may not necessarily benefit us. So I would really like to know, in terms of money, how much we are looking at. Thank you.

5.26
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has made serious statements here, which I would want to seek clarification on, especially the statement she made that the animals are resident outside the park. Why do you allow animals to reside outside the park to disturb human beings? Why do you permit them? This is very abominable, Madam Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification. 

When the minister says there are some interventions including compassion assistance, what does she mean? We expect Government to compensate people who lose property, human lives and crops. My district, Agago, has been suffering with wild animals especially elephants, particularly in the sub-counties of Omiya Pachwa, Paimol, Lapono, Lukole and Adilang. People are suffering year in, year out. Their crops are destroyed and they are not getting anything. Moreover, these interventions you are talking about in terms of community support are not being received. 

I do not want to speak much about it but really, do my people deserve this? If they do not deserve it, allow me to start permitting them to kill the animals because it is too much and I report this every year. Sometimes I call the Executive Director of UWA who promises a lot of interventions, which are not done. This year alone, we have lost a lot of crops including simsim, sorghum and so on from the gardens in all the sub-counties I have mentioned. All these interventions you have talked about do not cover my district at all. So, I wonder what you mean. 

These animals actually reside in my district. I have personally seen the elephants several times because every time they invade, my people call me and I go to see them. I have always stopped them but this time I think I should permit them- Collectively, we should look for guns and start- (Interjections)- Yes, it is so unfortunate. I am sorry to say this but it is too much. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to seek clarification on the trenches. The minister talked about trenches around Kidepo. My district borders Kidepo National Park but I do not see the trenches that you are talking about. From which part of Kidepo National Park have you started digging the trenches? 

You are also reporting here that sport hunting is done in Karamoja. My district borders Karamoja and we would benefit from this sport hunting but it is not done. So, what is actually taking place? Madam Speaker, I want to end here and I expect to receive serious interventions from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Let us use only two minutes, please. We have some other work on our Order Paper.

5.29
MRS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira District): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this report. 

In Lira District, we do not have forests and it took us by surprise when a leopard attacked our people. It was serious and I have the pictures on my iPad. One of them almost lost his eyes and two more had injuries on their heads. I remember I reported this attack to the minister and here she is saying there is humanitarian assistance and compassion. If there is humanitarian assistance, how do we access it? I think this is the right time to tell honourable members how we can access this humanitarian assistance so that our people can benefit from it. 

I also want to ask if we can have some of these officials at the district level because when our people were attacked by this leopard, it took some time for the UWA officials to come and help our people. We called them and they said they were busy elsewhere. It took them about three days to come to rescue our people. I do not know if you can put some of these officials at the district headquarters so that when there are some incidences of attacks, they can come to the rescue of the people. Thank you so much.

5.31
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from Kaabong District, which hosts one of the biggest parks in this country and which is earning a lot of revenue. 

Madam Speaker, I want some clarification from the minister. She has just told us in her report that interventions have been made in most of these parks, but it is unfortunate that in Kidepo National Game Park there is nothing. There are no trenches, fences or bee hives. Can I know what criteria are being used to make interventions at the other parks? Is it because Kidepo is very far from the city towards South Sudan? 

Secondly, the minister was telling us about sport hunting. Yes, sport hunting is there in Kidepo National Game Park but it is not helping us to stop the animals from destroying the crops. They can sport-hunt but the animals still come to destroy crops. 

Madam Speaker, Karenga Sub-county is not even two kilometres away from the park and the animals have co-existed with the people for years. However of recent, we are getting a lot of problems with food shortages because of animals like buffaloes, elephants, antelopes and zebras. I want to get some clarification from the minister because we have been complaining time and again, we have had meetings about this but there is nothing they have done for Kidepo especially concerning animal problems. People are really crying day and night. Last week, I was called by the chairperson of - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute. You have a lot of animals. 

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was called by the chairperson of Lobalangit Sub-county where an elephant killed a woman in the garden when she was harvesting her simsim. When such a situation happens, the rangers do not consider what happened; instead they accuse you of killing the animal, if you killed it. What do we love? Should we love the animals and not love human beings?

5.34 
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

My only concern is about the way you have ruled out compensation. To the best of my knowledge, Uganda Wildlife Authority is a legal entity, which has powers to sue or be sued. So if you rule out compensation willingly, do you want people to begin taking UWA to court? I believe once they go to court, you will be forced to compensate these people.

Madam Speaker, my constituency borders Toro-Semiliki Game Reserve and we have had issues with that game park. People have lost lives and surprisingly, it is the game rangers that have resorted to shooting the people. Recently, a man had gone to get his cows that had strayed to the park only to be shot dead. We complained and raised the issue but up to now, nothing has been done. He was shot by the game rangers but the only explanation they gave us was that the man had gone to poach.

Secondly, much as the wild animals stray to the people’s land, the domestic animals also stray to these game parks. However whenever cows go to the game park - you cannot control cows and they end up straying - the game rangers charge Shs 5000 per cow; so if a herdsman has 500 heads that have strayed, he has pay Shs 2,500,000 in order to rescue those cows. They remain caged with no water or pasture until the person gets the money to pay and then the cows are rescued. This is done on a daily basis and it has even become a business. They enjoy it when the cows stray because they can get money. But when it comes to them, there is nothing; we never get the compassion you are talking about. 

Sometime back, I informed the UWA people when a lion was killing the cows –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for the report. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister did not come out very clearly on the matter I raised last week concerning the animals that cross from South Sudan. We have animals like elephants and hippos that cross from South Sudan to my constituency in Amuru. They destroy crops and move back to South Sudan. Our people contacted the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the response they got was that UWA does not have much control over animals that cross from other countries. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when the honourable minister talks of compassion not compensation, we really feel so scared. This is the time of harvest in our districts and animals are destroying people’s crops. You find one person with five hectares of groundnuts and five hectares of maize that are being destroyed and the Government is not coming out clearly on compensation. I feel that Government needs to look into this matter very carefully. Someone cannot lose 10 acres of crops and Government does not give anything in terms of compensation to that person.

We have been raising the issue of animals destroying people’s crops and lives for many years. It is coming to four years of raising these very important issues and honourable minister, we were emphasising various interventions. I thought by now you would be telling the House where the fencing has taken place - in which national park - where the digging of trenches has taken place and where the bees were put to control animals. I really feel that –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas, the minister has always been spot-on in her reports, I think this one has been more academic and theoretical than practical.

I was born, raised, grew up and studied in Bunyaruguru where there is a national park, that is, Queen Elizabeth National Park. Fifty per cent of the park is in my area; they have tried stone hedges, they have dug trenches and they have even tried to put people but the problem has persisted. Even these bee hives do not work. We get problems with elephants every day. 

Madam Speaker, this problem can only be solved by electric fencing. I even offered the ministry to undertake a feasibility study because they did not have money. I got over Shs 200 million from donors to do the feasibility study and it is Shs 150 million per kilometre. When the President came, we told him and he called the minister. We were there at the function when you talked. We heard you on loudspeaker and you said, this financial year we are making 41 kilometres around Bunyaruguru to Katerera. Now you are here dilly-dallying with the issue of electric fencing. We budgeted Shs 3 billion for that electric fencing and you are now telling us that you want to fence Mburo where there are these small Kobs simply because you say they are taking ticks to animals, which ticks can be controlled.

My people are typical cultivators. They cultivate beans and cassava and that is their livelihood. They are poor not because they are lazy but because of the national park. Should I tell them that the Government is not going to put up electric fences, because it has always been an election issue –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice and thank the minister for the statement and also the ministry for the measures put in place to address this issue of the human-wildlife conflict.

Madam Speaker, I have two concerns. One is about boundaries. Honourable minister, your statement did not come out clearly on how you are addressing this issue. The main cause of human-wildlife conflict is unclear boundaries. Much as we agree that people encroach on the national parks, animals also cross their national parks and come to the gardens. There are no clear boundaries and this august House resolved one time that you survey and reopen boundaries of these national parks. Madam Speaker, I did not hear the minister’s response on what they have done so far in reopening the boundaries of these national parks.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of compassion versus compensation. This has been happening and UWA has been saying that they do not have any law to guide them on compensation. Now they are coming up with amendments to the Act with suggestions of compassion and not compensation. This is still going to leave us with a big problem because we are leaving it at the mercy of UWA. They will come and give whatever they can because there is no law in place to say, “Please, pay this or that”. So I would request that we look at this because we lose so many people we have –(Member timed out.)

5.43
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have read the statement of the honourable minister and found some issues, which I feel she needs to explain to help us appreciate her situation.

When she says that human activities have encroached on game reserves, she is not really telling us how many acres human beings have taken from the animals. As far as I know, there is little acreage which has gone; but when you analyse the death toll that is being experienced around these places, are they worth it?

The other thing that I would want the honourable minister to tell us about is the number of people that have been killed by both the animals and also your rangers. It is not enough to come here and tell us that tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner. Who are you bringing this money for; for the animals or for us? I am challenging you, honourable minister; suppose it was your son? It is a very big question that you cannot answer. I would ask you to start taking the lives of Ugandans seriously. 

5.46
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East Constituency, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent mountain gorillas in this Parliament and I now want to speak for them. 

In Kanungu, we have the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and also the Queen Elizabeth National Park but the actions of the ministry have not motivated the people of Kanungu to protect the animals. From Bwindi, we only get 20 per cent of the gate collections as a local community, which are peanuts. Recently, we wanted to construct a road to connect Kanungu to Kisoro but the ministry refused. Two parishes in Mpungu Sub-county in Kinkizi West were erroneously gazetted as part of the park and people are not happy. Because of that, we always have to restrain the people who always pick spears to kill the mountain gorillas.

The other day a road was cut off and Government did not intervene. As a result, six mothers died in that community. However, when a mountain gorilla fell sick, a helicopter was dispatched and people had to spear a mountain gorilla in retaliation. It is as serious as that. You must motivate the people in order for them to protect the animals.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister says that the animals, which live with people around Lake Mburo should be left to co-exist with people. I want you to allow me to bring a leopard here in this Parliament and see whether we can co-exist with it. (Laughter) I think it is a very serious issue. You should not just say that people should co-exist with these animals as some of them are very dangerous. Some of us who ply that route always have accidents on that road because the animals are marauding around the main road. I think the ministry should take action.

Finally, in Kigezi we are using tea growing to create a buffer zone and it seems to be effective. I do not know if you have discussed with Ministry of Agriculture to see whether you can promote tea growing around the park. Tea as a crop seems to create a serious buffer, to the extent that animals cannot easily cross and there is a double advantage that you can also use tea for the other usual purpose. However, you did not include it among the strategies you are exploring as a ministry. I thank you very much.

5.48
MS MARGARET MAKHOKHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the minister for the statement because sincerely speaking, she appreciates that there is a big conflict between human beings and wildlife. 

I happen to represent two constituencies - one on the mainland and the other purely an island. The minister talked about plans to help Mayuge District to overcome their challenges and I anxiously waited to hear something about Namayingo District, which we neighbour. It is so terrifying to go for the burial of a person and find they are burying only the hands or a leg simply because of crocodile attacks. So as you think of Mayuge and other areas around Lake Victoria, I humbly request that Namayingo be considered. 

If we can add more safe water sources off the shores, I think my people will survive. As you suggested, fish farming is very important even though Namayingo has not benefited much. The problem of crocodiles is very challenging and big and it is my humble request to the minister that as you consider other areas, do consider Namayingo because we have Bukooli Islands, which are covered by many islands around. 

I want to appreciate you because you acknowledge the problem, but intensify your search for funds so that you can be able to help our people. Every time I go there, the people are crying because of the crocodiles and yet I also fear them. I guess even you – (Member timed out.)

5.50
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to commend the minister for this statement. 

My concern is on the human-animal conflict. This is the prevailing situation in Karamoja sub-region. The animals now have the freedom to wander from the park and protected areas into the communities to cause havoc. There is a fresh incident where a young boy of 17 years was killed by a stray elephant. This occurred on 30 November 2014, five days ago, in Kotido District at a place called Lobanya in Kacheri Sub-county. It is about 84 kilometres from Kidepo National Park.

Madam Speaker, after the death of this young man, the Kotido District UWA office came up with compassion of two bags of posho and a bag of beans, which assisted the bereaved family during the burial. In this case, I am greatly frustrated because you cannot offer such compassion as if you are giving food to a hungry family. 

Uganda Wildlife Authority should come up with reasonable compassion if they have the heart for the human beings that have lost their lives due to the animals. I would also ask UWA to be seriously engaged in dialogue and consider the option of compensation because this will go down to comfort and heal the hearts of the grieved people who have been affected by the death of their loved ones.

In addition, Government and UWA should devise the most effective mechanisms to deter these animals from straying to the communities where they cause damage and destruction of property and loss of lives – (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her presentation. 

There is an Act that established the Uganda Wildlife Authority and it has a gap. That is why members are lamenting. I would like to know when you are bringing it here for review so that these issues of compassion, compensation and how to deal with those whose crops have been destroyed can be handled. Even when you give the compassionate fee, it is not catered for by any law. So if you brought it here, we would determine how much it should be.

Secondly, in your concluding remarks you said that we should coexist with the national parks but also benefit from them. However, you have given concessions to be run for the management of services around and within the national parks but most of these are given to foreigners. There is a hotel in Bwindi where they say you have to pay US$ 900 a night. How many Ugandans can afford this? So how are the locals benefitting if the services are given to foreigners? How have you considered the local people who are impacted by these national parks? Give us cases and say that in this area, this is what we have done.

Lastly, there is the issue of trenching. We get 20 per cent from the gate collections and in the law, the community is supposed to decide how to use it. Of recent, however, I have seen a different scenario where Uganda Wildlife Authority is directing these people to use that money to trench or create barriers. This money is supposed to be used according to the way they planned. I have seen this happen around Queen Elizabeth National Park. Where do you derive that? You are actually bending the law that you are supposed to implement.

5.54
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement.

Madam Speaker, I want to begin from where hon. Mbahimba started from; we are looking forward to this law being amended. This is because in my district, we have lost three people in two years. A woman who was coming from picking firewood was attacked by a buffalo. There was also a gentleman who was in his garden weeding and a buffalo attacked and killed him. There were also some children who were attacked by crocodiles. 

I want to say here that this compassion that the minister is talking about is very segregative because when we went to UWA, nothing was actually given. So I want to urge you, honourable minister, to bring these amendments on the Floor and I know we shall support them. We actually look forward to compensation. 

Secondly, there is the issue of boundaries. In Kween District, we have the issue of boundaries on the lower side; UWA and Kween District have an issue, which I brought to your office, honourable minister. Up to today, the people of Kween are still waiting but there is nothing.

My third point is about the buffer zones, which you talked about. I think we should move towards creating buffer zones as this will help us with wildlife and it will also help the communities. As you were winding up your statement, you talked about providing an enabling environment and I thought creating buffer zones within all these national parks would create an enabling environment that will benefit the people. I want to thank you.

5.56
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting this very important statement on wildlife. 

We do recognise wildlife as a key ingredient of tourism. At the same time, it is also encouraging to hear, as the minister has reported, that tourism is a leading foreign exchange earner for our country. That is very good news. We are also getting good information from the minister’s statement that other countries are utilising wildlife or tourism for the promotion of economic development in those countries. 

I got interested in the community-wildlife aspect. As was mentioned in the statement, Karamoja can be supported to promote wildlife ranching. I would like to know from the minister, what are the processes that can be undertaken by people if they are interested? What should we do to have this done? This is a good statement, which should not be left on paper. This must be put into practice. So what can be done in order to have this done for the benefit of this wildlife ranching in Karamoja, Lake Mburo and other places that you have mentioned? Thank you.

5.58
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and for giving us a lot of information in her presentation. I want to appreciate the measures that Government is taking to try to mitigate the human-wildlife conflict. However, Madam Speaker, I feel a lot should still be done, starting with some of the measures like digging trenches. 

I got the shock of my life one time when I was driving through the national park along the Karuma-Arua road and I saw an elephant jumping over those trenches near the roadside. I kept laughing and wondering how the elephants are jumping over those trenches you are digging. Maybe you need to encourage the people digging the trenches to ensure that they are more than those seven feet. When I saw an elephant jumping over those trenches, I realised that the trenches being dug are no bigger than those near the road. So you should encourage them to increase on the depth so that maybe they can jump and fall inside and next time they do not jump over.

Madam Speaker, the issue of wildlife conflict in the community is causing untold suffering. As I talk, we have a family of about 50 households who have permanently been displaced from Purongo in a village called Lagaji. They are now sitting at Purongo centre. They cannot live in their homes because their homes have become kraals for buffaloes and elephants.

I remember last time when we went for the reburial of the body of the late former IGP, we were inside and the elephants were near the road. Those Members of Parliament who went there saw the elephants roaming around the area. What should be done? If you have compassion or relief assistance being given to the affected communities, I request that you look into these families – (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate that tourism is one of the biggest earners of foreign exchange to Government but we also want our people. Why should we encourage a conflict between the tourist attractions and the people? 

We want this money for the construction of roads, extension of electricity and drugs in hospitals. This is not to the Minister of Tourism but to the Minister of Finance; why wouldn’t you allocate some monies so that a solution is got once and for all? These issues have been coming here time and again. If you check the Hansard, it is always reported here and it takes a lot of time. Why can’t we do that since we appreciate that it is one of the biggest foreign exchange earners?

Madam Speaker, the minister said that there is no law for compensation. We know that the office of the Attorney-General has been invoking a certain law to make compensations; why can’t that be invoked for compensations in this case?

Lastly, about your interventions, I am interested in the beehives. I want to imagine that in the beehives there are bees. When domestic animals are attacked by bees, sometimes they die. Don’t you think that if you use bees to deter the wild animals, they may end up dying and we may even end up losing the golden opportunity? Is that the best option? (Member timed out.)

6.03
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As leaders whose grandparents ceded 85 per cent of the land in Buliisa for the parks and forests and we remained with only 15 per cent, some of us are natural supporters of the tourism goals and conservation. However, put yourself in my shoes. I lost 12 people last year to ranger shooting and this year, five people with one having died just last week. How do you expect us to continue supporting this good cause when 52 years after independence, rangers are shooting citizens instead of arresting and prosecuting them? 

Can we agree here that there will be no more shooting to kill our people? Otherwise you are going to provoke retaliation and reciprocal action, should we eat the animals which stray? Would you want that? I do not think it is a way to go, so kindly restrain your rangers from that. 

Two, in the previous Parliament, we tried to dissuade you from this survey management. The best community friendly way of demarcating parks is creating roads; you save the community from remoteness, you attract tourism, you plant trees along the boundary and have alternative livelihood and woodlots for the community. Who is still having these backward surveys after surveys –(Member timed out-)

6.05
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Madam Minister, thank you for your statement. But it seems you are more in love with animals than human beings. Years back, I was in Hotel Margarita, a snake crawled to my bed. I shouted, I ran out –(Laughter)– there was a minister there with bodyguards; they came from their room and killed the animal. In the evening, I was in court for having caused the death of the snake - (Laughter). But today I leave in Entebbe and animals are ever in my compound; they have destroyed my crops, they have even dismantled the tiles on my roof and I do not know what to do. I told your predecessor and he said they were going to take action, but up to date, they have not taken action. When I travel to Maracha on the way, I always bump into elephants –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you honourable MP from Maracha. I would like you to clarify to this House, as to which wild animal can reach the roof –(Laughter)– yes, of a house and dismantle the tiles –(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: You do not know about giraffes? (Laughter)

MS RUTH LEMATIA: Thank you very much, if I did not put it clearly, I meant monkeys from the Zoo. They are busy destroying my crops and tiles in Entebbe where I stay. Even when I travel to Maracha, on the way I meet elephants and they are ever stopping us because they say, they have the right of way and we stop for some time waiting for these things to cross -(Laughter). 

Madam Minister, I think you need also to create space for some of us -(Member timed out_)

6.08
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE	(NRM, Woman Representative Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for the statement. Among the interventions you have mentioned, Buliisa District, we are not seeing any measures which have been put in place to prevent animals going to human beings. We would also like such interventions to be done. As my colleague hon. Mukitale has said, 85 percent is being harboured by national parks.

And then on top of that we also have problems with rangers. When local communities try to go to the national park to collect like firewood and herbs, when they find them there, they arrest them sometimes; they even cane them; like last year, one of them was beaten bitterly and tied. So sincerely, there should be good relationship between the rangers and also human being. 

The last one is on the boundary; some of the boundaries were made some years back. But in 2002, when they were trying to extend the boundaries of the national park, the area around Albert Nile was not considered and that is the area where the communities do their fishing and that is the area even used as a boat park. So every time the rangers come there and arrest the people. So my request is, that area which remained when they were adjusting the park boundaries should also be considered –(Member timed out_)

6.10 
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the statement from the honourable minister. But to begin with, I would like to condole with Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and the Ministry of Tourism for the loss of the lion that we lost just last week. You know, this lion left two female cubs, one called Mutagamba and another one called Flavia –(Laughter)-  so I have to associate with the death of that lion as a chairperson of the committee.
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the concerns of the honourable members and I think to implore the ministry and the minister and UWA to do all that you can, to really make good because the complaints we have had and we are continuing to get are really bombarding and overwhelming. 

Madam Speaker, much as we want all those interventions, we need to take cognizant of one thing that, actually it is not the human-wildlife conflict but the conflict between populations. Humanity is increasing, if we are going to increase by two million every year, animals are equally increasing because of the way they are being handled, so the issue is about increase in population. And it is the people we can do family planning. We may not talk to the animals to control their numbers, they will always continue to grow in numbers, elephants will grow in numbers you do not even need to be a neighbour of a national park for the elephant to come to your home. It can walk miles, and that is why you hear everybody here in Parliament telling you, animals are raiding them even when they do not neighbour any protected area.

I think this is time for us –(Member timed out_)

6.12
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. Mine is only on crocodiles in Nakasongola District. Honourable minister, crocodiles eat my people and our animals. Every week, we lose around two to three people to crocodiles, most especially on River Kafu, along Lake Kyoga and every valley tank in Nakasongola has crocodiles. It is a big problem. I have called UWA several times; they only intervened on one case, in Kinuni Parish, where the crocodiles were eating dogs, goats, people and the water was highly contaminated to the level that the whole parish went sick. Actually, we thought it was Ebola, and on finding, it was contaminated water; we had to provide special water sources for that parish for some time to allow people to cure. 

But, Madam Speaker, the minister promised to provide caging against the crocodiles; to put wires on the waters so that the crocodiles cannot access the shores where people are collecting water or feeding animals. So, I want to know how far you have gone with our problem and how you can help us get the crocodiles from the valley tanks. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you could use ten minutes. Now minister, yesterday we read a letter from the President, written 2011, where he described the UWA officials as power drunk, because of the way they handle human beings, just shooting them. He was not too happy about that and wanted you to do something about it. Please, if you could use just ten minutes so that we can get over with it. 

6.14
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for the concern raised and appreciation expressed and ideas that are brought forward. Definitely, this is a national issue as you can see every corner of our country is affected. So that is why even yesterday when I was making my statement at the national retreat, I called for a national dialogue on this - a conversation. Let everybody be taken up into this conversation so that we can generate ideas and see how to develop and get over this problem. 

Hon. Flavia has just pointed out that actually what we are witnessing is not conflict between man and wild animals, but the population growth of both man and animals and this is a planning issue. We are having a population growth of two million per year and we are also striving to make sure that animals survive because we need them. How are we going to compete? This is a planning issue and every one of us must make an input in it. How do we share the static borders? How are we going to utilise the resources that are available? So that is a bigger problem, a bigger topic and I think even the academicians should be brought into this one so that we can actually plan. It is a challenge that has caught up with us; we must face it. 

However, having said that, I want to answer a few of the questions because the others I may not be able to answer like the one from hon. Tinkasimire about the number of people who have died. That one I would need time to go back and compile and some of them I may not know but that is something we need to work on together.

I want directly to go to the compassionate contribution. As I told you, we are amending the law and I think we met with the Committee of Tourism and we discussed this law; some amendments were made, but I have been assured that this law will soon be brought back to us. So when it comes back to the ministry we again want to engage the Committee on Tourism so that we can look at it again before it is committed to Cabinet and then Parliament so that everybody makes an input. And I would like to request, when this happens, even those who are not members of the committee, please feel free to come in so that we enrich what we are going to be debating here, like on the compassion; the issue of how to determine that compassion - what rate has got to be decided upon.

Another issue that has come up is the rough handling of people. I do condemn that and the President has come out to say that nobody should harass, kill, shoot or do anything to people. If somebody has committed a crime, be it in the park or anywhere, there are courts of law where these people should be taken. So if anybody has been found doing that, definitely that person will be prosecuted in the courts of law. Otherwise, the ministry and government cannot allow harassment of people.

The question has also been coming out that now you are saying that animals are very important to us because of tourism but for whom are you earning this money? Yes, we are earning it for people and everybody including the animals because they are also sharing. So we got to see, how do we make up our relationship, what kind of relationship do we want to build because it was not by accident that God gave us these animals, and I am sure we are not about to eliminate them. So we have got to decide how we are going to live with them. 

However, we have got to bear in mind that these animals are not confined in one area and even those areas that have been identified as national parks or protected areas have no specific borders that are physical borders, they are porous, so you must pacify but you cannot be there all the time. So we need to see what more we can do especially with communities next to the park so that they become the immediate protector of the park and at the same time co-exist. In order to do that, the community must see benefit out it. That is why I was proposing that we further look at how to make wildlife conservation and forming a project that can benefit our people. 

I have visited some of the countries I mentioned that are doing business and I think the communities are comfortable. And if I may talk even about people in Bwindi, they have actually started appreciating the value of keeping those animals because they are getting money and so they are protecting them and are really concerned. My brother here knows about it they have an association and hon. Mbahimba, also knows about it. That association is there, people are being educated and money is coming out of that contribution. So we think that many people can benefit if only they are sensitised about how to go about it.

The honourable member from Bushenyi was asking how much money are we getting, what is the value that we are getting? Right now as I said, we have over 3,000 kilogrammes of ivory in store and more is outside between URA and immigration. But at the moment, there is a moratorium on sale of ivory. So whoever has got ivory globally, they are only storing it. Nobody is allowed. So that is why we say any movement of ivory is illegal because there is a moratorium globally not to sale anything. So that is why we are saying we cannot sale, we cannot burn until the global community has pronounced its self on it, although it would have been our immediate response that we dispose it of but the global community through C.I.T.I.E.S. will have to dictate how we move these materials.

There was also a question raised by hon. Lematia from Maracha about monkeys destroying the tiles. My sister, you remember the other time a monkey was also witnessed somewhere in the big house, so it is not an easy thing to control because with all the security still monkeys can find their way. But I can only advise, let us have a perimeter wall around the house and I think we can control some of these. 

Hon. Mbahimba also talked about the community of Nkulingo hiring foreigners. This is the community, not us. The community decided to hire the foreigners on concession and they are helping them; they are getting money out of it. So UWA comes in only to give them technical advice but otherwise I believe it is the community that is really benefiting from this.

Another member said 50 families have been displaced. Yes, that is true, we also have other families in Kapchorwa but we are trying to find solutions and that is why I say, we need to move to areas and find local solutions because I cannot sit here in Kampala and prescribe a solution in Kween, Kapchorwa or anywhere else. But as I promised, I will be engaging each one of you and I write to all of you to tell you when we are going there so that we can interact at the location and find solutions together.

On UWA as a legal entity that can be sued, yes, it is true and there are so many litigations in court some of them have been disposed of and others are on-going. So if there is anything that has been done by UWA illegally, people are free to take them to court and they tussle it out. But we would rather that we settle it amicably and the feeling I am getting here is that these animals belong to government. They do not belong to us. These animals belong to us as Ugandans and we want to see how to have them and protect them because we are the government. So let us not shade that responsibility to somebody unknown, we are the people. Let us come together, find a solution, the animals are ours, we have got to protect them, we benefit from them but at the same time we have got to protect our life. That is one last remark I want to make, Madam Speaker, these animals are ours, they belong to us, they add to our value.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe you can go with the minister to the canteen, we have to deal with some other business please. Tell us when we are going to have a national dialogue, I think that is what we are interested in so that we can all contribute.

MS MUTAGAMBA: The other questions, Madam Speaker, I have documented them all here. I am going to answer and bring them back so that each one of you can have their questions answered. Otherwise, all these questions I may not be able to answer all of them, some of them I do not have the data here. But I want to promise that I will answer each and every question that has been raised here and I will make sure it is submitted to Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do not go away now; when we close, you can go to the canteen and sit with members.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, we are going for the dialogue. I had thought that the minister would tell us her plans because after hearing from the concerned members, for example, the mission is about the Ministry of Finance to at least allocate some funds. 

Some of us who were in Zambia this year with the accountability committees, visited Zambia and it borders with a privately owned national park which is about four square miles. But they fenced the whole national park. So, I think the minister should come up with some suggestions to say maybe we are going to start with such and such a national park. But for her to say that we are going for a dialogue when people are dying, plantations are being destroyed - Madam Speaker, I think the minister should come up with a complete plan which can guide us. “We shall dialogue” but then so what?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I mentioned this message; maybe I was fast because I have told you for Lake Mburo -

THE SPEAKER: I do not think he was here when you mentioned them. He was not. Let him read the statement.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 70,000,000 (US $ 102,464,700) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (AfDB) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP (ADB) FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT 5 (RSSP 5)

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for us to acquire a loan of $107 million from the African Development Bank to finance two very important roads: One is from Rukugiri-Kihihi-Ishasha in Kanungu about 78.5 kilometres to connect us to the DRC Congo. The other is from Bumbobi - Bubulo to Lwakhakha; this is about 44 kilometres to connect Uganda to the Kenyan border. 

Madam Speaker, these roads are very beneficial to us in terms of poverty eradication, support to the tourism industry we just been talking about, in mineral extraction and transportation, support trade and market access activities in the areas and also to support cross-border trade, especially in this era of regional integration.

This loan has been considered by the Committee of the National Economy and a report has been involved. I beg to move that the House do support this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, motion seconded by the Minister of Works, Energy, Kanungu, Manafwa, Ssemugaba of Kiboga and hon. Werihke of Bungokho have seconded it.

6.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by government to borrow Units of Accounts 70 million equivalent to $ 107,464,700 from the African Development Bank Group (ADB) for financing the road sector support project 5 involving the upgrading of the Rukugiri-Kihihi-Ishasha and Kanungu and then Bumbobi and Lwakhakha road. 

This is the original report. I beg to lay it on Table.

Madam Speaker, I request to lay on Table the rated loan agreement, the related project appraisal report, negotiation minute and the related brief to Parliament with the resolution attached. I beg to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the committee minutes for the same loan request.  I now beg to report.

Introduction

Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow the Units of Accounts Shs 70 million equivalent to 107,464,700 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for the financing of the road sector support project No.5, in accordance with Rule 166(2)(b)of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, the request was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 July 2014 and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the loan request and now we beg to report.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the ministry of -

THE SPEAKER: Those ones members can read, even 2.2, 3.0 they can read. You could go straight to the objectives on page 4.

MR KYOOMA: The project objectives are to improve road access to socio-economic facilities and quality of transport service levels in South-Western and Eastern parts of Uganda by upgrading the Rukugiri-Kihihi-Ishasha and Kanungu road which is 78.5 kilometres and then Bumbobi- Lwakhakha Road which is 44.5 kilometres from gravel to bitumen standard thereby contributing to-
improving the standards of living of the beneficiaries;
supporting the tourism industry;
promoting regional integration and cross border trade with the Democratic Republic of Congo, as well as Kenya.

Project description and components

Madam Speaker, the road sector support project 5, comprises civil works for upgrading of Rukugiri-Kihihi-Ishasha, Kanungu and Bumbobi- Lwakhakha roads to bitumen standard. Then consultancy services for the supervision of the civil works, technical and financial audit, capacity building, gender empowerment, compensation and resettlement and the project components are outlined in the table that follows.

Madam Speaker, the civil works component will take $104.19 million, which is 83 per cent of the entire cost. Consultancy will take $6.88 million, which is five per cent. Capacity building will take $0.23 million, which is 0.2 per cent. Gender empowerment will take $0.23 million, which is 0.2 per cent. Compensation and settlement will take $14.74 million, which is 11.7 per cent.

Project cost and financing arrangement

The project cost estimate, net of taxes, is Units of Account 82.25 million, which is an equivalent of $126.27 million or Shs 318.77 billion. The project cost includes the base cost, physical contingencies of 10 per cent and price escalation of 7.3 per cent for the foreign exchange and for the local currency. The project cost by components and source of finance are shown in tables 2 and 3.

The Financing

The cost of the project will be financed by ADB and Government of Uganda. The financing from African Development Fund resource under the African Development Fund (ADF) will be Unit of Account 70 million, which is equivalent to $107,464,700 or Shs 271.29 billion which will cover 85.11 percent of the total project cost. The remaining percentage of 14.89 per cent will be met by Government of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, on Page 7, the first table shows the project cost estimate by components. I have already highlighted the components. The total for civil works for both the Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishaka/Kanungu and Bumbobi-Lwakhakhais units of account 57.34 million or $88.03 million.

The total for consultancy will be Unit of Account 3.77 million or $5.79 million. Capacity building will be Unit of Account 0.13 million or $0.2 million. Likewise for gender empowerment, the Unit of Account is 0.13 million or $0.2 million. Compensation will be Unit of Account 8.73 million, which is $13.4 million. The total baseline cost, including the contingencies, will be Unit of Account 82.25 million, which is $126.27 million.

The table that follows shows the source of financing; what will come from African Development Fund and what will come from Government, giving a total of $126.27 million as the total project cost.

Madam Speaker, on page 8, we have the table showing the source of finance by category in US dollars, and these figures are net of taxes. We are shown what will be funded by the loan, by Government for all these components I had already highlighted.

The table on page 9 shows how the different components, as already highlighted, will be financed over the five years given the fact that the project is a five-year project.

Madam Speaker, the table on page 10 shows the comparative unit cost per kilometre compared to other projects that have already been undertaken. Thereafter, 7.0 shows the loans terms and conditions. The loan amount is Unit of Account 70 million, which is $107,464,700. The loan period is 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years. The repayment period, therefore, will be 30 years. The service charge or what stands as the interest rate will be 0.75 per cent, which shows that it is highly concessional and the commitment fee of 0.50 per cent per annum on undisbursed loan amount, meaning that the user ministry should help this country after the loan has been approved to ensure that the fund should be utilised on schedule.

Loan Conditions

In addition to the entry into force of the loan agreement, the following conditions are attached to the loan:
1. 	Opening of one foreign exchange account and one local currency special account at the Bank of Uganda for the deposit of the part of the proceeds of the loan to finance eligible expenses for capacity building for UNRA.

2. 	Develop and submit to African Development Bank a Resettlement Action Plan together with a schedule detailing-
the sections into which each of the civil works is divided;
a timeframe for the compensation of the project-affected persons with respect to all sections.

3. 	Provide evidence in form and substance acceptable to the African Development Bank, confirming that - 
it has within six months after the first disbursement compensated and/or resettled all affected people with respect to first section of civil works in accordance with the Resettlement Schedule and Resettlement Action Plan;
prior to commencement of construction on any section of the civil works, all project-affected persons have been compensated and/or settled with respect to the Resettlement Action Plan as well as the Works and Compensation Schedule.
4.	Include the funds required as counterpart financing for the project in the government.

5.  	Submission to the African Development Bank of Annual fiduciary assurance reports on the progress of implementation including but not limited to the quarterly progress reports, annual reports and the audited financial statements. 

So, we hope that their absorption capacity will now improve.

Financing Conditionality

The interest cost of the loan is 0.75 per annum on the outstanding and disbursed as I have already highlighted. It is lower than the standard discount rate of five per cent recommended by International Monetary Fund and World Bank. This implies that the present value of the loan ($ 46.449 million) is typically smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted of that figure mentioned. This implies that in country’s total future payment for this loan is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in the present terms carried on the present value.

Madam Speaker, the next table shows the debt indicators of the loan. Then 8.0 are the implementation arrangements and under this project, it will be implemented within a five year period beginning in July 2015 and UNRA will be the implementing agency. UNRA through the nominated project coordinator and the designated project engineers and diverse team of professionals within UNRA comprising of procurement, environmental, social and finance experts will be responsible for the overall activities of the project.

The civil work will be implemented under two contracts. The civil work for Rukingiri-Kihihi-Ishasha/Kanungu Road will be implemented for 36 months and Bumbobi-Lwakhakha Road, for 24 months.

Implementation of the environmental and social management plan will be the responsibility of the contractor under the provision of the resident engineer and inspected by UNRA. 

Madam Speaker, I now beg to get to the observations and recommendations: 

1. Partial funding for the road network in the project areas

The committee observed that this ADB funding leaves out other important sections of the road network in the project area. For example, the Kanungu-Buhoma-Bwindi Road which is an equally very important part of this entire road network for promoting tourism.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should expedite efforts to upgrade from gravel to bituminous paved surface, this remaining section of the road, given its importance to tourism.

2. Alignment of the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road. 

The committee observed that the tarmacking of Ntugamo-Rukingiri-Kanungu Road was pledged by the government in 1987. The Ntungamo-Rukingiri segment was completed in the mid 2000s leaving out the Rukingiri-Kanungu part. 

The committee was further informed by the people of Kanungu that during the appraisal of this road project, they had proposed that the Rukingiri-Kanungu Road alignment follows the current road that passes via Enengo and Kambuga, as the proposed routing by government, that is Bwambara-Ishasha-Kihihi then Kanungu was not convenient for most people in Kanungu and the surrounding areas of the Nyakishenyi in Rubabo County. The government thereafter assured the people and pledged that during the implementation of this project via the preferred alignment, that is Bwambara-Ishasha-Kihihi, then to Kanungu, there will be a spur from Kanungu town to Kambuga Hospital and another to Nyakishenyi via Rugyeyo.

The committee recommend that government should show serious commitment to the people of Kanungu and the surrounding districts by ensuring that the efforts are made to ensure that a spur from Kanungu town, Kambuga Hospital, and to Nyakishenyi via Bugyeyo should be given urgent attention.

3. High transport cost. 

The committee observed that high transport costs are still a major challenge for landlocked Uganda. Uganda’s transportation system is mainly characterised by poor roads, limited compatibility between different modes of transport and poor logistic systems. The high cost of transport is largely due to poor roads that are badly maintained, overloaded and poorly managed. Beyond trade corridors, limited connectivity between areas of production and markets within and outside the country remains a major constraint to producers, Madam Speaker.

The committee therefore recommends that government must prioritise the rehabilitation and maintenance of other pending national roads, for example, Musiita-Lumino-Busia/ Majanji, Sironko-Namusisi-Muyenbe-Nakapiripirit. I am happy this one was submitted sometime back. Kapchorwa-Swam, Isingiro-Rakai, Kashozi-Bwemba-Nyakaliro, Dokolo-Namasale, and Lusalira-Nkongi roads, among others that are part of the trading corridor in order to improve the connectivity between producing areas and market to boost agricultural exports. This should entail the upgrades of roads capacity through the addition of lanes to roads whose poor conditions affects the flow of traffic along the corridors; and the upgrading of the key feeder roads connecting the producers to the corridors from gravel to paved standard.

4. Project benefit. 

The committee observed that this project has many positive impacts that will lead to increased urbanisation, improved transport services, reduced travel time, reduced transport cost and improved access to social services that will better the standards of living and above all boost rural economic development especially through tourism and value addition for agricultural produce in the project areas.

5. Government counterpart financing. 

The committee noted that Government is supposed to pay counterpart financing, that is, 14.89% has already been highlighted of the project cost amounting to unit of account $ 3.25 million which is an equivalent of Shs 47.48 billion in accordance with the projection. Compensation cost will amount to unit of account $ 4.8 million which is an equivalent of Shs 18.6 billion in the first year of implementation. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development should ensure that the required counterpart funds as a result of this project are adequately budgeted for and timely disbursed during the implementation of this project.

6. Cost overrun. 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed a potential risk of increase in the cost of this road project. The Auditor-General in his report on the financial statement for UNRA for the year ended 30th June 2012 attributes cost overrun in road projects to weaknesses in the feasibility studies, and inadequate road designs that lead to major variations and increase the cost of works contracts making the programming and budgeting for roads very difficult.

The committee recommends that UNRA should ensure that timely periodic technical audits of the project are carried out during the implementation of this project in order to minimise potential cost overrun, and the review of the detailed road designs and basing on the cost estimate on risk tender rates of similar contracts should be adequately utilised by UNRA by all upcoming road projects.

7. Implementation delays. 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that delays in the implementation of road projects that are debt financed is still a major challenge for the government, and might as well be a major source of risk for this project. The risk of delays is in fulfilment of conditions for loan effectiveness and other risks associated with the implementation delays could result in failure to achieve the project objectives in time.

The committee therefore recommends for the close monitoring of the procurement process by Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA to ensure the recruitment of suitably experienced civil work contractors and supervising the consulting firm. The close supervision and more proactive role by UNRA during the project implementation should reduce the risks of implementation delays of this project.

8. Land Compensation. 

The committee observed the continued non-availability of some parts of wayleaves for road projects due to land compensation issue. Though identification and verification of project affected persons is always done, cases of residents claiming to have been left out still keep cropping up in a number of road construction projects. There are also cases of residents who get cleared but choose to move off the complicated properties claiming that they were undervalued. Such cases force the contractors to keep in some sections interrupting the work schedule. 

The committee recommends that Government ensures that the valuation and actual compensation for land for this project is made in time so that land acquisition does not delay the implementation of activities of these projects.

9. Sustainability of the road project

The committee observed that there is a risk that the annual maintenance programme for these two roads once completed would not be implemented as scheduled due to the inadequate road maintenance budget. These being border roads, overloading of heavy vehicles might contribute to pre-mature road failure.

The committee therefore recommends that Government expedites the envisaged legal reforms to allow the collection and direct remittance of road user charges especially fuel levy to the Uganda Road Fund account, and this will streamline all funds to road maintenance.

Furthermore, UNRA should ensure the timely implementation of the actual road control measures, which are strategically important locations of these two roads to reduce the mature road failure by incorporating the construction of Weigh Bridge for each road.  

10. Supervision and contract management

The committee further observes that the slow improvement in supervision and contract management by UNRA due to the high project-UNRA staff attachment ratio that is a project engineer handling more than four projects. These staffing gaps impact on the effective supervision of projects. Due to staffing gaps, a number of debt finance projects in the road sub-sector continue to be supervised by hired consultants whose charges are very exorbitant. 

In some circumstances too, there is also laxity among UNRA and consultants who have not taken their supervisory responsibilities seriously.

The committee recommends that UNRA expedites the recruitment of staff and further ensures that consultants and UNRA take supervision of road projects very seriously.

11. Capacity building for UNRA

The committee observed that an amount of UA 150,000 (Equivalent to approx USD 230000 282, Shs 581.34 million) will be charged to build knowledge in UNRA by implementing the capacity building component of this project.

The practice of borrowing to build capacity of UNRA staff is on the rise as evidenced in some of the on-going debt financed road projects yet these costs should be financed locally from the government budget.

The committee recommends that government expedites the ADB finance study on the comprehensive capacity needs assessment of UNRA that will guide it and development partners on the future capacity building interventions of UNRA.

For this particular project, UNRA should share with Parliament the details of the knowledge that will have been built among UNRA staff as a result. 

Why we emphasised this, for every loan request for roads you will always find there is capacity building but at the end of the day they tell you UNRA staff do not have capacity. That is why we had to put this emphasis, Madam Speaker.

12. Road safety considerations

The committee observed that on a number of road projects, road safety concerns are not considered a priority during execution of civil work. Furthermore, occupation health safeties for a number of local projects are not adequately addressed due to lack of protective gears for workers, among others. Safety guards if neglected pose adverse effects to the environment and the population.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport together with UNRA should ensure that adequate safety measures for this project and other on-going and future road projects are effectively provided and enforced. 

Project designs and bill of quantities for this project and other future road projects should incorporate such measures to prevent, minimise and mitigate potential adverse environmental and social effects of projects. For contracts there is safety, furniture is included in BOQs, final payments should be withheld until there is compliance.

13. Inter-ministerial and agency coordination

The committee observed the continued lack of coordination between ministries, departments and agencies as evidenced by a number of electricity distribution lines along the projects roads especially for Bumbobi-Lwakhakha road that are likely to be affected and may call for relocation of the electricity distribution lines in the future, an expense which would have been avoided.

The committee recommends that Government strengthens the coordination capacities between ministries, departments and agencies in the implementation of projects in order to minimise wastage of limited available resources.

14. Sanitary facilities along the highway

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the costing of RSSP 5 had not included the construction of sanitary facilities along the highway. This is in line with the recommendation of Parliament that all new roads should provide for such facilities and resting places.

The committee therefore recommends that this provision be catered for as the government devises a lasting means of setting up and maintaining these facilities along all new highways.

15. Contingency fees

The committee notes that the 17.3 per cent contingency fees provided for in the project costing is too high considering that this could be utilised in other areas of the project to benefit the people.

The committee therefore recommends that the amount for contingency for the project be reduced to 10 per cent and the remaining 7.3 per cent be utilised as follows: 2.3 per cent be used to construct sanitary facilities along the highway and the other five per cent be devoted to carry out the road designs for the spur from Kanungu Town to Kambuga Hospital and another to Nyakishenyi via Rugyeyo as well as the Bumbo-Magale road in Manafwa.

16. Community involvement

The committee observed that communities or projects beneficiaries through their local leaders were adequately informed about this project. In this regard, the committee notes that the involvement of community in implementation of this project will make them understand and appreciate the likely impact of the road construction over their livelihood.

The committee therefore recommends the continued involvement of all stakeholders in the implementation of this project especially in the context of resettlement activities along the project roads. UNRA should ensure extending and redistribution of opportunities project affected persons where applicable.

17. Power theft in the project area

Madam Speaker, the committee was shocked by the high level of power theft in the form of hooking of thin wires on electricity distribution lines in one of the project areas. That is along Bumbobi-Bubulo-Lwakhakha road.

The committee was informed by management of UMEME Limited that power theft in this project area has led to a number of deaths that are unrecorded. 

The committee was further informed by management of UMEME that though power theft was a general problem for the entire country, the Bugisu sub-region contributed most to this problem with the energy purchases or loss ratio for Mbale District alone at almost 50 per cent.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure immediate interventions to stop power theft and report to Parliament the output from the interventions within two months of adoption of this report.

The ministry should also expedite the effort of amending the Electricity Act 1999 to provide for more punitive measures against individuals that are involved in the vandalism of public electricity infrastructure and power theft.

Madam Speaker, this is very serious. We are told that in that region, they simply call it a snake bite. Once someone has been electrocuted and dies, they call it a snake bite and sometimes they even bury at night so as to avoid detection and thereof punishment - it is very serious! Even during the day, you find bulbs on, simply because they are not paying for this power. There, you can find someone with a serious business also stealing power. But it was even worse for police, because at one police station, there was also power theft. So it is a very serious problem.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the above recommendations, Government’s request to borrow UA 70 millions, an equivalent of USD 107,467,700 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the road sector support project 5, be approved. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chair, and the Committee of the National Economy. Honourable members, the report has the necessary members’ signatures, but before we start on it, I just want two clarifications:
One, the loan request is for $102 million. That is what you wrote as loan request, but there is also $107. So we want to know which figure we are dealing with. Is it the $102 in the resolution request or the $107, so that we know what we need to pass it?

The second one is for the Minister of Works, this capacity building. You know, some of us represent lakes; we have not invested at all in water transport. There is no capacity building for the people to deal with water transport. That is why the ferry of Lake Victoria is sitting in the store, because no one in this country knows how to fix it, or even to assemble it. But all I see is capacity building for roads, what about the capacity building for water transport? And how much capacity are you building anyway? 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The first issue, I think there was a problem when the minister was presenting a brief here, because there is no disagreement. What remains a fact is that, what was borrowed is the UA 70 million. But when you were exchanging it, there was an exchange rate in the appraisal document. And when you apply the exchange rate in the present document, you get US$107,464,700. And even consistently, in the appraisal document this is the figure. But even in the brief by the minister, if you calculated using the exchange rate, still it will give you this amount. So the right figure is US$107,464,700. I thank you. The rest is not mine. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you will answer when we conclude. Okay three minutes.

7.08
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to borrow the unit of account, 70 million to finance the two roads. I will go to 9.0 on the observations and the recommendations, where the committee chair said that there was partial funding for the road network in the project area. He did mention the Kanungu- Buhoma –Bwindi Road. However, the committee forgot the Bubulo- Bududa circular road. We know we are proposing these roads for the sake of economic integration, and we know very well that Bududa is a food basket for the Bugisu Region; and we also export to Kenya. 

So I know in the funding of these roads by the ADB, they will consider the economic rate of return. But as Government, we also know that it is these district roads- they are the food baskets. That is where most of the exports are coming from. So it would also help to boost agriculture.

I, therefore, would like to request Government to also consider upgrading this road to bitumen standards. This will help our people, now that we are promoting household incomes through agriculture. This is one avenue through which you can help local people, also to benefit from the economic integration; the East African Community Integration.

Secondly, I will touch on the issue of integration. We have seen many Government projects being derailed because of compensation. This will be clearly spelled out; which people are going to be compensated. The community is a bit difficult. Everybody may think that they are going to be compensated. So it should be clearly defined as to who is going to benefit, so that we do not get derailed, like in the Bumbuli-Lwakhakha Road. It has taken many years and our people have waited a long time. Of course they will support it and I know that they really support the road.

Thirdly, I would like to talk about the sanitary facilities. This is very important for public health. We need those facilities. We do not want our people to litter the roads, so I support the committee recommendations and I appeal to Government to get that money to fund the facility. This will provide sanitation facilities along the two roads. Thank you.

7.10
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Kanungu are extremely anxious because they have never seen a tarmac road in their life. And we had been assured by the Ministry of Works - the adverts for this road was put on in May this year 2014; that by December the contract would be signed. And that after three months of mobilization, by March-April construction would begin. That is the message we have been passing on. But from the report, you are telling us that work begins in July 2015. I hope we do not have any Katosi phenomenon in this. We want you to assure us as to when the civil work commence.

Secondly, I want to explain the issue of routing of this road to Kanungu. We had a serious disagreement with Government in respect to where this road should pass, because the routing proposed by Government is peripheral and tangential to Kanungu District. In other words, it just touches the side of Kanungu leaving out the bigger section - actually leaving the whole of my constituency.

When the President came in 2008, there was serious disagreement and he pledged that to accommodate all the people of Kanungu, there would be two spurs: from Kanungu District to Kambuga Hospital and from Kanungu to Nyakishenyi which is in Rubabo. And people calmed down and were settled. But now when you applied for the loan, you excluded those two spurs. So we want clarification from the ministry as to why you did this, and whether you actually have put money in the national Budget, your own budget, to construct those roads.

I want to agree with the committee that you re-allocate part of the money for contingency to do the design for those spurs. So I just want to tell the minister that even when you construct what has been provided for under the loan and you leave out the other spurs, the Kanungu people will not be very happy with you.

We need to take that pledge by the President together with this loan request. And I also do hope that compensation issues will be handled in time, so that we do not frustrate the progress of this road. I thank you very much and call upon the members to support this loan request wholesale.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us agree on two minutes, are they not enough?

7.13
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start from where hon. Baryomunsi stopped; about compensation. I have seen in this document that the Government of Uganda provided for five billion for compensation. And yet, the total cost is 18.6 billion. Meaning the there is already a shortfall of 13.6 billion. So I am wondering why we are incurring a shortfall before even the project starts. I saw it on page 9. Because if you look at the compensation conditions, the project is telling it clearly that within the first six months of disbursement, compensation should have been made.

Now if you only provide five billion and we are short of 13 billion, it means that you are not going to compensate in time. Why are we not committing ourselves? I want to know how we are going to get the balance of the money and from where so that we can feel confident that compensation will be done in time.

My second question is that big projects like this, I see supervision and I think it is highlighted by UNRA only, where is the role of the local governments where these projects are going to be implemented? I have also seen community involvement, are you saying that these local governments are part of the community or they have a role to play in monitoring and evaluation?

My third issue is about the gender component. I have seen cargo bicycles and donkey carts going to be provided to promote women in the market and I am told that in the west, women do not ride bicycles. I hope you are not going to disorganise the cultural set up. I would like to see how you have planned to implement this without distorting the cultures but I want to see the sensitization part of it; to ensure that this is not going to cause the gender violence which I have seen this project trying to address.

7.16
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be brief. I rise to support the loan request; but one, duration on page 9; that table clearly shows this project is going to take five years.

These are two separate contracts between the Kanungu and Kwakhakha roads. The Kanungu thing is taking 36 months and the one of the Eastern is 24 months. My understanding is that these are separate contracts which can run concurrently if we have a serious contractor. So why do we need five years working on these roads? I need some explanation.

Secondly on the issue of sustainability on page 17, it is clear that the issue of sustainability is hanging and yet I thought earlier, Madam Speaker, we agreed that this kind of project should embed within itself a maintenance clause so that we do not start wondering how we shall maintain the road.

Thirdly on supervision contract management and capacity building on page 18, the question I have for the honourable minister, do we really lack adequate staff in UNRA? Because sometimes you have been blaming us that we Parliament delay these projects but now it seems it is a question of your own capacity. Do we need foreigners to supervise the roads so that we spend some of the money on the foreign consultants for supervision?

Does each road have a component called “staff training”? Because I thought in the ministerial policy statement, everywhere I see staff training; on a particular project where we are getting a loan, why do you put a component called “staff training”?

Finally, on the contingency, again a question to the honourable minister, what is the standard? Why do we now have 17 point something per cent under contingency –(Member timed out_)

7.18
Ms ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Nanafwa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I stand to support the committees’ report and at the same time thank them for their recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I support their recommendations one of them being for the ministry of works and UNRA to be serious especially when contracting out these roads. We would not like honourable minister of works - he is being disturbed, he is not listening.

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister for the presidency stop disturbing the ears of the minister of transport.

MS MUTONYI: Yes, because what I am saying, I would not like to have a repeat of Tororo-Soroti road, with UNRA changing design, the feasibility study is not well - then every other time designs are changing and this road has dragged on and on up to now it is not ready. I think this is the fifth year. If we are not careful, these other roads the Kanungu and Rwakhakha roads might have the same problems.

On compensation, hon. Khainza has talked about it, many people took photographs and they are waiting for the compensation on that road. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister, why the Bududa part was left out? And worse still why Magaale-Bumbo is not mentioned? Because whenever the President comes - and that is his favourite area - he is always promising that Mbale-Rwakhakha Road will go through Magaale- Bumbo. That is very serious if it is not included. It has been coming all the time, now this time it has disappeared.

The issue of bicycles, Madam Speaker, what happens to these bicycles? Bugisu being a hilly area, the women do not ride bicycles. I do not know how it was smuggled in? Instead of putting money somewhere else to improve these roads, we would like to know honourable minister –(Member timed out_)

7.22
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very ethical in supporting the position of the committee on this loan request. The minister and the committee are talking of two very important roads according to them. But are these the only important roads that we have? How many important roads are there? And what plans are there for the other important roads? And how are we balancing the prioritisation of roads for upgrading? 

In this motion, the minister talked of the linkage of transport to poverty reduction. Honourable minister, when you talk of this, do you put in consideration the poverty rate across the country? According to recent statistics poverty rate in the country has been reduced to less than 20 per cent. This is very good we commend it but what are the rates across the country? 

Northern Uganda where I come from, especially mid north, the poverty rate is still about 42.6 per cent; in central here it is about 10 percent; eastern about 23 per cent; western it is less than 10 per cent. What do we put into consideration when we talk of this thing? 

And then on page 15, the recommendation of the committee on where they are arguing Government to prioritise some of the roads that are not yet considered. I am very disappointed that I am not seeing one of the roads that is very key to us. They have been talking about it and have been on plan as my colleague has just said, it has disappeared; this is the road from Masindi Port, Rwenkunye to Apac, Lira - Kitgum – (Member timed out_)

7.24
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the loan request, but I wonder when the Mitooma Road will make it to one of these loan requests. On the issue of compensation, to this day, we allow people to develop and build within the road reserves only for a few months down the road to turn around and they claim compensation. I want the Ministry of Works to sensitise the people; have a sensitisation programme strategy for making sure that people do not continue to build in the road reserves. 

On the issue of community involvement, I would like to ask the  minister, is there a policy for community involvement in road maintenance, we see roads going to waste both community and central government roads, while the communities are just looking on? The saying goes that, “A stitch in time saves nine”. So, can we have a clear policy on community involvement! The other day we saw an RDC abusing people’s rights and caning them like small children, though even children are not supposed to be – (Interjections) – Okay, he was a chairman LCV. Though even small children are not supposed to be caned and nothing has been done, but he was beating them in the name of community involvement, can we have a policy please. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to support you on the issue of capacity building for water transport. The other day I travelled to Kamuli and spent three and a half hours from here to Kamuli, which means that really, from Kayunga to Kamuli, it took me over two hours. But while coming back I used the ferry, and from Kamuli to Kayunga is just 30 minutes saving a whole one and a half hours. Time is money, so if we could invest in capacity building for water transport and indeed not only capacity building but also facilities - (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay half a minute to support water transport. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. Let us have facilities for water transport, so that we do not have to depend so heavily on the roads. Thank you.

7.27
MR DAVID MUHUMUZA (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the loan request, but I have two issues: Number one is about how the ministry and even the committee have put in place the measure to control corruption, because yesterday our colleague, hon. Nandala, talked about that. Whenever we pass a loan here, it is the technical staff that clap first and who smile the most. 

So now, can we be assured that this money will not be embezzled; we pass a loan, those who benefit most are the technocrats, they just move around and get more money. So we want more measures in the report to make sure our money is not also being eaten like the Katosi money or the Northern bypass money and so many others. We want assurance that this money will not be wasted.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is about our Kyenjojo-Hoima-Kigumba Road. That road has been appearing in the manifestos; even when I was still very young, up to now it has not come here to be passed. We hear only stories; even they had told us sometime back that around this year, September, works may have began but up to now we are not getting feedback. So I want basic information from the minister and the committee to know how far that loan of Kigumba-Kyenjojo road has gone.

And finally, about the involvement of local government in monitoring; all local government chairpersons and even councillors and our engineers at district level are always left out by UNRA whenever they are doing their work and when problems come communities run to us the MPs to tell them what is happening in the central government roads. So we wanted to be assured that this time, the local governments are involved. I thank you very much.

7.29
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I stand to support the motion to pass this money so that it can do good work. However, I have the following observations.

Madam Speaker, we as Committee of Physical Infrastructure have recommended here in Parliament, in our report, that UNRA and Ministry of Works should plant trees in the road reserves so that we can secure our road reserve. But we want the minister to assure us, how are you going to implement that one? We have a person in charge of environment protection - what is he doing without planting the trees?
 
Then, two, there is an issue of procurement; can the minister assure us that he has streamlined procurement in UNRA and in Ministry of Works? Because they can advertise that they are going to conclude all issues concerning procurement and signing contracts within a specified time, but then they go over a year considering a contract. Isn’t it prudent to get a procurement committee outside UNRA or Works? How is it, how can we improve on efficiency in procurement because now they have been talking about Kigumba, we procured that loan here, from African Development Bank, but the road has not yet started. What is going on? And many other projects and cases; Ministry of Works returns money to the Treasury because of over delayed procurement processes.

Last but not the least, there is an issue of weighbridges. When we visited those weighbridges, we found out that the ministry had given instruction that they are harmonising - is it with the East African Community - therefore, Uganda should not use measurement of axle load but should use gross weight. Gross weight is overweight on our roads; we saw one vehicle, it had over loaded, but when we used axle load, it was under loaded, and it is destroying our roads. But when we used this gross weight, you find that you cannot easily get overloaded vehicles. So, how have you harmonised and used the axle load instead of using gross weight? Thank you.

7.32
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween) Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee and I stand to support the motion. But as I support this motion, I would want to register my disappointment and my worry. As we are following up these roads, Kapchorwa-Suam road was in the group and the ministry had promised that they were going to work on the three roads, the two plus Kapchorwa-Suam road. Now I am only seeing two roads. 

My question to the minister is, when are we receiving the loan request for Kachorwa-Suam road - you can look at me honourable minister –(Laughter)– it is really disappointing, because all along, we have been expecting Kapchorwa-Suam road to be worked on but now it looks like we are finishing even these five years without a road in Kapchorwa. Honourable Speaker, we are really disappointed as a region; we have passed so many loans in this House but none, not even one from the time we came - it is now almost four years, no loan has been passed for Sebei Region. May I know from the minister when we are going to work on Kapchorwa-Suam road?

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the components in this loan. We have people under civil works, we have HIV/AIDS mitigation; this is a very good component under gender empowerment. There is also something under that, these are components that we really want to support –(Member timed out_)

7.34
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with others but partially I am not agreeing because of the following reasons: I have seen in the presentations, the compensations are twice. There is compensation affected by persons which is 11.7 per cent. Then other compensations, 13.40 per cent. Can the minister clarify what are these other compensations?

Then the other issue is on capacity building. Why does the ministry go to capacity building? A whole Shs 581.3 million to be used to train only six staff! Do you want to say that in UNRA we do not have qualified staff? I think this money should be allocated to some other important activity than capacity building. 

Then the last one is on gender empowerment; this money is borrowed and our children will have to pay back the loan. Why do you budget all this money for buying bicycles? Of what importance is it to the community? This project for the bicycles should be used in value addition like buying milling and processing plants so that those communities that are in agricultural production can add value in what they are doing –(Member timed out_)

7.37
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee report that we borrow the money. However, I want to ask the minister to take seriously the recommendation on ensuring that staff from UNRA is recruited as a matter of priority and capacity of the staff built.   

Madam Speaker, how do we move to continue borrowing money yet we do not have people on the ground to supervise how the monies are going to be used? We even don’t have enough people who have got the capacity to see how these funds are utilised. I think if we were to be strict, we would not pass this loan unless the minister confirms to Parliament that enough staff have been recruited to deal with this project. Because every time we are passing loans, it ends up like the Katosi Road scandal. So I want the minister to take this very seriously.

Secondly, the committee recommended that Government should prioritise some of the roads that are meant to connect production areas to the market.  If you move from Apac - Apac is leading in the production of cassava. If you go to Lira, Pader, Kitgum; sim sim, rice, sunflower, and sorghum for breweries - these people are producing all those crops. But the road has been on the list for long; that one mentioned by hon Lowila, from Masindi Port to the border. It has been there and it is disappearing and yet it is one of the major roads. I really want to ask the minister that when you are coming here for the next request for loans, if you do not have that on the list we are going to fight on the Floor of Parliament here because now we are getting tired. You should really take this seriously. 

Finally, we are talking of safety and it has been recommended by the committee, when these people are working on the road, normally you find they use cement, lime and a lot of dust. I thought they were supposed to care for safety of the people using the road – at least they would have water being sprayed on the road so that even those who are moving are protected from the dust. But, Madam Speaker, there is a road from Kawempe to Kafu and now going beyond Kafu; on that road, they left us in dust and they did not put any water – (Member timed out_)

7.39
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion because I know that this loan is covering one of the most difficult areas or sections that I have been having in my work as Member of Parliament nationally. Of course I know there are areas like Swamu, Karamoja area, West Nile and others where some work has also started. So I support this area. For instance, I know that some of the civil servants especially from the city have been having difficulty in supervising work. I am told when they have been passing between Rukungiri and Kambuga, they do not go back. They pass the other side of Kabale and they never go back again. So I think this one will assist to give some bit of good services for this area. 

Now my concern to the committee is that somehow there is a question that has failed to be answered by the reports from the committee especially on roads. On the issue of the unity cost on construction - this is where most of the money is eaten; you know we do not have scrutiny on what will be the cost in an area per kilometre and whether there is value for money. This is where really the game takes place in terms of the unit cost, the diameter, the depth and the others. The committees have not been able to give us an answer because you cannot have an understanding unless you do scrutiny and you really understand this matter. And I think in the next report, that matter – (Member timed out_)

7.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some people may be wondering why I have stood up and yet we did the job in the Cabinet. But there are certain common features that I want to convey to colleagues. I do not come from those ends but recently, I travelled along those roads, the western parts. I wanted to go to a place called Kanungu where they have discovered a lot of iron deposits. So I slept in Mbarara then I thought I was seeing the mountains near, I started driving in the morning. I turned through Rukungiri, I followed a very impossible road, very many corners, by the time I reached there, I think I had spent five hours. Then I realised that even this one had no difference from the other. 

Then again I went to Lwaha, Mbale area. I also found the same features, but what is interesting is that they all have three characteristics: you have got there plenty of agricultural activities, they grow both seasonal and perennial crops; and you see very brisk people moving - that is what I saw on both of them. 

Then the other thing I saw is that these roads are connecting other countries which means, if we developed them then it means we the easterners shall decongest Malaba. Some of our exports and imports will pass the other side. Then for the west, they will also decongest there and goods will come to Uganda for the benefit of all Ugandans. 

Then the other point is on mineral deposits. On that route, we have got huge deposit of Pharmacolite which we should develop. Then we have got limestone and iron ore there as well; huge discoveries are being made in Kanungu, which we must take advantage of; let us pass this loan now -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope when we make that road, the lime will not be transported from there to another town for processing as they are doing in Karamoja. They are transferring it to Mbale, spoiling our roads. The fact is that they should have been in Karamoja.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Now, we are going to build a factory in Karamoja for cement as well so that the roads are safe. I thank you very much. 

You recently passed the road for Karamoja - that is the southern route and then we shall go to Soroti next time and put there a railway line. I thank you.

7.45
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to also support the loan. But I would like to ask the minister about this issue on the gender component; did the bicycle issue come from the women or did you think for those women? It is important always to try and consult these women. And if I was the one, I do not know. I have not been there, but maybe asking for some shelter along the road for market women would maybe be a better option but it is up to you. 

On sustainability, if you take this road from Karuma to Arua, you will see how bad it is for the Ministry of Works to leave our roads to go bad. So, this sustainability component is very important between Pakwach and Nebbi because the road is really bad. Why do we leave our roads to get to that state when we have spent so much on them? It is important to really maintain these roads as quickly as possible.

About capacity building, you relocate that one because when you recruit, you recruit already qualified people and so you do not need to build their capacity but only have to orient them if they are newly recruited.

On the direct collection from the road users, we are already paying tax on the fuel that we use. What kind of direct tax should be collected apart from the weigh bridges? I do not support this taxing of people more again on that road –(Member timed out_) 

7.47
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have stood up to support the loans particularly to the Kanungu area where I have been and was stranded at one time. Yes, I have been stranded there because I am a gender activist and I travel in all those areas.

Madam Speaker, my concern is on the inter-ministerial agency coordination. Basically on the issue of compensation, I want to know from the minister whether when you were coming up with compensation, you used the Government Valuer. Does the Government have one office of the Government Valuer because I sit on the Committee on Natural Resources and we found it very challenging particularly with where the transmission lines pass.

They found that people are now comparing rates with the UNRA compensation and where the transmission lines pass - because people are not compensated very well, especially with those transmission lines and they want to rate themselves with the UNRA. 

So, do we have any Government Valuer that you use to come up with this compensation this is why people are coming up even to refuse, for instance, the Ministry of Energy to pass the transmission lines through their land.

And on the nature of contractors, honourable minister, we are just up and down when we are getting these loans for people to work on your roads. But these contractors that you contract leave a lot to be desired. For instance, you contracted Dott Services to work on the Kagamba-Kitagata-Ishaka Road but it is coming to four years right now. But when you reach on that road, the years they have spent is really too bad –(Member timed out.) 

7.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I had not been to Kanungu, I would have opposed this. But because I have been to Kanungu a number of times and I have seen the status of the roads in that place, I support this facility.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of sanitation facilities along the roads, I think we should re-allocate the money on capacity building. These roads have similarities with the previous roads that have been built and the UNRA staff has been there. They have had capacity built like on the Kabale-Kisoro Road – they just have the similar physical features on the road.

The UNRA staff have been trained and built capacity on this matter. So, this should be moved to handle that. When I look at the eastern route starting from the Owen Falls Dam, I do not know whether it is by design or what that you find to the east of that road, there are so many roads getting out of the main road. But to the east, apart from the one going to Kamuli and Pallisa up to Lira, there is no road going to the west of that road. 

When will the road of Kumi-Serere-Kagwara to link up with the ferry we are proposing to have which will link up with Kamuli be done? I understand there are some people who are opposing that road because they are saying that the Tirinyi-Mbale-Kumi road will ‘die’ because the business will be in Kamuli, Kasilo and Soroti? Can you tell us what is happening? When is that road coming on board?

On the issue of the power theft, why is the power theft dominant from where the minister comes from? Is it because the minister comes from that area? You have stated Mbale and maybe hon. Werikhe will help us to understand why power theft in the whole country is high in that area.

On the issue of compensation -(Interjection)   

MR WERIHKE: I am a member of this committee and that is why I am constrained from debating. However, on the issue of power theft, actually it is a national problem. There are certain areas which – (Interjections) - yes, Masaka until recently, was the lead in power theft. It is true Bugisu as such has actually been notorious of hooking power, but we have had very serious meetings as leaders with the technical teams from Umeme and the Ministry of Energy and we have actually brought the theft down. 

But it is the commitment of the leaders; we are committed to making sure that power theft across the entire country is brought down to nil. That is the commitment but it is true that power theft actually goes on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Kamuli was one of those which were high on the list of power theft, but the targeted transformer which they used to steal from was on the main road near my house. So, I moved it to my compound where there is security. Now, for over one year, there is no theft. Yes, I moved the transformer to my home. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you for that clarification. On the issue of compensation, honourable minister, when I was coming from Entebbe yesterday - I understand there is a problem of the Chinese working on the express highway. Their work has slowed because some people have refused to leave where the road is supposed to pass. And there are those who have not been compensated and so this is going to delay the completion of the road. What do you have to say about this?

7.52
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The importance of roads in Uganda and elsewhere in the world cannot be disputed. However, the burden of external debt in Uganda is overwhelming. I have just taken a very quick research and I have discovered the total external debt for Uganda today stands at about US$6 billion and it is the highest in Uganda’s history. I am even getting worried that the external debt per capita could exceed the income per capita if we do not reconsider this approach.

Madam Speaker, Uganda with a revenue authority that collects even in excess has jumped the external debt from US$1.4 billion as it was in 1987 to about us$6 billion today. 

We must find out reasons why countries that used to give us grants can only guarantee loans for us. That is it, Madam Speaker. Instead of the so-called capacity building to UNRA that already has engineers and experts, we could think of sensitising locals such that they understand these projects very well. Otherwise, they would think that it is because of hon. Amama Mbabazi and the sole candidature that the tarmac road project of Kanungu is now on board.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were going to ask us to sensitise them not to steal the road signs. I thought that is what they were going to do other than the other thing.

7.52
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support and thank the committee for the report. I would not want to say what I am going to say, but I am going to say it. Do not get excited, you people of Kanungu about the approval of this loan. About two years ago, I was so excited when we approved the loan of Bukakata Road but up to now, nothing has taken place on ground. The people in Bukakata are wondering what is happening. The state of the road is so bad. And, this is a road that joins the districts of Masaka and Kalangala. So, when you get excited, for me, I sit back and feel bad for that excitement. Probably, the minister will come up and explain. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk about the road furniture on the newly constructed road, most of the road furniture is stolen. We do not know whether it is stolen from those roads where it is already installed to the new ones that they are going to commission. We suspect that something wrong is happening. You take stock on all those highways that were commissioned when the road furniture was installed; if you go back now, you will not find anything. 

So, there is suspicion that probably those people putting up the road furniture, go back at night to remove it and take it to other roads.

7.57
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the loan and also congratulate the ministry and the committee for having a gender empowerment component in the loan for the first time. However, I make the following observations. I do not know, and I want to know from the minister, was it the women that proposed the cargo bicycle and the donkey cart? Or, it is some men that sat somewhere and thought for the women what they wanted –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Komuhangi. I participated in the pre-financing mission, which the ADB team and UNRA and Ministry of Works had in Kanungu and we never suggested the bicycles. Actually, we raised the real issues like construction of the markets for the women to sell their produce. 

So, I just want to confirm that for the side of Kanungu, I was part of the consultations; the women as well as the men never raised those bicycles.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much for the information which confirms that actually some men sat somewhere and were thinking for the women. So, can we re-focus ourselves here on what women actually need, not what you have quoted? 

Madam Speaker, for the women awareness campaign to implement on-going institutional actions on gender-based violence, I want to know exactly what the Ministry of Works is going to do. Are you going to work with the institutions like local governments or you have your own staff that has a separate programme on this? I want you to be specific because it can easily get lost into what we are saying.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I am disappointed with the capacity building of UNRA staff because we have constructed several roads of this nature and I know the UNRA staff have been training. Should capacity building be all the time and at any cost? Really, we need to revisit this aspect. 

Then another one, the civil works has taken the biggest budget. But, this civil works; the design should cater for active transportation. The walkways must be provided for people to walk safely on the roadsides. There must be cyclists’ lane for active transportation for people who can use their cycles to go to work. And, you know this also promotes physical fitness for our people and they must be accessible to persons with disabilities. Really, these should be catered for if any changes are to be made. 

Otherwise, I am so happy for the 17 road markets for the women; for the 16 boreholes for the women. But, for the road safety, I think the road safety authority and other budgets should cater for road safety, not this contract. I thank you.

8.01
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the loan. I was in Mulago, but I came running when I heard of this loan. 

Madam Speaker, I was born in a place called Nyakishenyi in Rubabo under a tree way back in 1968. There was no road and my mother almost died. You can imagine! If my mother died with me, you would not be having the Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality now here. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, this morning we had a very serious meeting with you on improvement of maternal health in this country and I told the public that the money in the Ministry of Health is being stolen through health-strengthening systems. Members of UNRA, I want you to look at me; I imagine you are seated there. And, Minister Byabagambi, you are my good friend; you are smiling. The money which you want to ‘eat’ in capacity building is Shs 581.34 million. Are your hearts where they are supposed to be? Surely, you have been building roads in this country for so long, why do you want to ‘eat’ this money? 

Minister, can you block ‘eating’ of this money if you are a Ugandan? Honestly! Because, this money, Madam Speaker, can build toilets along these roads; this money can do so many things. I want us to stop this mentality of ‘eating’ money that we have actually borrowed because this is money which our grandchildren will pay when we are long gone. This is not a joking subject. This is not a Golola show but serious business.

When I was a medical student and you were the chairperson of Mbarara University Council, you taught us to go and work in communities, not Kampala. I took your words and I went and worked in Kambuga Hospital and the road was not there. I am a doctor by profession, but I can tell you, Madam Speaker, the women in Kanungu, when you get obstructed labour – and now they do not have a doctor – you either have to go to Nyakibale or Kisiizi hospitals. To Nyakibale, you must pass via Nengo, and when you want to come to Kisiizi, you have to pass via Rugyeyo. This omission of the state from Kanungu to Kambuga Hospital is serious. It is paradoxically pathetic to abandon this facility. All the Congolese come to Kambuga Hospital; Kihihi people must come to Kambuga Hospital; people of Butogota must come to Kambuga Hospital.

And, Nyakishenyi, in particular, where I was born - I am telling you, Nyakishenyi is highly mountainous. You cannot cross from Murama to Wanyondo – and there is even gold but you cannot cross because the road is bad and very mountainous. 

Hon. Byabagambi, I was kindly requesting; you are my good friend. The President pledged to the people of Nyakishenyi - and my grandparents and uncles are there waiting for this road. If this road is omitted, hon. Byabagambi, I can tell you that the NRM Government will get a problem with the Bakiga in Nyakishenyi. 

By the way, we have produced very many children and we have many votes. Please, make sure the people of Nyakishenyi get their road because President Museveni promised them the road. Do not ‘kill’ President Museveni’s votes, hon. Byabagambi as they gave 100 percent and if this road is not there, it is going to be a problem. (Laughter)

Another thing, the road of the easterners must be given. As I conclude, I hope we pass the loan for the road from Gulu up to Kitgum and Lamwo, because we also need that road. I am trying to be nationalistic.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for being patient with this debate and I want to thank you, minister, for listening to me. I know you have always given me audience. I have stood in support of this loan for the road for the east and Kanungu. But for Nyakishenyi, where my mother and I were born, help me, please. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Honourable minister, I just want to reinforce the point raised by hon. Oketayot. I went to visit them in Pader; I do not know how many hours I spent when I tried to go there. They told me that road was promised during Obote’s time. It is a very key road running through eight districts.

8.06
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving the opportunity. These days, when they are constructing these roads, they put big channels on the sides of the roads that when a vehicle loses control and goes into them, the accident is fatal. Can we have these channels standardised? The ditches should be covered. In most cases, they do not have to be so deep. So, we waste resources constructing very deep channels which are very dangerous. I thank you.

8.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you very much for the support that you are giving to this request. I know there are a lot of unfinished businesses in terms of infrastructure, but the Government is trying as much as possible to address all areas of Uganda. 

Most of the questions that have been raised would be answered by the sector ministry, which is the Ministry of Works because they are technical in nature. But, there is the issue of debt sustainability which has been raised by an honourable member and the debt sustainability position for Uganda. 

First of all, let me say that debt sustainability is measured against certain variables, such as GDP, domestic revenue collection and export performance among other variables. And for Uganda which is part of the East African Community and the East African Monetary Union, has fixed a celestial of 50 percent to GDP ratio beyond which we should not exceed. If we do that, then the debt becomes unsustainable.

This loan will certainly increase the external exposure, but our external debt exposure as of 31 December 2013 was standing at US$6.4 billion. This level qualifies us to be in the sustainable level of debt and should not worry the country. In other words, we still have a leverage to borrow in order to address our infrastructure gaps that we have in our country on the roads, railways, water transport and energy among others.

I thank you, honourable members, for supporting this loan request.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, members asked you on what the standard contingency is. Sometimes it is nine, sometimes 10 and now here, it is 17. Why do you not have a uniform contingency? And they wanted to know about the proposal made for reallocations which are very cheap.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance gets requests for loans from different sectors and these sectors have usually assessed what component they will address in that loan. 

For this loan, the Ministry of Works and Transport usually make assessment and feasibility studies. Whatever arises from those studies may raise the levels of contingencies. The contingencies are not uniform. It can be two or eight percent. 

There is a project where the contingency has gone up as much as 28 percent of the loan depending on the perimeter and the terrain where the project is going. If, for example, you are constructing a dam and the Ministry of Minerals and Energy determined that the soil and the rocks are not reliable, the risk will be higher and therefore, the contingency will be higher too. If it is a better terrain, the contingency will be low. For this matter, the Minister for Works and Transport should tell us why they fixed it at 17, but not at 10. Mind you, Madam Speaker, this money -

MR OKUPA: I just want to give the minister information. In financial management, contingency cannot go beyond 10 percent. The issue which the minister is quoting here about dam construction - first of all, the cost of the dam construction is so high. The 10 percent or less than that is quite a big amount also. So, it is wrong in the financial management for contingency to go beyond 10 percent unless you are now somehow financial engineering here. For us who have studied finance matters know it cannot go beyond 10 percent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, conclude and then the Minister for Works.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, this study is not a monopoly of certain people and we have seen in this Parliament when we passed different levels of contingencies. They depend on the situation as I had just said. 

For this loan, the Minister for Works - because the terrain of where these roads are going to pass is really a bad one, they cannot determine conclusively the geologies of where the roads are going to pass. For example, you cannot have the same contingency when you are doing the Kisoro-Kabale Road like that one where you are doing a flat surface. But the Minister for Works should be able to explain this, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

8.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the colleagues for the overwhelming support for this loan to tarmac the long-standing roads, which are within the manifesto and which were appraised by the government.

Madam Speaker, you will allow me start with the contingency then I will come to water transport, then for the rest of the questions which are similar, I will answer them in bulk. 

We have experience, especially from the two roads that we have just concluded: Kabale-Kisoro and Fort Portal-Bundibugyo, where we have ash soil. Unfortunately, this ash soil reoccurs in different sections that sometimes you do not capture during the detailed engineering designs.

Secondly, the contingency is to cover the risks. In case we find that the risks are not as we envisaged, then that contingency is not touched at all. But when you look at Kanungu which falls under the mountainous area with a lot of ash soil; Lwakhakha, Mbale, Magale-Lwakhakha, you find that really it is all ash soil.

Meanwhile, we also started experiencing underground rivers which we have not been getting as we continue going to mountainous areas. We have experienced rivers between Kabale and Kisoro where we failed to get the bottom, the hard surface of the roads. We had to do what we call ‘do-minimum’ so that every year you go back and fill. That section is about a kilometre. We left it there.

So, this contingency, Madam Speaker, is not necessarily that we are going to spend this money but it is to cater for those which we have now seen - and actually, it was proposed by the bank itself because this is the same bank which financed Fort Portal-Bundibugyo and Kabale-Kisoro. When they saw that, they said, “I think there is more risk in these mountainous areas.”

Madam Speaker, if I can move to water transport. You are spot-on -

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. 

Just on contingency, honourable minister, my understanding of ‘contingency’ is unforeseen and things that you cannot predict at the beginning. What you are saying seems to show that you know that this is a situation that you are going to encounter and so you should be costing.

When you look at Page 7, Madam Speaker, the contingency is not just the physical. Close to 35 percent of the contingency is price fluctuation. Whether it is heavy rain or floods, price is price and I think the members have a right to say, “But what is special with this one?” If you are able to know that in this kind rain terrain are the costs of the road so the unforeseen and things that you cannot predict should fall within 10 percent even with a price escalation.

When you look at the current situation in terms of the economy to really put US$7 million, I think you owe us an explanation.

MS KAMATEEKA: Further clarification, honourable minister. First of all, you have said that it is a contingency we will not necessarily have to use and yet this money comes to us. Whether we use it or not, we pay interest on it.  

Then you have said that it is the World Bank which suggested. It is ADB which suggested, the lender suggests that they offload money on you so that you can pay interest on it!

Hon. Minister, would it rather not be better that we take 10 percent? And when we need more, we will see how we can get it rather than have it and not spend it and accumulate interest on it. I thank you. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think, Madam Speaker, as hon. Magyezi has stated, this is unforeseen and I cannot quantify even which I am likely to meet. You know this is the reality which has been on the ground especially on the two roads. How do we know? - On one side, we have to keep the unit cost within the risk and on the other side we have got a higher risk.

The third is that this money usually is a saving. We have been saving money on these loans. You remember, Madam Speaker, how the loans from the central region helped us tarmac some of the roads like this road in Wobulenzi. Those were the savings from this contingency. We usually give enough room because if you give small room then you will not finish the road. You will end up getting stuck. 

So, we do not use this money unless we are compelled that there is a very big problem and we need to start up valuation. It is not wastage. As soon as it remains, it goes for another and, for instance, I am going to talk about the Kanungu section. If this money remains, it will automatically go to Kambuga. So, I will not look for the money for Kambuga anymore. That is how it is. In case the Bududa circular remains and we have not got any problem, this will add on.

Madam Speaker, these days I think we have clearly seen that when we reach towns and the local governments usually request to tarmac so many roads, where do we look first? Have we saved anything in the contingency? If we have saved something then immediately we do something for the local government.

So, Madam Speaker, this money is necessary but at the same time, it is within the powers of Parliament to do what they feel is necessary. I have given my explanation and we, as a sector, feel that this money should remain.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. We are not opposed to that in case there is a request. But, we are saying the standard practice - because if you read the estimated project cost beyond the 10 percent syndrome there have to be 12 methods of calculating contingency. Which method was used to arrive at this 17 percent?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, I am not an economist to know the methods they used to calculate but an engineer. I give the access route and what I am likely to meet in that access route and then the economist factors it in.

So, Madam Speaker, I now move on to water transport. On water transport, I really agree with you 100 percent. I think that I am one of the beneficiaries who have used the Kamuli-Kayunga route. I could not believe that I could leave Kamuli at 6.00 O’clock and at 7.30 I was in Kampala. It was quite amazing. 

I think that you are right that our policy should shift and make sure that water transport is given the money and you know that is why we wanted – last week we were in Cabinet and we were talking about the creation of a Multi-Transport Regulatory Authority. The reasons as to why the ministry wanted that was that once an agency becomes autonomous, then it attracts some foreign funding. We actually wanted to capitalise on that so that we can build our water transport.

You can imagine the only port we have in Uganda is at Port Bell. Whenever, we want to put money there, it is not there. But it is the only port that we have in the whole country. 

As I talk now, it is covered by water hyacinth. The second ship that we wanted to repair was procured and finished; the contractor is in place but we do not have money to repair that ship. So, we have not been giving due attention to water transport. 

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, that Parliament has now finally given me a push and water transport should be given a priority. It has never come out, pronounced like it has been pronounced today. I have to tell the truth. 

You see, Madam Speaker, I am a humble public servant. I am saying this with humility. That the pronouncement you have made today on water transport has given me a push. What has been there is - has been in the committees, on individual basis and then the President giving the promises. But now to come out boldly on water transport is really very beneficial to all of us. I am very happy with it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to let the Hansard team go home. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: On the compensation of the 18.6 billion, you know compensation goes with the financial year. So the first year, it is usually much more money. That is why they quoted 18.6 billion but then during the subsequent years, we shall be budgeting for the shortfall. 

Then we go to the local governments. We usually involve them and these days it is mandatory that the contractor, before he starts the road works, should give the specification and quantity of work to the local leader, in order to sensitise them and for them to know what they are exactly doing in their area.

And on top of that, it is now a policy that wherever these roads pass, the local communities are given the first priority for employment. 

Now let me go to the bicycles. I think this is a very good idea of having markets along the roads; we have seen what they do, especially to our poor women. They work to get some money, cook food and get something to take home. 

But then, they had looked at how do they transport their products? That was the thing that came in. And when they thought of how they can transport their products, what came in first like in areas of Mbale where they have some donkies is donkey carts. Okay?

Now for people from Kanungu where they do not have donkies, they would say that you can have a bicycle and put on a cart and you push. But if you do not want that, it should be removed as I have no problem with that. 

So, I am in contention, Madam Speaker. We can decide with what to do with it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think with issue of the market, everybody agrees. I think the other component of bicycles is what the members are not agreeing to. The markets should be there.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think what we can do, Madam Speaker, is let us convert the money of the bicycles and carts into more markets. I think that can balance the equation. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: What about value addition? What about providing maize mills to them so that they can sell posho instead of maize? I do not know what members say.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, where we have tried to do that, it has attracted almost the whole village and we found that we are cooking for the whole village. I think the best way is to give those who come to work some money. May be we increase on the amount of money they are to get, but they sell their products by increasing the market. Let us add on the markets so that we create more space for these women at different locations and I think that can work out –

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the gender committee first.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister too, for accepting to change. When you look at the 17 markets provided for here and at the stretch of the road that we are talking about, they are quite few. So, let us add on the markets for the women along all the roads. We should utilise that money for more markets.

MS AOL: In the event that we have more funds in the Contingency Fund, I am proposing a good percentage of maybe 50 percent of what we have to go to that aspect of gender empowerment and build those small markets along the road. That is my proposal. I thank you.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I support that idea of putting the markets. However, I would like to request the minister that, in case there is more money – you know, when you convert those bicycles, we would like to have a value addition. Because if those women have say machines, like for grinding millet, maize, cassava, it would actually promote them; have extra value addition rather than concentrating on selling raw materials. I thank you. 

MR NZOGHU: When you travel from Hima to Mubuku, you really appreciate what trees can do on roads. One, you secure the road reserve, two you are also protecting the environment. 

When you take the case of Mbarara-Ntungamo-Kabale Road, where there are issues to do with compensation on the road reserve and yet the road was already there. I think it is high time that the Government and especially, the Minister for Works, looks strictly at how we can secure those road reserves so that we can avoid double compensation. (Applause)  

Depending on this, I also suggest that some percentage goes to securing our road reserve.

MS KWIYUCHWINY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that transport is very important for women. But when you say bicycles and donkey carts, they are really manual. I would propose a tri-cycle cart with a carrier which can still carry those goods to the market for the women.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just wanted to add one more thing. When I drive on those roads, you find that these people are mothers; the children are lying among the potatoes. I want to see a small day-care facility. At those markets, these children spend the whole day with their mothers, sleeping under the potatoes and matooke. Yes, capacity building money can do that.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this is a very good idea. I remember very well that when we were working on Kapchorwa swamp using labour–based technology, one of the components was this day-care where women would bring their children to be looked after and then they would work on the road, thereby getting an income. It was a very good project. I think it needs to be looked into.

Then secondly, on the issue of trees, I agree. Trees also protect our road reserve and now it is within our policy. By the way, we started with the northern bypass. We teamed up with a certain NGO called Go-Green or something like that. The Speaker is actually the patron. Now we are planting trees along our road reserve.

Well, there is usually a beginning, and trees take time to be seen but in reality, those trees are there and are growing. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister finish please. You know the Hansard team needs to go home as they have been here for the whole afternoon.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am moving on capacity building-

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the issue of enforcement with the encroachers on the road reserve - on the Soroti–Mbale-Tororo Road - I just want to take you to between after the Awoja Bridge in Soroti town, there are two people who are busy constructing just now. I told your officer in Soroti to stop them but they have not. They are building three metres to where the road starts. I do not know why he cannot stop it? These have just come when the work is going on. Can you enforce that?

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think that is very good information. I thank you for that. I think I will have to drive there and see but from here, I will contact the engineer in charge to go and check on those structures.

Madam Speaker, let me go to contingency. What brings in contingency is when we add more stock on the roads - when you add on more kilometres, then you need extra manpower. And that is why we put a small component of only 500 million for this. Because we need extra people to supervise these roads, we have to recruit and train them.

And you know they are supervising very highly crooked people. These contractors are not all that easy. We are talking of only 200 million and I think here we have said only Shs 500 million.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Honourable minister, the first and you know why I brought it, it was very painful:
The people of UNRA are there; some of them are seated here. You have talked about members whom you want to train; I wanted you to tell us the names of these six members you are talking about and we find out whether they have not been involved in any other roads. Is the training deferred because you find that the people who are trained on Tirinyi Road are the same fellows who want to train on the Kanungu and Lwakhakha roads?

I am told, honourable minister, that that is how money is robbed. You are talking about only 500 but Shs 500 million is too much money –(Interjection)- give me information.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is true that you may see the one who has worked on Tirinyi Road in Kanungu; but where he has moved to another one, there is somebody who replaces him at UNRA. 

And on this capacity building, we may look at the quantity of money and we say that this is too much and we can reduce it but to get away with it completely is not a good idea. I know very well that even here, our members of Parliament were taken for staff, they also require capacity building and I think they go for capacity building. I beg the members that we look at the amount and see how we can reduce it but not to do away with capacity building.

You can say we reduce the amount which is much but to say that we do away with capacity building is just like hiring somebody to do your work without tools to use. I beg the members that we look at the amount and see how we can reduce but not to do away with capacity building.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as the minister is trying to convince us that we accept and reduce on the amount for capacity building, I would not wish to agree with him because UNRA usually consults consultants on each and every road to build the capacity of even those that are already there.

So which capacity are we going to continue building? We would rather use this money to do something else rather than giving this money to UNRA consultants and staff to continue ‘chewing’ it and we continue suffering in terms of paying money. I do not agree with that!

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the privilege to also be serving on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and one of the challenges that we actually identified as a committee is how to build the capacity of local firms. Because most of the bigger projects are being taken on by foreign firms; and as a committee we have been asking ourselves how possible it can be for us to build our local content. We have local firms that we can attach to these foreign firms that are competent and, therefore, by the end of the project, we realise that maybe somewhere our firms have picked.

I was also of the view that maybe this money, if it is to go to capacity building, let us see how we can design it in a way that our local construction firms can benefit from there and attach them to those firms that will win the contract for these roads. Madam Speaker, that was my view so that then we know that in future, we have a local based firm from which we can tap the manpower. I beg to move.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am on the same page as my shadow minister. It is exactly what we are doing. But we are doing it to the graduate engineers from the universities. What we did in the ministry is that we agreed that we have to improve on the capacity of our locals. And we said that on every project, we must attach new engineers who are recruited as graduates. We train them; these are your sons and our daughters and they deserve this training – (Interjection) - maybe, that is a very good question. How many engineers have we recruited so far? I can provide that information on Tuesday, Madam Speaker.

That we have deliberately recruited from the universities, we have attached them to these projects and we are building their capacity for the benefit of the roads. I can bring that list and lay it on the Table. I pledge on that.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to challenge the fact that we need capacity building because I even want to believe that we are having a problem on the Mukono-Katosi Road because maybe there was no capacity building in whatever was to be done.

My problem, Madam Speaker, is that these are not the only road projects Uganda has. There are so many others going on even now. Why should capacity building be at every road but the same people? That is the point I wanted to make.

MR MANDERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also do appreciate the concern of members. It is true that the issue of capacity building even to us as committee members, we are so much touched. It is true like what the minister said that there are graduate engineers who are always recruited and attached to different roads as they come on. But our concern as a committee was that colossal amount of money that was actually showed in the proposal. That is why we would propose that we have some reduction at least but let us not fight the component of capacity building because it will be a bad practice because you will not find capacity building in all projects. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I just want to be clarified when we talk of “capacity building” because this Parliament considers the policy statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport and I know there is a budget provision for capacity building for both UNRA and the ministry. When you say, under a road project like this, you have a component of capacity building, are you saying you get fresh engineers and they go for Masters Degrees and PhDs under this loan? What exactly are you trying to tell us? What kind of capacity building are you doing on this?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Magyezi and hon. Mutonyi. It seems that they have some information which I do not have.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is important that we trust our committee. Our committee on page 18 was very clear on this point. They said, “The amount Shs 580 million will be utilised to build knowledge in UNRA by implementing the capacity building component (training six staff members)” and then the committee goes a step ahead. 

This is where we should also really listen to our committee because the practice of borrowings to build capacity of UNRA staff is increasingly on the rise as evidenced in some of the on-going debt financed road projects. So, we are talking of a habit, we are talking of a practice which you can defend.

And the question we are asking is, is it necessary that in every road project you have capacity building? Is it going to be the practise? For me, I do not think we should buy what hon. Mandera is saying but let us look at the principle. UNRA is not a training institute; it is not a college, we are talking about a department that has technical competence. Now, if we permit this one, then I think we shall be -

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MR MAGYEZI: If we permit this one, Madam Speaker, we are setting a wrong precedent. It is not about the amount, it is about the principle. (Applause)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I beg to differ a bit from the honourable on this capacity building. Someone asked, “Do we have to do capacity building for each road?” For me, I said, “Yes” because the roads are of different terrains, because the roads have different soils so - (Interjection)- yes but they have to teach them what they are supposed to do – 

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am now forced to raise a Point of Order against hon. Mutonyi. These things you are talking about are things that are taught at the university. For a doctor in a hospital, you have to go and operate but stop capacity building on doing a C-Section. But when you talk about road construction, we have got a component of road construction in engineering and hon. Byabagambi is an engineer and he knows. 

Is she in order to tell us that UNRA now has become a training institute for road construction when people have been sent to university and we have been paying the money? Is she in order? (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I think you will have to satisfy us, what are you doing with the ordinary training budget which we give you every year in this House? And also with the training budget we give to UNRA every year, why do you need additional?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this is my prayer. My prayer is based on what we found out in the Ministry of Works and Transport when we looked at the private sector and found out that they do not have engineers who can even quantify the work. You see, there is school knowledge but there is also practical knowledge and usually- we say - 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By simple mathematics, capacity building of Shs 500 million for six people means each of the staff is going to be trained at Shs 100 million. 

Is the minister in order to suggest that a fee that cannot even be consumed by a PhD student can be taken by one engineer for only capacity building? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what training is it? Because that is like US$40,000 per engineer. Isn’t it? It calculates to how many dollars? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I was still explaining -

THE SPEAKER: It is about US$40,000. Is it for a PhD or is it for a Masters?

MR BYABAGAMBI: My prayer, which I was still making in my submission before he interrupted me was that this practical experience is necessary and I mentioned earlier that we want a policy of having these graduate engineers having practical experience. 

I also mentioned that we look into the amount of money - okay, we can reduce the amount of money but the principle of having these young engineers trained really should be supported.

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order from hon. Werikhe. 

DR LYOMOKI: Point of Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It was hon. Werikhe. (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, there are two issues that the minister responsible for potholes is trying to raise. For him, he is talking about engineers but the committee is talking about staff of UNRA and so these are two different issues. 

So, is it in order for the honourable minister to appear as if he is not aware of the details of what he is talking about because these are two different issues? Is it in order for the honourable minister to continue misleading the House on this matter? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Can our chairperson tell us what people are going to benefit from this training? Let our chairperson first clarify.

8.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the colleagues for the concerns.

On this capacity building, the amount is uncalled for. (Applause). First of all, while the minister is saying they are building capacity, I want to be challenged because if you go to all these road projects that are being worked on, they are being supervised by consultants and not our engineers.

Secondly, even for designs, you will be told that they hired consultants to do the design - (Interjections) - and we are on record. We have been asking, if there is capacity building and you are building the capacity of our staff, why would you continue hiring consultants even to design roads? It is very perturbing.

Madam Speaker, you are just looking at Shs 500 million for this project, what about when you look at the north-east road corridor, it is over Shs 2 billion in the same period. I think that it really needs more explanation and this is where we have been getting a problem with the ministry.

As a committee in charge of this, we are saying, if you build capacity, it should be built and attained. You should ask the minister to tell us how many fresh graduates he iS talking about. Why would you use billions and more just for a few staff members! So, Madam Speaker, the members are right. I thank you. (Applause)

8.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I can understand the concern of the members. But we need to know that as we speak today, the staffing levels of UNRA - that is the human capacity - is 50 percent or less. (Laughter) So, for every project, that we get, we use that project to train staff so as to improve the capacity. And so, for this case and even the previous –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order. 

MR SSEMUGABA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stood up on a Point of Order. Is the Minister for Finance in order to talk about capacity building money to recruit staff? Shall we suspend some and yet he is the one involved in planning for this country. Other than planning for recruitment of more staff in UNRA, is he now trying to mislead the House and to use the capacity building money to recruit? Is he in order to confuse the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your argument defeats, I think, your intention. If you have been training with every loan, why are you at 50 percent? Because for every project you are recruiting new engineers and training them. So where are they and why are they at 50 percent?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, let me explain again that currently, UNRA is restructuring to ensure that the staff levels are commensurate to the work. You have talked about supervision by consultants and design by consultants. We would wish that this work be done by UNRA staff. So for every opportunity that we have, for example, acquisition of a loan, you build in a capacity building component so that you can improve on that once and for all instead of budgeting because funds are not readily available. So that is the explanation I want to give to the House.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think I will not labour too much on this and maybe I need to rename the item and also we look on the amount of money because it is only US$150,000. But the principle of getting young engineers on board for both private and UNRA is good because these engineers do not only work on roads but also these engineers are everywhere, even in health. 

So, I think this idea of having young engineers getting trained is a good principle. We can bring it here and maybe we rename it –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, the minister has talked of having the same people whose capacity has been built to work on the road in Kapchorwa, then the road in eastern and western Uganda. Then at the same time, the minister is saying that the money for capacity building is being used for training and building the capacity of young graduates from the university. I think those are two different things and the minister is misleading the House by presenting information that is conflicting. Is he in order to continue constantly misleading the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should tell us the truth about what you want to do with this money. Either they are new engineers or they are old staff but you cannot continue just -

MR BYABAGAMBI: Okay. What I want from Parliament is to authorise me to train young engineers - (Interjections) - you can leave your UNRA as it is now but let us bring young engineers on board. Let us build capacity for our people. On every road being constructed, we have a consultant supervising that road but on top of the consultant, we have a manager; an engineer from UNRA attached to that road and on top of that, these days, we attach a pupil engineer to a -(Interjections)- trained engineer who remains there permanently until that road is finished. I think that is the capacity I am talking about -(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be clear. First of all, what is the policy with regard to capacity building in the ministry? I think this is what he should give us. 

Secondly, you are emphasising engineers. There are various categories of actually technical people in the ministry. For example, in Kireka you have a laboratory; don’t you need these other people who help you in analysing soils, the rocks that you are going to encounter in construction? 

So capacity to me would entail more than just actually training engineers and there should be a policy, which you should give us rather than just having money attached to a project for one or two roads. We need a real overall policy with regard to capacity building in the ministry. This will save us rather than just gambling. That is not right.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister continues to defend himself, he continues to confuse me. It is as if UNRA is becoming a training institution. Does UNRA recruit chemical engineers such that when they get into UNRA you want to turn them into civil engineers? 

What is that training that you are talking about that when you are recruiting, you need more capacity building? And, Madam Speaker, when they say that they want to train people using the loan that we are getting for this project, why do they wait for such loans to train and recruit engineers within UNRA if they know that they have a staff gap? Why can’t they bring it under their ministerial policy statement such that they train and recruit rather than waiting for such loans?

MR MAGYEZI: I rise on a procedural point. The honourable minister has continued shifting positions from training to recruitment, to upgrading to transfers, he seems not to see the point that the members are making. That we are not going to take a loan to construct a road and we end up using it to recruit staff, which is a mandate of the Ministry of Public Service and training which is under their policy statement handled under the budget of the ministry. 

Given the time we have spent on this matter and aware of what it really means, as a principle, shouldn’t we be appealing to you to use your discretion and make a ruling on this matter and we proceed because the minister seems not to want to concede on this matter and yet we think it is really open.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee be adopted with the amendments as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for the work done. I just wanted, for the record, to report the official absence of the following members who have also gone to Arusha for the football tournament. They are: hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Denis Obua, hon. Patrick Nsanja, hon. Tom Aza, hon. Geoffrey Kiwanda, hon. Bernard Atiku, hon. Julius Maganda, hon. Peter Mugema, hon. Peter Ogwang, hon. Johnson Bagoole, hon. Fred Badda, hon. Kiyingi Bbosa, hon. Martin Muzaale, hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko, hon. Kasolo Haruna Kyeyune, hon. Joseph Balikuddembe, hon. Joseph Ssewungu, hon. Hatwib Katoto, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Boaz Kafuda and hon. Noor Byamukama. Also, a number of staff are officially on duty on our behalf in Arusha. 

So, honourable members, I want to thank you for - I announced the netball early. For purposes of next week’s Order Paper, we will start with the questions from agriculture; the two questions and then we go to item No. 7 which is a presentation of reports on the oil and gas sector.

I want to thank you very much, the Sergeant and the Hansard team who have stayed doing this work.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on National Economy is considering a total of four loans and they have brought one loan today. And we know that some of those loans are expiring like the ones for the infrastructural issues in Kampala. 

Now, we are also going for recess, is it not right, Madam Speaker, to direct them to bring these loans maybe next week so that we can handle because otherwise we are going to lose some of this money and yet they have been handling these issues for a long time.

So, I suggest that, Madam Speaker, you use your discretion to direct that all these remaining three now be brought so that we can handle them before we go for the three months recess.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and we actually have more than four loans. We have five and there are those loans which we are still scrutinising. 

I would move the amendment to the effect that for those loans, whose reports are ready, we can present them than to rush with those reports for which we have not done thorough analysis to present them here for the sake of presenting them and yet we may find ourselves in challenges like the explanations to which members are finding here. I beg to amend this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been interacting with the chairperson of the committee on those loans and I think we have agreed that full loans should come in next week and the balance the other week. But you should do them properly even if we are in a hurry. We should hurry, but carefully.

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much and I also thank the Clerk’s team. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. I thank you very much.      

(The House rose at 9.07.p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 9 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)

