
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Thursday, 2 December 2021

Parliament met at 02.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I appreciate that most Members have gone to Arusha for sports; that is why the House is like this but we will still handle today’s business. You are most welcome. We have matters of national importance.

2.05
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, but I also would like to thank you, if you will allow me, for consistently keeping time. There was a time in this Parliament, when we were made to wait for the presiding officer for two hours. I want to thank you for not making us wait.

The procedural issue, Madam Speaker; the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has briefed and even obtained clearance from Parliament about the ongoing fighting in the provinces of Ituri, and North Kivu and briefed their Parliament that they are doing this with the help of UPDF.

In fact, Madam Speaker, I came here thinking that the Government of Uganda will be seeking our clearance and I came ready to give that clearance. But Madam Speaker, the Government - I see the matter is not on the Order Paper. In addition, for the DRC, they did not need the authorisation of Parliament but the Ugandan Government needed the authorisation of Parliament to go to another country.

Madam Speaker, if you recall, in South Sudan, where we went to help another government, we were incurring a cost of Shs 60 billion nearly every six months. Therefore, there will be costs related to this fighting in the DRC. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether you have been notified that Government will come here and seek authorisation or they think the Constitution mandating them to do so does not matter anymore.

At the beginning of this Parliament, we were all given copies of the Constitution and we swore to protect the Constitution, Madam Speaker. That is the procedural issue I am raising. 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. In the sitting of Tuesday, we agreed that the minister should come here and present a paper requesting permission to be in the DRC. The minister wrote to me, saying that he will not be available but will make a presentation on Tuesday. Therefore, we expect it on Tuesday. Thank you.

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper, we have provision for questions for oral answer and there is just one question. The procedural issue I am raising is that according to our Rules of Procedure, the questions for oral answer should be responded to within two weeks. 

More than two months ago, I raised a question for oral answer to the Ministry of Public Service in regard to the delayed implementation of the structure for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, and also their non-payment of salaries for now coming to seven months. This matter has not been responded to. 

In addition, it is not only I that is affected; I have been to the Clerk's Office and there are several questions for oral answer that have not been responded to. So, will it be procedurally right to only have one question for oral answer when there are so many whose timelines have already elapsed? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, speak about yourself and your question. You do not speak for the rest. However, your issue on science, innovation and technology is being handled in the ad hoc committee; it is one of the terms of reference in the ad hoc committee. Therefore, you will have a comprehensive response to that effect. Next item.  

However, also, ministers who are asked questions should be responsible enough to respond to the questions that the Members are raising; we need these responses. By the time a member comes up and says, I have this question, you should be able to respond to the question. Members are raising questions for and on behalf of the people of Uganda. Therefore, you should be responsible enough to answer them. Next item. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING THE 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN AGAINST GENDER BASED VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, allow me vary the Order Paper a bit. Can we have a statement from Dr Aceng first, then you will come next.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF UGANDA'S PREPAREDNESS TO COMBAT THE THREATS OF THE NEW COVID-19 VARIANT OMICRON

2.11
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The statement was submitted and I hope it was uploaded.

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I received a directive today to update this august House on the status of Uganda's preparedness to combat the threat of the new COVID-19 variant Omicron.

Permit me to present the report now in addition; I will give a status update on the pandemic and the vaccination status to date.
As an overview to date, we have registered 127,485 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 3,252 deaths.

Furthermore, the current admission stands at 115 in both public and private facilities.

The country has sustained low transmission of COVID-19 with a positivity rate of less than 5 per cent since September 2021. Actually currently, our only hotspot is Obongi that has an attack rate of more than 10 per 100 cases.

In regard to the Omicron variant, the B.1.1529 variant of the SARS Cov2, also known as Omicron was first identified by scientists in South Africa in a specimen that was collected on 9 November 2021, and later from specimens collected between the 12 to 20 November 2021 from Gauteng, South Africa, Botswana, Hong Kong and subsequently reported to the World Health Organisation on the 24 November 2021.

A meeting of the World Health Organisation Technical Advisory Group on variant evolution held on the 26th of November, named it the “Omicron” variant and designated it a “variant of concern”. Since its initial identification, the variant has spread significantly to reach all provinces of South Africa. It has also been identified in countries neighbouring South Africa namely: Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Zambia as well as among travellers to distant countries including, the Netherlands, Thailand, Israel, the United Kingdom, the Czech Republic, Italy, Belgium and Germany, with the list of countries continually growing. Before I came in here, the countries had reached 23. 

Madam Speaker, not much is known about this variant since it is new, but, this variant is reported to have 32 mutations (genetic changes) in the spike protein gene (the coat of the virus); more than those that have been identified in several other variants of concern, including the Delta and Alpha variants. These changes, it is feared could potentially render the virus more infectious, more transmissible, and harder to detect using available laboratory tests and may cause more severe disease. 

However, all these are still under research and are yet to be well documented. 

While the Omicron variant has been reported in several countries across the world, it is important to note that this variant has not been detected, as yet, in Uganda.

The World Health Organisation is coordinating with a large number of researchers around the world, to better understand the Omicron. Studies currently underway include:
1. Assessment of transmissibility.
2. Severity of infection.
3. Performance of current available vaccines.
4. Performance of the available COVID-19 diagnostic tests, and
5. Effectiveness of treatments.

More information will be available in the coming weeks, which will be shared widely. In the meantime, the Ministry of Health continues to closely monitor the evolution of the spread of the Omicron variant globally, and a number of measures have been instituted to prevent the importation of the variant into the country.

Government interventions to curb the importation of the Omicron Variant

Madam Speaker, regarding management of travellers in and out of the country, we have intensified surveillance at points of entry – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR PAUL NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. We cannot access the statement being read by the minister, on our iPads. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement was actually given to the Clerk. I do not know why they have not uploaded it. Of course, the responsibility of the minister stops at giving the statement. However, this is a very important document that we need to get. Just take note of what the minister is saying as they upload it. Mr Okema, can you upload it? The minister can continue as they are uploading it.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was on the measures that Government is undertaking, and I was at the point of intensified surveillance at points of entry; with particular emphasis at the high-volume entry points, notably; Entebbe International Airport and high-volume land border points like; Malaba, Busia, Mutukula, Elegu, Mpondwe and Katuna. This does not mean we shall neglect the other border points of entry.

The following is being done based on a scientific approach and after a careful analysis of the risks: 
    1. The Government of Uganda instituted mandatory testing of all incoming travellers upon arrival, on 28 October 2021. To-date, 48,259 samples have been tested with 228 positive cases recorded. On average, six positive cases are recorded daily. Testing of all incoming passengers at Entebbe International Airport will continue. However, passengers will be allowed to proceed to their destination once their sample has been removed. We believe that the daily average of six cases is still a manageable number that our surveillance teams can easily track and follow up. 

    2.  Testing of incoming travellers at other land points of entry, will be conducted by the private laboratories at Government-set rates as Ministry of Health continues to build capacity for testing as directed by Cabinet.

3. Persons who test positive shall be tracked and put under homebased care or health facility-based isolation depending on the severity of disease. Asymptomatic cases will be placed under home based care and followed up by the Ministry of Health using our toll free lines daily. The positive cases will be subjected to a repeat PCR test on the seventh day. 

4. Symptomatic cases requiring admission shall be managed at designated COVID-19 treatment units. 

5. All positive samples from travellers shall undergo genomic sequencing to enable detection of the Omicron and other variants.

6. All travellers are requested to be honest and sincere when sharing details of their addresses and contacts. This is to enable prompt follow-up to prevent the spread of the virus. Giving false addresses puts the entire country in danger. We are relying on the public, including us so that we avoid holding travellers at the airport, but at the same time, take precautions to avoid spread of infection. 

Madam Speaker, generally on this average of six cases, sometimes, one or two give wrong addresses but we have been tracking them down because we get numbers of their identity cards as well as passports.  

Additional measures that we are undertaking:
    1. We are taking samples from alerts or people who develop COVID-19 like symptoms from among the communities in the country. Samples from these individuals that test positive are subjected to genomic sequencing. We believe that this will enable us to search for the presence of the Omicron Variant in the country or any other new variant that may develop within the country. 

    2.  Increasing the uptake of COVID-19 vaccination, and we are accelerating the vaccination campaign. You are all aware that we have opened up to eligible people who are 18 years and above. 

    3. Adherence to COVID-19 standard operating procedures. This is a must, including mandatory use of face masks when in public, maintaining good hand hygiene at all times, avoiding crowds and keeping a distance of at least two meters. 

These are cheap preventive measures that help us to stop the spread of the virus. I would like Members to note that the more COVID-19 circulates among the communities, the more opportunities the virus has to change or to mutate. It is therefore, extremely important that we all work to reduce circulation of the COVID-19 variants to interrupt mutations of COVID-I9.

To give an update on COVID-19 vaccination, Madam Speaker, Government of Uganda continues to prioritise COVID-l9 vaccination as a strategic intervention to control the pandemic, including the effects posed by the new variants.

So far, 6.9 million doses of the COVID-l9 vaccines have been administered to the population. Of these, 5.8 million, that is 25 per cent of the 22 million eligible persons, have received the first dose of the COVID-l9 vaccines while 1.2 million, that is five per cent have received the second dose.

To date, the Government has received a total of over 17 million doses through donations and direct procurement by the Government of Uganda, of which over 10 million doses have been distributed countrywide. Distribution of the remaining 6,607,237 doses is ongoing. We expect an additional 15.5 million doses by the end of December 2021. That will give us a total of over 32 million doses.

In order to increase uptake, my ministry expanded the vaccination activity from only static sites in the health facilities to include outreaches in the communities, including villages, places of worship, taxi parks, markets etc. This is intended to bring the vaccines closer to the communities. 

It is against this background that we commenced an Accelerated COVID-l9 Mass Vaccination campaign starting with the regions with high COVID-l9 infection rates. We have so far covered four regions of Teso, Lango, Kigezi and Acholi with different rates of performance.

I also thought it important that I talk about weekly markets because there are weekly markets in various districts that have remained closed. During his address to the nation on 22 September 2021, HE the President directed that weekly markets in the hotspot districts of Soroti, Kampala, Kalungu, Kabale, Kumi, Tororo, Gulu, Nwoya and Yumbe remain closed. He directed that I follow up and review their situation for safe reopening. 

Since that time, intense surveillance, management of cases and vaccination against COVID-l9 has taken place in these areas. Currently, they are no longer hotspot areas and therefore, I would like to inform the district task forces and the public that the weekly markets can now be opened but with strict adherence to SOPs and the curfew hours. 

As I conclude, I would like to appeal to honourable colleagues in this august House that you support the Ministry of Health in the vaccination campaign and also support us where possible in curbing the importation of COVID-19 new variant. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Minister of Health, for the comprehensive report. I will open it to debate but before we open this, honourable minister, on Tuesday, there was an issue that was raised by the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Much as you are doing mass vaccination in highly infected areas like Acholi, there is a lady who has come up and is de-campaigning the vaccination saying that vaccination is meant to kill the Acholi people. 

As a House, we agreed that you go and do mass intervention on that. You go on radio in Acholi with the Acholi Parliamentary Group and make sure that, that information is put aside. It seems the locals believe what the lady is saying and it is out of that, that most people have not gone for vaccination. You may need to take note of that and get in touch with the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. 

2.29
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the brief but informative statement that she has presented to Parliament this afternoon. 

However, I have a few questions. One of the questions is, how effective are the vaccines that Ugandans have been receiving? To what percentage are we safe with the emergence of the new variant? There is a lot of speculation that with the new variant, even if you were vaccinated, you have zero percentage of immunity. I would like you to clarify that. 

Secondly, given the fact that we are going to open schools on 10 January as Government has communicated, is the emergence of the new variant going to affect the going back of children to school? Most of us are parents and our children have been home for over two years. Please respond to those two questions, honourable minister. 

2.30
DR PATRICK ISINGOMA-MWESIGWA (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. The question I would like to ask the minister is whether there are plans for us as a country regarding the harmonisation of our mitigation efforts with the countries within the region, especially the East African Community setup. Thank you.

2.31
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must express my happiness with the minister that you have given a report in the House that the markets in Teso, Soroti and Kumi can open. That is very good. The people of Teso were asking when their markets will be open because they also wanted to look for school fees and there was nowhere to take their animals for sale. 

The other thing I would like to inquire about is the issue of masks. Although it is open, people are reluctant. I do not know what the ministry will do in order to encourage people to put on masks. Every corner you go to, you find people removing their masks. 

On the other end, I am happy that in Teso, we were able to mobilise people to go for vaccine. We are continuing to mobilise them to go for vaccination. We go even to the villages where they are drinking from and we ask them to get vaccinated and they are responding positively. Thank you. 

2.33
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister for the statement. In your statement, you indicated that on average, you are getting six positive cases coming in through Entebbe International Airport. I would like to know about the other ports of entry. I have not seen that captured in the report and it becomes a major concern. We need to also know how many positive cases are coming in through the other ports of entry like the Busia, Malaba border. Thank you. 

2.33
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for this statement. The issues that I would like to seek clarification on are the following:

First, the measures that you outline here sound like they were the existing measures. In other countries, what they have done are travel restrictions from countries that have this new variant. I would like to hear of the new measures and not the old ones because the old were before this problem.

The second point, maybe you will help us to understand, if in the whole of Acholi, one lady can mobilise people against vaccines and she succeeds, have people lost faith that the entire Government from the President to ministers, one woman can wake up and begin mobilising and succeed yet all of you cannot. Look, you have said that you have 17 million doses in the country but you have only administered six million and you are not reporting about the expiry.

We need to understand whether we relieve you of this duty and get maybe a woman like that one to mobilise the country to go for a vaccine – (Interjection) - I am asking questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You get the clarification.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Ssemujju for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Ssemujju is whether he, as a Member of Parliament, doesn’t think that it is important for him to also mobilise Ugandans to come for vaccination. You are speaking as if it is only the government that should mobilise but as a Member of Parliament, he has no duty to mobilise. Could you clarify whether you also have a duty to mobilise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was an issue in the House on Tuesday where there was an alarm that one woman who has gone viral, recorded a voice and she claimed to have worked in State House and knows how State House wants to finish the Acholi, and how the drug/vaccine that is being given out to Acholi is being infected before it is taken to Acholi.

Therefore, what hon. Ssemujju is asking, “How can that one woman manage to demobilise the whole sub region?” Therefore, as Government, we should be able to come out. What he is requesting is that as Government, we should be able to overpower what the lady is saying. 

In the same sitting, we even agreed that the lady should be arrested. You should look for her and arrest her because she is disorganising the whole subregion and Government. [Member rose_] No, I was giving you clarification of what happened because both of you were maybe not in the House. Actually, the recording of that lady was laid on the Table. Hon. Anywar also made a submission on the same lady.

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has got the clarification-(Interruption)

2.37
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the lady is doing is criminal because she is inciting the public against the Government programme. She can be arrested and charged. Therefore, I believe the authorities can take it up from there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we made a ruling to that effect. We must have this lady arrested. Whatever she is doing is criminal; I mean disorganising Government programmes.

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has clarified. I was only asking a question for which I am also seeking an answer. How can the whole institution of the state be overpowered by an anonymous person? Isn’t it an issue of faith?

Finally, I sympathise with hon. Jane Ruth Aceng and by the way, I appreciate the work that you do. We now have our soldiers going into Congo. Last time they returned, I was a young boy working for a newspaper; they returned with women. Congo has had problems from one problem to another.

I would like to hear from you if there are measures that will curtail our soldiers who have crossed now into Congo, the way they crossed, many of us didn’t know; either themselves taking COVID-19 to Congo or returning with it and other problems. Taking to Congo, we would sympathise with the Congolese but there is an authority there.

However, are there measures because you see they will be moving in and out? Are there measures at the border to curtail the importation of a variant like this one or any other variant from Congo? Last time they imported many things like Gold, women but I am more interested in health issues for which now, I would like to seek assurance that there are measures there -(Interruption)

MR WAKABI: Thank you. The information I would like to give my colleague is that I represent a constituency which borders Congo. And due to the war now going on between UPDF and ADF, people are just crossing from Congo. The minister has not mentioned any area where the Government has put emphasis in controlling by at least vaccinating or testing people who are crossing from Congo. That is the information I would like to give my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, that is the question that was asked by one of the- I think Dr Isigoma or somebody that what about these other areas outside Entebbe; how many people do we register?

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you and my colleague for the information. It is a serious matter because you may not only have these new variants imported by our own forces but also people who are running away from - I would like to hear about the presence of the ministry in those areas. Thank you very much.

2.41
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you. From the statement and we, leaders, we have done our part to mobilise our electorates to go for vaccination. Let me take this opportunity to inform you, honourable minister, that in Nakaseke, the vaccines are not available; like Kikamo Health Centre III, Butalangwe Health Center III, people go and line there and in the evening they are told that the vaccines are not available. I am getting a lot of phone calls and we do not know what is happening to Nakaseke. It is ever neglected.

Remember this district was affected by the NRA war and our roads are in very poor state, we don’t have schools and even just vaccines cannot be availed or provided in Nakaseke. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually neglected even by their own Member of Parliament because you are basing on hearsay. Have you been there to verify whether the vaccines are there or not?

MR ALLAN MAYANJA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I have been there and they told me that they do not know because the vaccines are not available. They are not provided by the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like you to go there and verify whether there are vaccines or not and then give a report to Dr Aceng so that action is taken.

2.43
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, we appreciate the work you do. We would like to find out why you are not taking action at continental regional level. Why has it taken too long? 

When it comes to mobilising Covidex and funding, partly you do it at AU level. 

However, Africa is being isolated; no action - we are not hearing the Heads of State and their actions. For example, Madam Speaker, tourists and even some citizens of Uganda who travel because of business are missing flights. Why do you have the guideline for testing as 72 hours and yet you cannot coordinate and ensure that the test, which is done in South Africa and the passenger stops in Ethiopia, can be legally accepted here? (Interjection) Let me conclude then - 

I have seen a travel guideline by the United Arab Emirates Government that provided you have a test with a QR-code that can be linked to the source, you do not need to conduct another test. Why don't we have at the African level or East African level have our staff based in Nairobi, the one of Nairobi based in our testing centre here and centralise the testing QR-code? We should have our staff in all these places, the way the Uganda Revenue Authority staff sit in Mombasa; Kenya Revenue Authority staff sit in Malaba, Uganda to avoid tourists losing time to enable business move and also to avoid several tests, which are very costly - (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that I returned from Glasgow just two days ago. I led the Ugandan delegation - we had gone with many people and our colleagues here, we went through the testing process. 

My colleague is raising concern but the big picture is that if you compare with Uganda - and I must be on record that we should thank the Government and our Minister for doing the best to have even the testing simplified, the cost even lower. Before we even reached home, the results were already posted on our phones. 

Contrary to what happens elsewhere, it is very costly in UK. The cost was 128 pounds compared to our $30 in Uganda. We were even supposed to go to specific areas to test and that is what they honour. Therefore, my brother and colleagues, maybe this is still a bigger picture. We appreciate the concern but let us also appreciate that Uganda has even gone an extra mile to do the best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe we need to give credit where it is due. As of now, we are better than the test and fly. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, schools will be reopened in January.           Some of us who are associated with schools have requested Government to use our schools as testing and mobilisation centres, so that when the schools reopen in January, we do not have a problem with the parents coming, and either parents or kids have not been tested or vaccinated. 

If you use the private sector; we can just announce that for your kid to be admitted, the parents and the children who qualify must come for vaccination or you will have no space in the school. You will find that within a short period, we shall have this matter - so that when schools open in January -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot give such conditions really; there is a right to education. I mean, we should go out as leaders just to mobilise people to voluntarily come for vaccination.

2.47
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the Minister for her statement. I, however, wanted to hear a little more about our readiness in as far as the health structure is concerned.

Madam Speaker, the Minister, like myself is a great believer in God. Therefore, we believe that God will protect us from another hit. However, while we trust God, we also lock our doors. 

We were hit initially, and then there was a scamper; hospital beds, ventilators and so on. We did not seem ready in that regard. 

So, I wanted to hear from the Minister, how ready we are in case we get another hit. It is good that vaccination is happening, but again, we are told that even when you are vaccinated, you can still carry, you can still be infected, and that is why even after we are vaccinated, we still wear masks. Therefore, the vaccination is good, but how ready are we in case we get another hit? I think that is important. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, I was raising something and you said I should raise it on Thursday, when the Minister is here. There is an ongoing strike by medical workers. We hear there have been some meetings happening and so on, but I thought it would be important for Parliament to get an update. What exactly is happening? People call us as their representatives; they go to hospitals but no medical workers to attend to them.

I was speaking to some of the leadership of the Medical Association yesterday; they told me that some of their members are contemplating taking it a notch higher by withdrawing emergency services because currently emergency services operate. Now once that happens, it puts the nation in a precarious state. 

Therefore, they have issues, they have raised promises that have been made and fulfilled, etcetera. I thought it would be good that the Minister gives an update to the country through Parliament, what is going on around there; some kind of reassurance is important. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you talking to them as the Chairperson COSASE or a Spokesperson of NUP?

MR SSENYONYI: As a Member of Parliament of this, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you. Let us start from behind.

2.50
MR REUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister of Health for the statement. However, I would like to know, I have been hearing about booster doses after the two vaccinations. I saw Rwanda has started giving booster doses. I do not know whether when you get booster doses you would not get the Omicron variant. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.50
MR LUKE KYOBE (NRM, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the things I would like to raise to the honourable minister is that during the peak of COVID-19 last time, private hospitals raised the bill so high up to the extent that some dead bodies were held up for the relatives to pay. How is Government planning to have centres in case COVID-19 comes back in high magnitude to avoid such instances happening again? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.51
MR YOVAN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my minister for giving us a very good report about COVID-19. I want to know from the minister; in Arua district, some health workers are still dodging vaccination. How are we safe since they should be the first people to be vaccinated? What measures are we going to take to control the situation? Thank you.

2.52
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for submission. However, during the first phase, we did raise a number of issues here. We thought putting them into place would actually be preparation for the second phase in case it arose. 

Personally what I want to know from the minister, one of the preparations for the first phase was provision of the ambulance system and so on. 

In addition, the islands were considered, and Madam Speaker, you did actually send a team from here to see whether the boat ambulances were available. And indeed we found out they are available in the country. 

However, since they were procured, they have never reached their destinations; we do not have them on the islands. 

In the preparation for the second phase, which we are praying does not happen, can we have those ambulances in our areas because that is the reason they were procured? I know the minister will say that it is because of security issues but those issues were handled. We have interacted a number of times and we want to see them there.

2.53
MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Health for giving us this status update. Besides that, I would like to inform the House that in my district, I do receive regular update on any delivery of vaccines. That gives me an oversight on how best my district is benefitting from the vaccination programme. I would like to thank the ministry for that process. If all the Members of Parliament can receive the notification from National Medical Stores as the delivery happens then we can make follow up.

Secondly, there is stigmatisation of vaccination among health workers. As my colleague from Vurra indicated rightly, at the forefront is health workers and if we hear that they are not vaccinated fully - and we tend to get rightful information from them - the subsequent uptake by other community members becomes a challenge. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inquire from the honourable minister: what is the status of the health workers that are fully vaccinated in this country so far because they are at the forefront? 

Lastly, we know that Omicron is a new variant and as a country, we are happy that we have not yet got an indication of this variant. However, we are again told that this was found in a research laboratory in South Africa. How prepared are our laboratories to detect this new virus to the extent that the minister can say that we have not got this new variant? Maybe, to some extent, it is already entering into the country and our laboratories cannot detect it. It is a technical thing, I note. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Afidra. By the way, I also get notification.

2.56
MS BEATRICE AKORI (NRM, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Minister of Health for the tremendous efforts she is putting in place to secure this country. 

However, I have only one concern, which is affecting our subregion and that is misinformation being given out to the general public. We are aware that in the villages, majority of the people are not learned. Therefore, whoever gives them information, they take wholesomely.

The challenge that we have at the ministry is with the public relation officers. Whenever this information goes to the community, we do not get contrary information from the public relation officers in the Ministry of Health to counter the misinformation. Madam Minister, we know that you are working tirelessly but you cannot be everywhere. We really want to call upon those PROs in your ministry to also come up and help us to clarify on such misinformation.

Lastly, in some districts, we do not have health centres IVs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what kind of misinformation has been given so that we get to know?

MS AKORI: Like the case in Acholi Subregion where a woman recorded her voice and it is being circulated. Actually, for the last two days, I have become the PRO of Ministry of Health. My voters call me – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not a PRO, you are a Member of Parliament and a leader of those people.

MS AKORI: Yes, they move in groups and want to know if this medicine is bad. What is our take on that? How come the ministry is quiet? They are not telling any information but it is us trying to tell them that the information given is wrong. I think there must be a system in place whereby if we get such information, without taking long, contrary information should be given by the ministry.

This information has taken about one to two weeks. We begin to respond later when these communities have already taken the information wholesomely and it becomes very difficult for them to dispute. I would like to request the ministry to have faster response to such misinformation as this will guide our community. 

In addition, there are some districts where we do not have health centre IVs or district hospitals but we have PNFP. If you consider the way you were distributing the gas cylinders to the health centre IVs and other districts, why don’t you consider such facilities so that they also benefit because they are also doing a lot of work for our people? For example, in Agago District, we do not have a health centre IV and a district hospital but we have PNFP in Kalongo, which is a treatment centre for the district. However, they have not been receiving such facilities. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members of Parliament, I do not think we need to wait for PROs to speak for us. We are the voice of the voiceless. It is us who are educated who should go to those uneducated people and give them information on what is happening. If you are going to wait for a PRO from the Ministry of Health to start telling people that no, it is not correct, go and get treatment then you are at a loss. Let us speak for our people and country. It is about the health of our people in this country.

3.00
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Minister of Health for the update. I would like to seek clarification on three issues:

First, honourable minister, sometime back, the ministry had a challenge of vaccines getting expired or near expiry and not utilised in time. Your statement is silent on it. I would like to know whether that problem still exists and if it is there, what action has the Government taken to make sure that you do not have vaccines expire when they are needed somewhere else.

The second issue is about the vaccination. Madam Speaker, we have been mobilising our people. In my constituency, together with my colleagues, we have been reaching out through radios and even organising and working with the medical teams to make sure that we do mass education. I think the issue of outreaches is still curtailed by shortage of medical officers to administer those vaccines when you have a lot of numbers. However, the issue of allowances is also coming up. I would like to seek clarity, as you got more vaccines doses, whether you have proportionately increased on the manpower available to administer those vaccines but also the allowances.

Finally, the honourable minister mentioned that the source of the new variant was South Africa. We have heard that this variant started from many countries in Europe but as soon as the South Africans announced it, we have had these reactions. This is being looked at as an isolationist approach against Africa. 

We would like to know whether at a continental level, there is an African CDC and whether as Ministry of Health, you have taken any steps to talk about this because the reaction is unprecedented. It means that the moment an announcement is made, even in a country like this one - one case - we are likely to see that kind of reaction.

As Africans, we should be concerned. We would like to see a statement come out from the ministers of health at continental level to talk about this so that you give confidence to the countries that we are not going to be isolated. 

Finally, we are going into Christmas. We are going to have a lot of gatherings. We would like to know whether there is going to be intensified sensitisation. I know we have the minister of ICT here. What strategy do we have? People are going to gather and we are going to see more crowds than we have been used to. Thank you very much. 

3.04
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County, Mbale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Health for the statement on COVID-19 and the update to the nation and this august House. 

Also, to look at the events that came from the report, that there are 17 million vaccines and six million have been vaccinated, yet the opening of the economy fully is conditioned on the vaccination. I am just offering a suggestion on this. 

When Emyooga became a very important issue, this House went on recess and it was on record in the entire country that Members of Parliament have gone to the communities and they are following this up. I believe it produced results. Why can’t this House make a pronouncement – even if it is for one week – Members of Parliament go back there and talk about this thing so that it shows the importance that it has in the community? This way, we will be able to raise the numbers and this economy will be opened up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see the minister clapping as if she has enough vaccines to vaccinate everybody. We do not have any problem with sending Members to go and mobilise their people to be vaccinated but we need assurance from the minister that the vaccine is there such that by the time we send the Members, everybody will be vaccinated. It is a serious time. Things are not running in their usual style.

3.06
MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yumbe hosts the largest number of refugees. You have pointed out that there is a new strain of the virus, yet the borders that neighbour South Sudan are very porous. These refugees continue to move from South Sudan to Uganda to the areas where they are being hosted. I see that because of their free movement, it is easy to conduct the new virus in our country. 

I would like to know from the minister; what precautions are put in place in order to see that all the refugees are vaccinated? Others are also de-campaigning the immunisation process. Whenever they are supposed to be vaccinated, they go to South Sudan, and they return to pick their rations because of the porous borders. 

Secondly, Yumbe Hospital was elevated to a regional referral hospital last year but to date, this hospital still operates on the budget of a district referral hospital. A lot of facilities like an oxygen production plant are not there. In case of the virus engulfing us and the facilities are not enough in the hospital, what are we going to do in order to curb such a situation?

The regional referral hospital is supposed to host five districts in West Nile; Adjumani, Obongi, Koboko, Maracha and Yumbe. Now that the hospital has not been facilitated to the fullest, what are we going to do in case of such emergencies? Thank you very much. 

3.08
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Minister of Health for the statement. When we started the vaccination, it started with the elderly, those above the age of 50 years. Eventually, when we received enough vaccines, all the adults got the opportunity to be vaccinated. 

Many head teachers are encouraging even those under 18 years to be vaccinated ahead of the opening of schools. We have head teachers who are telling the children who are above the age of 12 years to be vaccinated. I do not know if it is safe for such children to be vaccinated because it is widely spread. We need assurance as parents so that we give the right direction to our children. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the ministry of health for the support, particularly to the taskforces at various levels, the district and the sub-county, for mobilisation against COVID-19 and vaccination. However, this Parliament appropriated funds for the taskforce and these funds were disbursed by the ministry to the various districts. 

In some districts, including my district Madi-Okolo, the funds meant for VHTs and other lower local governments meant for the mobilisation for the taskforce were abused. This has demoralised some taskforce team members. I do not know what the ministry is going to do to ensure that such people are brought to book because it has affected the mobilisation against COVID-19. 

We have so many districts where the health units are grossly understaffed. This it to the extent that some districts operate at a staffing level of 29 per cent. This affects the vaccination process. 

Some of these districts have been submitting requests for the wage bill but they have not been accorded that and it has affected recruitment of the critical staff – (Member timed out.)

3.11
MS FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Aceng for that comprehensive report. I always enjoy reading your reports. Thank you for the good work you are doing. 

You have told us that 5.8 million Ugandans out of the 22 million have been vaccinated with the first doze and 1.2 million have received two dozes. Can we comfortably say that we are okay? What is the problem? We have 17 million doses and so far it is only seven million Ugandans vaccinated. Can you tell us that we are okay and we can actually relax?

Secondly, the new variant we are hearing about, with the current vaccination that we have got, are we protected? Or are we going into another circus of a new vaccine? Since I am a member of the COVID-19 task force, I am so worried again. 

Thirdly, data of availability of vaccines per district; can we know so that we continue mobilising? We would like to know what is available in our districts and the types that are there so that we can mobilise the people to go for vaccination.

Lastly, are the COVID-19 task forces in the districts still operational or were they time bound? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.13
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister for her report. However, I would like to know from the minister whether the vaccination of children - 12 years and above - has been cleared by WHO. I am saying this because the last time I talked about testing using the RDTs – because that is what other countries are doing since it takes a shorter time; in less than five minutes, you have your results - she said that there was no clearance from WHO.

And immediately after that, I saw a circular from the Ministry of Health to all district health officers directing them that they could go ahead and vaccinate children below 18 years for as long as they were above 12 years of age and with comorbidities. Has WHO given that clearance?

Secondly, yesterday I received a call from my RDC; we have been mobilising the populations. However, we have a challenge with the lack of vaccines in Tororo. People go in big numbers to the different vaccination centres but there are no vaccines.

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable minister; as you ask us to mobilise, where are these vaccines because all that is happening is that they simply pick from other districts and bring a few? Where are these vaccines that you have been reporting that we have 17 million doses and only seven million have been sent? Where is that other difference? That is what I would like to know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I need assurance on two things. One is on the availability of vaccines. I heard a voice from somewhere that we should be able to go and help and mobilise for people to be vaccinated. 

Secondly, what law do we have in place on mandatory vaccination? Do we have a law in place? If we do not have, what is your plan as Government on that?

Thirdly, somebody talked about people wearing masks as and when they wish to. What is our position on wearing masks?

3.16
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise as the Shadow Minister of Health to give my response to the statement from the minister. Honourable members, the statement from the minister, the way it is - word by word - is exactly the same the way it was when a variant called Delta that was announced from India got into Uganda. Therefore, if we take it up the way it is without any modification, we shall very much be in position to have Omicron getting into our country. 

I invite your attention to some of the measures that are to be taken by the ministry. You know the first one was mandatory testing. However, let us remember that at the beginning of COVID-19, we had mandatory testing and quarantine. At the time of Delta, we only had mandatory testing. This time round, from the statement of the minister, we have mandatory testing but passengers are allowed to proceed to their destination once samples are withdrawn. That is exactly what the minister said.

On Wednesday while presenting to you our alternative Ministry of Health statement, after realising that time is passing without the country coming up with a responsive plan to the danger of Omicron, we suggested that we should develop a red list because we know the countries where this variant is. It would not be unique to us; some countries have done it including our colonial masters, the UK. Therefore, we can as well do that. We can do it for even a very short time.

However, the issue is that it will help us study and prepare for the fears the minister stated in her speech. In her speech, she was able to point out that as of now, we do not know the transmissibility of this variant; we need studies that will assess it and inform our decision. We need to be informed on the severity of the infection. 

The performance of the current vaccines and available COVID-19 diagnostic kits; as of now, we do not know whether they will be able to detect that variant. We do not know whether our treatments will be effective or not. These are worries she has stated in her statement and if we can take drastic measures at the point of entry, the worst being or the most lenient being that whoever gets into Uganda does not exit the airport unless a negative test is presented. To this, we justified and made it real by asking us to scale up the testing capability. We asked for an increase in the GeneXpert machines. 

The statement the minister made previously was that Entebbe International Airport has only two GeneXpert machines. Honourable members, this testing capacity is small. I say so because when we were in Bududa District Hospital, we found that that facility also has two GeneXpert machines. Tororo District Hospital has the same capacity.

Therefore, we cannot replicate a similar capacity to Entebbe International Airport; when we strain the testing capability, then passengers can look for Plan B. That is when you have instances of a passenger releasing money or any inducement so that he is let into the population.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise? At the same time, honourable shadow minister, let us not contradict ourselves. We are the same people here who made a lot of noise. Why are passengers kept at Entebbe when the results are not yet out and we gave orders in this House that let the people go to their homes, and the results will get them there. Now, again, we are saying otherwise; which is which?

DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, in the face of a new COVID-19 variant (the Omicron) and aware that the country was put under lockdown for 42 days, we lost over Shs 3 trillion in tax revenue; we were stressed. Up to now, schools are still closed. 

Sincerely, we should not keep loopholes in our system. We have very many challenges; our SOPs are challenged. You know the minister is talking of enforcing SOPs but look at the doctors’ strike; it explains the gaps and challenges. Doctors are striking, for among many reasons, that they do not have PPEs.

Therefore, we cannot let ourselves lose. If there is anything that gives us an opportunity to fight against Omicron, it would be at the Entebbe International Airport. If we let it lose at that point, the Ministry of Health will come here with a COVID-19 plan of almost Shs 2 trillion to buy oxygen, beds and other things.

Now that the economy is fragile, we have a very good opportunity to develop a red list and accelerate the vaccination process.

I would like to applaud and commend the minister for the effort she has made in vaccination at churches and other places. However, before our eyes, we see that all that effort is only in the urban places. We are worried for the rural places and it is for that reason -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that the vaccination is only in urban areas?

DR BATUWA: The accelerated vaccination effort - where they are putting vaccination clinics at churches and high volume places are in Kampala and some urban places. We would like the same replicated upcountry. I would give various examples but allow me to put Tororo in perspective. It is one of the big districts with over 40 subcounties but vaccination is taking place in designated health facilities and in totality, they are 14. This is not practical; you can clearly see that about three subcounties crowd around one vaccinating area. What this speaks to is the distance one has to move to get vaccinated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise?

DR BATUWA: It, therefore, prompts us to interrogate whether one will easily get vaccinated or will have to move out of his convenience to get vaccinated. 

In summary, the Opposition has alternatives to the approach on the Omicron. I request that the Minister allows us to present our alternative to her such that she looks at it and where possible, picks out what she can consider - (Interruption)

MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member and the House is, those who remember going to the expo in Dubai, they would collect your sample and by the time you get to the immigration desk, the results are already transmitted. There is no rocket science in this; one, that you have to crowd the airport. Two, that you can take the risk of sending people to their respective homes, some of which you may not trace, others may even give you a wrong address. We simply need to perfect our game such that by the time somebody gets to the immigration desk, the results are out.

DR BATUWA: Finally, on the common approach to management of the COVID-19 Omicron variant by East African countries, we appeal to the ministry that COVID-19 does not need a passport to cross from one country to another. Let us not be in a situation where each country does its own things. Can we have a common approach, especially in the fight against Omicron getting into our region? 

As of now, we have no information that it has made entrance in our region. We believe we are all free from it; so, let us have a common approach. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable shadow minister. I can still give a disclaimer. In my district, a very good number have been vaccinated and I must thank the ministry for that. Procedure? I hope it is on the same.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure because it has come to my notice that this House is fully constituted. We have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. Close to her is the Minister of Security, hon. Jim Muhwezi and Cabinet members. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, we are in a state of war. We have sent our brothers, our sons and daughters across to Congo. This matter is so critical in that in my hands and before me, I have the Constitution. I have the UPDF Act and I have the Rules of Procedure that put it to this House to ensure that we defend and protect the constitutional provisions of this country. 

Madam Speaker, it has become apparent - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kateshumbwa, he is on procedure.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Hon. Kateshumbwa, just some patience please. Madam Speaker, are we procedurally right to sit here and deliberate - Of course, I am hearing the Minister of Information trying to heckle my position but I am rising on a constitutional matter, which precedes all other matters. 

Now that the House is fully constituted, can we really be informed as a country? Can Government seek the mandate of this honourable House? This is the only Parliament that we have in this country. 

In addition, the continued disregard of the constitutional order, Madam Speaker, is putting me at odds and I hope the Parliament as well. How do we proceed without this matter being presented here, now that we have the Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Minister for Security? Can we have a motion before this House, bearing in mind that our counterparts in Congo were briefed and Parliament sat and this matter was discussed, save for Uganda? 

It is our sons, our boys who are down there doing the fighting and life along the fighting is being expended? I am telling you that we may do deliberations in this House but that engagement is going to cost the budget of this country. For all we are deliberating upon, we may never realise it with that ongoing conflict. 

Madam Speaker, can the Prime Minister – well known as majegere in some other circles - stand up and inform this country?  We cannot continue in darkness when you are seated here and you are the Government? Is it a vote of no confidence in the Government or you are putting a vote of no confidence in Parliament?

My prayer and procedure is, are we procedurally right to proceed as if there is no government in this country, to proceed as if Parliament is being disregarded in this manner, to proceed in a very unconstitutional manner of doing business in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, that is actually the danger of coming in late. As the presiding officer, I come to this House at 2 o’clock. I have one good person who raises procedural matters. A procedural matter was raised on that issue and I made a ruling to that effect but because you came at 4 p.m., you are raising the same issue. There is a ruling to that effect and I want to tell you that my ruling is final. It is not for the Leader of Government Business. The ruling I give is final. Therefore, because you have seen the Leader of Government Business coming in, you want to raise those issues. It was already ruled upon. Next item. Can I have the minister?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be here on Tuesday, you will get the statement. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: But the continued time, Madam Speaker, is not - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The continued violence of the Constitution is persisting. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, can you sit? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Madam Speaker, I do not intend to go against your statements -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you sit?
 
MR SSEKIKUBO: I want to you to rule on the continued violation of the Constitution. Your order is final and I understand and I appreciate that but that should not superintend over the constitutional order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, I have made a ruling to that effect and I do not want to be pushed to the corner. Dr Aceng -

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the honourable members for the issues that they have raised in relation to the new variant but also other existing issues. In my statement, I clearly indicated that not much is known about the Omicron variant – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure - 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Minister for Health is using a microphone that many other people have used. She did not spray it the way she has sprayed and even spraying “air” after hon. Ssekikubo. (Laughter) This is a serious matter, if hon. Ssekikubo, is contagious, we need to know from the minister responsible for health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Baryomunsi, can you spray there since you are also a doctor? Yes, let Dr Baryomunsi do it. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, there is suspicion that hon. Ssekikubo has political omicron – (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have not even moved one item and we are here on order. Dr Aceng, can you summarise your response?

DR ACENG: Yes, Madam Speaker, and I will be very quick. As I was saying, Omicron is a new variant and not much is known about it. I clearly listed the areas of research that the World Health Organisation and many scientists are undertaking with the commitment to give more information in the coming two weeks. 

Nonetheless, Madam Speaker, I also clearly indicated that it is very important for us to continue vaccinating because we do not know whether the new variant responds to our vaccines or not but information coming in from South Africa is that of the 990 cases they have, the majority are unvaccinated. That gives you information that vaccines are good.

We are all looking forward to the opening of our schools and we all must work towards the opening of schools. Therefore, we must concentrate on getting the population vaccinated and support the Ministry of Education and Sports, to ensure that the schools are opened. Since the first wave, we have worked on harmonisation of our response as East African countries. In one of the countries that has made the greatest efforts in this harmonisation is Uganda. We are still using the interventions that we set in place: using what we call the - system to enable trade and travel to take place at our border points of entry. I did make a presentation in this Parliament on that issue as well as the fact that we are looking at a common East African pass and a common East African vaccination card. All these are ongoing. 

However, there are countries that respond slowly and so, the efforts do not move at the same pace.

Madam Speaker, the issue of mass vaccination, washing hands and among others, as leaders, we have to take it up. It is not only a Government effort. While COVID-19 affected countries, it affected individuals and it is our responsibility as individuals to see that these things are adhered to, without having to wait for the Government.

As leaders, we should actually reach out to the people, who believe in us so that this can happen. Regarding positive cases coming in through the land border points of entry, Madam Speaker, this is not happening because the cases come in with their tests already in the system. Those who come without tests, they are tested and when they are positive, they are not allowed into the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sseggona, allow the minister to finish and then ask the question.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, the issue of having a red list of countries and blocking countries to come in, I do not think it is a scientific decision; it is rather a hijack reaction. If you followed the dates I gave you when samples were taken, and reports were given, there was a large period of days. Omicron can be anywhere right now, and I already mentioned that it is within 23 countries. Therefore, starting to block countries without having scientific information is not a wise thing to do. We need more information on Omicron. If you look carefully, most of the countries that are being blocked from travel are African countries.

In Uganda, we do not only have people coming in through the airport, they also come in through the land border points of entry. Are we going to block everywhere? I think that we need to take decisions based on risks. In addition to that, Madam Speaker, like you mentioned, our airport is small. If indeed, it is true that Omicron is more transmissible, which we do not know; just one case waiting with the rest of the people at the airport, is more risky than allowing them to go home. The genius expert machines that are being asked for have been ordered and they will be delivered in January. Procurement takes a bit of time, so, we are waiting for that. 

Are we ready if indeed, Omicron is very transmissible and highly virulent? In my last statement here, I mentioned some of the things that are being done, including increasing bed capacity, the ICUs, the oxygen, among others. Our oxygen plants are arriving anytime now and they will be installed and many other things are ongoing, including training people to handle the ICUs. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, apart from the fact that the health workers are tired, the country is generally ready from what you have seen that we have been handling. Our uniformed personnel are all vaccinated. Not only do we vaccinate them for COVID-19 but wherever they are going, we cover them with the polio vaccine and the yellow fever vaccine. The National Medical Stores endeavours to put information on the phones of all Members of Parliament not only on the delivery of vaccines but also delivery of essential medicines. I request honourable colleagues to follow that.

The issue of coordination internationally and continentally, is an issue that the World Health Organisation is attempting to do. However, many countries want to run their own responses and it is not easy to bring everyone on board. 

The strike of the health workers was called off and I will not talk much about it. They are back to work and in any case, it was only within Kampala not everywhere. 

The issue of vaccinating the different priority groups, the vaccination of health workers is at 97 per cent and they continue to get vaccinated, the security personnel and teachers are at about 85 per cent. The challenges we have had, majorly, are with vaccination of the elderly but now with the accelerated mass vaccination and going closer, we are beginning to identify the elderly and vaccinate them. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the decision that you said that it is possible to mobilise Members to go back and mobilise the population for vaccination, this is extremely welcome. The challenge we have is that health workers need facilitation for them to vaccinate. The issue of facilitation is hampering our quick movements because these resources are being given majorly by partners and we have to wait for them and then we move.

The other issue that needed response is immunisations of refugees. Again, let me state here that vaccines are in the facilities where where refugee communities are and we are working with UNHCR to ensure that they get vaccinated. 

The issue of Yumbe hospital is being handled by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The issue for VHTs and funds has been raised on this Floor several times. I have brought it to the attention of the Ministry of Local Government through which these funds go. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker is the issue of vaccination of children with the Pfizer vaccine, especially children with co-morbidities. Yes, this has been discussed and cleared with the World Health Organisation, although other countries are vaccinating even other children with the Pfizer vaccine.

Lastly, next week, I will be laying on Table the Public Health Act that will cater for a number of issues you raised, including mandatory vaccination, and also people who do not wear masks and do not follow SOPs, what we can do to handle them. (Applause) I thank you for giving me the opportunity.

3.44
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister, at least one of the issues has been answered. All along we have been asking for a law which makes it compulsory for people to get vaccinated and they do not pose a risk to others. Thank you, honourable minister. 

The second thing the minister has not addressed is that whereas she talked about the doctors’ strike being called off, there are no efforts to mobilise the entire medical profession in the country, in cases of a pandemic like this. I take it that we are at war; we should be mobilising all our forces. Now, you have so far failed to provide for the few health workers that are working in government facilities, in terms of salary, in terms of PPEs as well as compensation. 

I think one of the core issues the medical staff have been raising is that their colleagues who have died or suffered in the line of duty have not been compensated. So, how do you expect to mobilise the whole country, including medical professionals in the private sector to join this war when you cannot provide for those few in government employment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to start a debate afresh? I am only getting clarification from Kinkiizi. I see you dying.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Health for the effort she has made to elaborate on the situation on COVID-19. I am concerned about the issue of her response on increment of beds and oxygen in the hospitals. 

I represent the people of Kinkiizi West, Kanungu District in Uganda. Two weeks ago, the whole district leadership went to the Ministry of Health; we were led by our honourable minister of ICT. The complaint was that the only hospital we have has only three oxygen cylinders. And the health centre IV has only two oxygen cylinders, and that is where the district ICU unit is. 

I want clarification from the minister; are you talking of Kampala or your district or are you talking about Uganda, including Kanungu? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me first get clarification from the minister who led the people. Honourable minister, first give us that clarification because the other one is on hearsay.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Kaberuka. He has actually presented the views of the MPs from Kanungu. It is true that – it is the question whether the oxygen and the PPEs being procured will be distributed not only in Kampala areas but to all districts, including Kanungu. So, hon. Kaberuka is right; we engaged with the Ministry of Health and the same questions remain relevant. So we expect the minister to answer whether what the ministry is procuring will reach Kanungu and the other districts.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, hon. Chris Baryomunsi is a minister who sits in Cabinet. He is creating an impression that Cabinet is doing nothing; that even ministers must go lobbying from one department to another. Is he in order to portray this Government and Cabinet as unserious? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked the honourable minister to clarify, because he was a former Minister of Health. And the question would be; what did he do when he was in health? (Applause) Because if you bought beds and had everything, they can't expire in one day. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In defense, when I was a Minister of State for Health, there was no COVID-19 in the country. (Laughter) 

Secondly, I am the elected Member of Parliament for Kinkiizi East and there is no harm in a minister engaging with a colleague minister and members of the ministry to discuss details – (Interjection) - No, in the ministry.

He is questioning why I went to engage with the minister and the Ministry of Health when I am a minister. You cannot discuss the nitty-gritty of Kanungu in Cabinet. As a Member of Parliament who is responsible, it is okay for me to go to the Ministry of Health, discuss with hon. Jane Aceng the details of my constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, let us hear from Dr Aceng, although you needed to sort out your issues out of Parliament and not bring it on the Floor as a Cabinet minister.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, to begin with the last issue of oxygen; we have procured over 10,000 cylinders of oxygen. So far, 5,000 have arrived in the country and they are receiving the identification marks. They will be distributed countrywide up to the level of a health centre IV. So all facilities will get oxygen. The regional referrals will get oxygen plants and the lower facilities can fill up their oxygen cylinders from the regional referrals. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING THE 16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM CAMPAIGN AGAINST GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we are getting a statement from the minister. We have been debating gender-based violence, the girl-child, and all that. We are only getting the statement. We are more interested in hearing about the Kasese thing. 

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not a Prime Minister.

MS MUTUUZO: This statement was uploaded on the 23rd on our iPads so you can refer back.

Its background is the 16 days of activism campaign against gender-based violence.
Madam Speaker, in 1991, the inaugural 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender based Violence took place as an event organised by the Women's Global Leadership Institute, a programme at the Rutgers University in New Jersey, USA which trains women in leadership based on global good and practice. Since then, the campaign has grown into a global campaign marked with a wide range of activities organised by various stakeholders. 

This year 2021, therefore, marks the 30 years anniversary of the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender Based Violence. Several other initiatives came in place to reinforce the l6 Days of Activism Campaign. These include the UNITE Campaign to End Violence against Women by 2030 which was launched by the UN Secretary-General in 2008. 

The UNITE Campaign calls for global actions to increase awareness, galvanise advocacy efforts and share knowledge and innovative measures to address GBV. It is in this same year (2008) when the Government of Uganda, under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, joined the international community to mark the campaign annually as an advocacy and mobilisation strategy for raising public awareness on Gender Based Violence and re-committing actions to ensure that medical, legal and psycho-social services are available to survivors.  

Both the UNITE and the 16 Days of Activism Campaigns provide an opportunity to discuss and strategise on solutions and good practice for ending GBV. These campaigns also contribute to the efforts to implement the Beijing Platform for Action and the national policy and planning frameworks on gender equality and the empowerment of women. 

The Government of Uganda has adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which include SDG 5 on Gender Equality. Uganda Vision 2040 and the Third National Development Plan prescribe gender equality and women empowerment as fundamental to national development. It also prioritises-(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. It is not normally my behaviour to ask honourable colleagues to introduce themselves. The honourable minister here is extremely rare in this Parliament. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for her to first introduce herself so that we know who she is by name, the ministry – (Interjection) - I have eyes.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for her - since it could be her maiden speech- to first introduce herself and we know her properly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is one form of gender violence. (Applause) The honourable is harassing hon. Peace Mutuuzo, who is State Minister for Gender, maybe for the new people. By the way, in one way or the other, we must appreciate what the honourable is saying; because of the masks, we may not be able to know the person. It is just good for the Hansard and thank you for the concern.

Hon. Mutuuzo, I would like to refer you to page four; progress made in addressing the gender based violence in Uganda. Start from there.

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for your sensitive ruling on harassment of women. 

Progress made in addressing GBV in Uganda 
The Government of Uganda has registered significant progress towards prevention and response to GBV through the following interventions: 
    1. Ensuring a strong legal and policy framework with the National Policy on the Elimination of GBV in Uganda, 2016 as well as enacted several laws including the Domestic Violence Act, 2010; The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009; the Penal Code Act, Cap 120; the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act, 2010 and the Employment (Sexual Harassment) Regulations, 2012. 
    2. Building capacity of Government agencies, including Local Governments, to design and mainstream interventions for prevention and response to GBV in ministerial plans and programmes. 
    3. The National Gender Based Violence and Violence against Children Multi-Sectoral COVID-19 Response Plan which runs from 2021 to 2024 has been developed as a framework to guide the national response and scale up the delivery of quality and comprehensive support services for survivors and victims of GBV. 
    4. We have scaled up interventions for male engagement and involvement in GBV prevention and response. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development National Male Engagement Strategy is being implemented and a simplified popularised version has been developed to widen the use and adoption of measures to engage men and boys for the elimination of GBV at all levels. 
    5. Offering support to women's economic empowerment through the provision of credit to 18,914 women across the country, promoting access to appropriate technologies in enterprise development and skilling in enterprise management. 
    6. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has extended support for the abandonment of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) in practicing communities, including the establishment of a cross-border FGM taskforce.
    7. The Equal Opportunities Commission is revising the Certificate of compliance framework to include specific output and outcome indicators for GBV and harmful practices during the assessments. 
    8. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, in collaboration with partners, have established 18 GBV safe shelters in 18 local governments, which provide comprehensive services such as temporary shelters, legal aid and health, reintegration and resettlement of gender-based violence survivors.
9.  The Ministry has established strong co-ordination mechanisms at national and local levels, namely, the gender based violence, high policy dialogue, medical and legal GBV working groups, violence against women and violence against children COVID-19 response subcommittees at the local governments. And, there are district gender based violence co-ordination committees that meet quarterly to deliberate on the strategies to address GBV. 

Scheduled Activities for the 16 Days of Activism Campaign against Gender Based Violence

We have held a high level inter-ministerial committee meeting across border dialogue to address gender based violence, specifically FGM. This was held on from 24 to 25 November, at Speke Resort Munyonyo in Kampala to lay strategies to end cross border female genital mutilation.
 
The national launch was held at Amaji Primary School Kamudini Sub County in Oyam District on Friday, the 26 November 2021. The event was marked under the COVID-19 standard operating procedures. Hence, the number of persons at the launch event was limited. 

The national dialogue for religious, cultural and traditionally on ending gender-based violence will take place on the 10 December 2021 in Kampala.

We shall continue to share knowledge and showcase publications and reports; that activity is ongoing and started on the launch day. 

Media campaigns on television, radios and social media campaigns are ongoing. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I wish to acknowledge and appreciate Members of Parliament for the efforts to the campaign goal of ending gender-based violence through their works in ensuring gender responsive legislation, reviewing budgets of MDAs to ensure responsiveness to gender, and equality issues, including planning, budgeting and interventions to address gender-based violence. 

I also wish to encourage Members of Parliament to initiate, participate in the various events for the campaign as a way of marking and contributing to the efforts to ensure realisation of the goal of ending gender-based violence, and zero tolerance to all forms of gender based violence. We desire to eliminate it both at home, communities and the entire country. 

I would really want to invite Members of Parliament to participate and show solidarity with survivors of gender-based violence in the country and throughout the world.

Allow me to conclude with an appeal to honourable Members of Parliament to work with all stakeholders to end gender-based violence in our society. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable minister. As I said, yesterday, gender-based violence activism is running from 25th November to 10th December; it is a campaign for 16 days. I am also happy that Government is integrating several agencies in this fight. At the end of the day, we shall achieve one goal on the fight against gender-based violence on women and children. 

We need to advocate for a long-term strategy to prevent and eliminate this violence from women and girls. 

We also need to amplify the success stories demonstrating that violence against women and girls can be prevented. We do not have any success stories that this and that happened and that is what happened or such and such perpetrators were prosecuted; we do not have such success stories. 

Then, we need to promote the leadership of women and girls in their diversity and participation in policymaking. That is the only way we can have this reduced. Members, we had this debated yesterday for over an hour. Can we go to the next item? 

The Prime Minister is around, can she read her statement then you come in. 


PRIME MINISTER'S TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is already 4.00 p.m.

4.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, allow me to respond to questions given to me. One is from hon. Atima Jackson, Member of Parliament, Arua Central Division, Arua.

The questions and the answers are on our iPads. In his question, he said that in the Daily Monitor of 25 November 2021, it was reported that Entebbe International Airport was on the verge of being taken over by the China People's Republic. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister clarify the status of Entebbe International Airport?

My response is that the financing agreement in question was signed in 2015 between the Government of Uganda and the Exim Bank of China as a commercial transaction, for which the two parties negotiated and agreed upon the terms amicably and voluntarily. 

It is a 20-year maturity loan with seven years grace period carrying 2 per cent fixed interest cost per annum. The terms negotiated are semi-concessional and favourable to Government for infrastructure development. 

These terms were also in line with a Government Public Debt Management Strategy of 2013. Under the agreement, I want to inform you, honourable colleagues, that the airport was not mortgaged or pledged as collateral, as alleged. 

Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey, Member of Parliament, Tororo North Constituency, Tororo District. Madam speaker, can I just go for responses because Members have questions? Thank you so much. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate a proposal of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. That is what I have been desiring for the last 18 years of being an MP. However, that is only possible if we establish a Parliamentary TV and radio. 

The Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker ruled that we are the voice of the voiceless. The voters need to get the question clear. Is it proper that the Prime Minister now changes the mode and the practice? Is it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the honourable Member is saying is that the Members outside there do not know what the question is. It is only the few of us who know the question.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much. Let me read the question, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya asked a question: “What is the policy of financially facilitating the new administrative units and expanded members of the LC III and LC IV?”

My response is that facilitation of new administrative units and members of Local Council III and IV is a mandate of Government. Parliament approved a supplementary budget of Shs 29.3 billion for operationalisation of the new town councils and subcounties on 18 November 2021. Additionally, Shs 8.59 billion was approved to cover the shortfalls in payments as ex-gratia, honoraria and councillors’ allowances in this financial year.

The second question was: “For the last three months, all LC III chairpersons of new subcounties have not received their salary. Why?”

My response is as stated above: that Parliament approved the supplementary budget. Payment of salaries of chairpersons of all these new administrative units will be effected.

Hon. Fredrick Angura, Member of Parliament, Tororo South Constituency gave a preamble that the Ministry of Local Government funds every COVID-19 Village Task force and the Village Health Team (VHT). There is, however, brewing discontent as the amount paid differs from district to district. “Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explain to this House, the basis for this discrepancy?”

Madam Speaker, my response is that the districts were guided to pay Shs 100,000 to each village Task force and Shs 300,000 to each Village Health Team, comprising two members.
However, there is information that we got that some members of the Village Health Teams are not the same in some districts. This resulted in funds being shared, where the members of the VHTs were more than two.

Hon. Moses Aleper, Member of Parliament, Chekwii County (Kadam),
Nakapiripirit District, gave a very long background, which I must read. 

This matter arises from the matters raised by the armed forces veterans and families of the deceased veterans in his constituency Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit District (during the consultations/interactions with the constituents) concerning their benefits as promised by the Ministry responsible for Defence and Veteran Affairs.

His issue is: “In 2019, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs through its arm, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, carried out a countrywide verification exercise on compensation of former service men and women. This involved collecting data on their biodata, service and Bank details to facilitate compensation payments. For the deceased ones, letters of administration and family details were as well gathered for the same purpose. During this exercise, the promise was that their compensation payments would be made before the end of 2020. 

However, this has not come to pass and no feedback is forthcoming, and they have been left in suspense and despair. Because of the costs involved in the gathering of the required information; letters of administration, national identity cards, travels, among others, many of the veterans and the deceased families borrowed money or disposed of their property and have been rendered more desperate as they keep waiting for the promised payment. Though this concern has so far been raised by those in my constituency, I strongly believe this is the case across the country. They are therefore, asking for the feedback to this promise knowing that the year 2020 has long passed.

What ought to be done since they are entitled to this compensation under the UPDF Act, 2005? Payments should be made to this group of people as provided by the law. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, provide very comprehensive answers to these woes of people, who have sacrificed their lives and families for the service of this country.”

Madam Speaker, my response is that in 2019, the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs carried out a countrywide validation exercise on compensation of former service men and women and survivors. The verification exercise resulted into quantification of the outstanding arrears, or the unpaid pension and gratuities, which we have already started on paying. Continuous regular payments have been effected and many beneficiaries have received their pension.

For the case of Nakapiripirit, we have a number of the verified claimants, who have been paid, and some cannot be paid because they lack vital information. In addition, the lists of beneficiaries under different categories were documented and shared with their district leadership to enable the beneficiaries to access accurate information.
Government is committed to ensuring that all the outstanding veterans' pensions are cleared.

The other question came from hon. Veronica Nanyondo, Member of Parliament for Bukomansimbi District. She asked the following questions but she gave a background: 

“Recently, the Government through the Ministry of Education and Sports together with the National Curriculum Development Centre, introduced a new thematic-based lower secondary school curriculum that will be implemented when schools reopen in January. 

However, it is not clear if all stakeholders were involved in the formulation of the new curriculum. Furthermore, Parliament has to be brought to knowledge as to whether the Government has the structural and financial readiness to implement this new curriculum. 

Besides the National Curriculum Development Centre recently planned to distribute materials to only 4,000 schools leaving questions as to what would happen to the remaining over 8,000 schools.”

Her question is, does the Government have a sustainable plan to ensure that all schools are well equipped to be ready for the implementation of the new curriculum? 

My response is that Government has identified two aspects to ensure effective implementation of the new curriculum. These are staffing and purchase of instructional materials.

Government has recruited and deployed 1,598 staff in the newly completed seed secondary schools under the Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer Programme. The recruitment of the remaining 1409 posts has also commenced and will be completed in the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Government has identified Shs 45.8 billion for the recruitment of 3,594 staff; that is teaching and non-teaching staff over a period of two years. Government has procured instructional materials for the lower secondary curriculum; that is senior one and senior two and they will be delivered by the end of January 2022. The procurement process for materials for senior three and senior four is ongoing. 

Question No. 7 is from the same Member. “Is there any corresponding compliance by tertiary institutions training teachers relevant to the new curriculum and the gradual re-tooling of teachers already in service and in private schools? 

My response is that the Government has developed the new teacher education programme to equip the teacher with relevant competencies needed to deliver the new lower secondary curriculum. 

Additionally, funds have been provided for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for retooling 20,000 teachers of seniors one and two in the entire country to handle the lower secondary curriculum.

Question No. 8: “Recently Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports and National Curriculum Development Centre, introduced a new thematic-based lower secondary school curriculum which will be implemented when schools open in January 2022…” I think she repeated this.

Question No.9: “It is not clear if all stakeholders were involved in the formation of the new lower secondary curriculum.” 
My response is, Government, through the National Curriculum Development Centre, consulted widely during the formulation of the new lower secondary curriculum. 

Question No.9: “Does the Government have the financial and structural readiness to implement this new curriculum?” My response is, the NRM Government has provided funds, which have enabled the National Curriculum Development Centre to implement the curriculum since February 2020. 

Her last question is, the National Curriculum Development Centre – she has also repeated this one because I answered it first. 

Question 12: “Are there plans to have gradual tooling of in-service teachers in both government and private schools in preparation for teaching and learning of the new curriculum?” 

My response is, a training strategy was developed for retooling of the in-service teachers on the new curriculum and this will continue in the subsequent years. To date, a total of 30,000 teachers out of the projected 50,000 teachers in both government and private schools have been retooled.

Hon. David Kabanda, Member of Parliament, Kasambya, Mubende District asked, “The Government recently completed a multi-million water project in Kagando Subcounty, Kasamba County, in Mubende District. It is now three months since this project was completed but it has not yet kicked off because of lack of electricity in the areas which would enable the water to be pumped in order to supply the area. When is the Government going to install a transformer in this area to enable pumping of water to the surrounding areas?”

My response is that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, in consultation with the Ministry of Water and Environment, will undertake a field visit to assess the requirement for the installation of the transformer to Kagando Water Pumping Station after which the project shall be packaged for funding and implementation. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this time. 

4.29
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Prime Minister, for the responses that you gave to the country. 

Madam Prime Minister, regarding the first question that you tackled about the Entebbe International Airport, what you have stated is clear that China is not taking over Entebbe International Airport. However, the message that is moving around, which you may need to clarify to help us, is about the request that Civil Aviation Authority was seeking that some clauses in the concessions can be changed. If they want their budget to be approved, they need to go to the Chinese lender so that, that budget and a strategic plan can be approved. 

Number two, that if there is any dispute arising out of that loan, the arbitrations have to be done by China International Economic and Trade Commission. This is the information moving around and most of this information is being compared with the concession which the Government entered into with Umeme. 

That Ugandans are now fighting the effects of leaders who do not scrutinise loan clauses very clearly and at the end, they leave the burden to the citizens. Maybe you need to clarify this so that it helps us to be on a better page. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, you say the message is moving? Where is it moving from? You mean messages have got legs these days? Where is the message moving from?

MR AMOS OKOT: Well, what I mean is, we are in the country and we interact with citizens of this country. Wherever we – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, what I want you to do is to come with a document, lay it on the Table and say this is the evidence I have that the concession is not in line with – Come with documentary evidence to lay on the Table and say, this is the information which is contrary to what the Prime Minister is giving. I think that would be a smarter way.

4.29
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): When you live in an area where people interact and you are part and parcel of that citizenship, your ears will definitely have to hear issues which are running-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are about to go to a Malwa joint. Then when you hear whatever the other person says you will come to the Floor and say this is what I have heard moving.

4.32
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I appreciate where my learned friend John Okot-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not a learned friend.

MR LUBEGA: Actually he is not, I agree – where my friend, hon. John Amos Okot, is coming from. First, our rules do not allow us to rely on social media and other forms of hearsay or speculation. However, look here we are and we are not simply discussing a loan agreement but we are discussing the life of a country.

The Government has kept mum on matters of these concession agreements. Ugandans who consider their lives mortgaged would like to know what exactly is in these agreements because you are contracting on their behalf.

I happen to chair a committee that has been looking at a number of agreements here and they leave a lot to be desired. Rt Hon. Speaker, you and I sat in a committee of this House called COSASE and you know how we struggled to get access to these agreements in order to be able to help the Government when they are writing these agreements to make recommendations at least. However, they keep hiding under something called confidentiality clauses.

Now, you keep or allow a clause of confidentiality against the principal owners of the agreement. When you walk around, I don’t like this ratio profiling. Every project is being handled by a particular company from China. However, Ugandans also have a fear because of what they have heard from elsewhere.

May we have the agreement submitted to Parliament to remove this speculation? It is not enough to simply say the agreement is there, it has a maturity period of seven years with a grace period of two years carrying two per cent fixed interest. What happens when we fail to pay? Tell us how much you have paid of the amount borrowed, how much is remaining and what happens when you fail to pay because it is a possibility. The reason you are borrowing is because you are broke, you don’t have money. Therefore, Ugandans must plan with you. This Parliament represents the people of Uganda. They want to see these agreements. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe what we need to find out is on how much is paid, how much is outstanding and whether there is any default to the effect. However, I can also comfortably tell you that the agreements are in our library but restricted to chairpersons like you. You only go and read it from there for the same reason that you have talked about - confidentiality. It is something that our countries agreed upon. However, if you want to look at the agreement, it is in the library. 

4.36
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I am the acting Leader of the Opposition today, therefore, I am going to have a bit of a response. Foremost on question No.1, Madam Speaker, the time span we are talking about is 20 years. Therefore, we are legislating not only for ourselves but also our children. Therefore, the majority of us who are principal actors now, possibly we will not be there. That is the very reason we ought to work transparently. 

I watched on TV, the Minister of Finance, I don’t know, his name is hon. Matia Kasaija, I didn’t know he was around, responding and it was pathetic. He said that these agreements have errors, omissions, they were not done rightly but nevertheless, they are okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that the Minister of Finance on TV?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: On TV in Uganda responding - he was before COSASE and I was on TV. I imagined a simple Uganda on his name-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was he on TV?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: He was responding before COSASE.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was before COSASE, okay.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes and responding and I was watching on TV.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would be more bothered if he was addressing a press conference or on TV. However, if it was in COSASE, that is okay.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: He was on-(Interruption)-

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): The other day, on this same matter, you directed that COSASE handles it extensively. Yesterday, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance appeared before COSASE. You said that a report should be made and brought here for extensive discussion by the House on the matter.

I wonder whether we are we moving procedurally right to discuss the matter which is still being investigated by COSASE? Wouldn’t it be right to wait and COSASE finishes and then they bring a comprehensive report? The way they are bringing it-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A member is responding to what the Prime Minister said.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the assurance we need to give our children and grandchildren who are not born is that we act at all times in good faith. Therefore, we urge the Government, while signing these agreements that we have an Attorney-General and well learnt -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t want you to rely on what hon. Matia Kasaija said. I would like you to go to the library and first look at the agreement then we come back for a debate on that agreement. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I accept but then there is also a problem with your ruling, Madam Speaker. If you say only chairpersons, I am here elected by the people of Butambala in my own individual right. I legislate on behalf of the people of Butambala, a chairman of a committee cannot internalise on my behalf. 

My simple appeal to you, Madam Speaker, is that any Member of Parliament that wishes to go and see these agreements, an arrangement should be made before this Parliament where they can confidentially - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please go to the library; the agreement is there. The only thing we cannot allow you do is to photocopy the agreement. It is read before the person in the library. You must have some kind of confidentiality even if it is a home.

I would like to ask hajji: would you come and sit here and chair the House if I was not here? You can’t. There are some things that are limited to some personality. (Applause) That was a joke haji.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, on question No.2, I expected the Prime Minister, concerned about the welfare of councils to have a response that is more proactive. A mere passing of a supplementary does not normally translate into action on ground. Now that we passed a supplementary, I would have expected the Prime Minister to come here and say, by this date these councils monies will be available. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be answered by hon. Matia Kasaija, the in-charge of money. We passed a supplementary here; when does the money reach the district councils? It is a process by the way; you have to give a warrant, you have to give -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Secondly, payment cannot be on “groupage” – (Interjection) – that you group people and pay them a lump sum; payment is personal-to-holder. These village health teams (VHTs) cannot be grouped. If I work as part of the village health team, you recruit me as a person but on payment, you say “We paid you as a group; share,” that is extremely unfair.

We expect that every person you recruit to a village health team must know that at the end of the month, this is what I work for. However, to say - and villages differ in sizes; a village in hon. Sseggona’s constituency, or a zone, has as many people as in my own whole parish. Therefore, when you have two or three village health officers, pay them what is due to them.

However, you cannot say now because it is a village, I am going to pay you this amount of money. We believe Rt Hon. Prime Minister that is extremely unfair and that causes discretion. What district officials do there is to begin to also take part of the money. I have issues of that nature in my constituency. They say, “Now we are paying you Shs 30,000,” but it should be well streamlined so that each village health team official receives what they are due.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, we have understood that well from the Leader of Government Business. She said that each village is supposed to have two VHTs. However, there are circumstances where the VHTs are more than two. Whereas their budget is that each VHT should get the Shs 300,000. 
Therefore, in a circumstance that the VHTs are more than two, that is when the discrepancy comes in because all of them have to be paid. So, maybe the other thing that we may need to do is to budget as per the number of VHTs and not just make an assumption.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I think you are absolutely right. We are here advocating that going forward, it is personal-to-holder. 

Madam Speaker, I have also observed that lately, the Prime Minister responds to the same question three times and comes and says the question was repeated; was the response repeated? It shows the level of preparation.

If the question is repeated, must your answer also be repeated? That means the Prime Minister picks this file, does not read through and comes in here. So the young girls listening out there admire you, and demand a better job to be done.

Madam Speaker, also the response of Mr Kabanda; the answer is that a field visit will be made. When Government implements a programme - you are making a dam; you are sure you will need electricity, but you do not provide it, then you say, “We shall pay a visit.” Really!? And the Prime Minister carries the statement to Parliament -?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, Hajj, the Prime Minister's work is to monitor Government programmes and the other sectors. Therefore, when she says that she wants to do a field visit, she wants to go and see the thing that has been done - whether correct or incorrect.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I agree, but I expect the Prime Minister, having received that question, to call the responsible agency - she is the coordinator of Government - and then come here with a concrete answer. If she will pay a visit for everything, then she will visit the whole of this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be done. Can we go to the next item?  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF CAPABILITIES OF THE FIRE RESPONSE SERVICES IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, we said Kasese.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PROSECUTION OF ROYAL GUARDS OF THE OBUSINGA BWA RWENZURURU WHO WERE ARRESTED IN 2016

4.47
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a statement on the status report on the Kasese case, CRB 881 of 2017 (Uganda v. Charles Wesley Mumbere and 220 others).

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in December 2016, 168 accused persons were charged in the captioned case before the High Court of Uganda sitting at Jinja. The case was moved to Jinja due to the tense security situation in the Rwenzori subregion at the time.

Since then, and as investigations continued, more arrests were made, and the total number of those charged increased to 221. These were all committed to the High Court in 2017.

Of the 221 accused persons, 11 were released on bail in 2017 and another 143 were released on bail in January 2021. These returned to their respective homes in the Rwenzori subregion. They are reporting to the Registrar of the High Court and the Chief Magistrates within the jurisdiction - that is Fort Portal High Court.

However, all of them will be expected to report to Jinja High Court for the pre-trial hearing. The rest of the accused persons were denied bail for various reasons, and are still on remand.

The pre-trial hearing of this case was commenced in December 2020 but has been constantly interrupted by COVID-19-related restrictions. 

A number of pre-trial conferences have been held to streamline procedures and to deal with the preliminary issues before the actual pre-trial hearing commences.

The last pre-trial status conference was held on the 8 June 2021 at the High Court of Jinja.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the prosecution has substantially disclosed the evidence and materials it intends to present at trial in the Court to the defence; all as required by rule two of the Judicature High Court International Crimes Division Rules of 2016.

The prosecution has also made an application for the protection of 70 witnesses in form of delayed disclosure, summary and redacted disclosure and use of pseudonyms, among others for all the two cases indicted and the court is yet to make a ruling.

The pre-trial hearing was adjourned following the imposition of the COVID-19 related restrictions and the case has not yet been fixed for hearing. Otherwise, the prosecution is prepared and set to commence the hearing of the case, once the case is cause listed. 

Finally, it is also worth mentioning that the judge who was handling this case, Her Lordship, Justice Eva Luswata, has since been appointed to the Court of Appeal. Both the prosecution and defence are yet to be advised on the Judge who is going to handle this matter. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.52
MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Deputy Attorney-General for making an attempt to respond to the concerns of Parliament, at least in this matter.

I said at least in this matter because the Attorney-General in this Parliament knows that there are other pending matters where we are waiting for a response and they are constitutional in nature, including the deployment in Congo. 

In respect to this particular case, Madam Speaker, it is so disturbing that a prosecution rooted in the massacre that happened at the palace of Omusinga wa Rwenzururu in the year 2016 has not taken off to date.

I am addressing this to the Attorney-General because in Uganda, we do not have a Minister for Justice. The Minister for Justice would have addressed the administrative challenges that are related to delayed trials.

The Attorney-General, in particular, is party to the cases against and commenced on behalf of Uganda. His lenses are, therefore, skewed because he is party.

Secondly, it is a constitutional requirement in Uganda, under Article 28, for people to exercise the right to a speedy trial. It is also a requirement that the Government must afford facilities for a person who is facing trial.

Let us begin with these people whose jobs were interrupted by the state when the Government forces attacked the palace and you subject them to a trial from Kasese to Jinja but those are the lucky ones who are out on bail. Don't forget that they are jobless.

However, there are those that are continuing to languish for the last five years in prison, some of whom, if not all, will eventually be pronounced innocent. I mean at the conclusion of the trial. Who is responsible for delayed trials in this country? It is the Government of the Republic of Uganda. As a lawyer, I know and I have been shadow Minister for Justice for 10 years.

I have sat in the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the last 10 years and this is my 11th year. The major cause for backlog in cases of this nature is lack of funds for sessions. Even in a case as prominent as this involving a cultural leader in this country, the Government cannot take extra steps to provide the funding necessary. This is a case which could be handled even in Fort Portal within one month and concluded such that we know who is guilty and who is not.

We are talking about justice. How about the murderers that massacred people at the palace, telling us that these people were committing an act of insurrection? Some have since been promoted to senior positions. The leader and the chief architect is now the deputy CDF. To cause mayhem, he deputises a relative of the victims and they are now in Parliament with us. They have not been cleared. We have not seen an investigation against those people who murdered. We have not seen those weapons, which were meant to be used for insurrection; they were not recovered. They showed us pangas, spears and other cultural regalia.

Madam Speaker, the delay itself is unconstitutional. Nobody can call Government to order other than this Parliament. What happens to the children of these men that are not going to school now? Where is the compensation programme for these people? Instead, we see the Government going to make truce and negotiations with some people in Kasese without addressing the plight of these people. I have paid specific attention to the dates provided by the Deputy Attorney-General.

Some were released on bail in 2017 while others were released on bail in 2021. I do not want to question the wisdom of the Judiciary in granting or denying bail. However, there is a corresponding duty on the part of the Judiciary and the Executive, which appropriates money to provide money for these people to be tried. I think we must come out very strongly on Government and demand that these people be tried and the matter is concluded because it has to do with the Constitution, fairness and justice.

I have heard the voices of the most ridiculous commentaries with an intention to abolish bail in respect of certain offenses. It is offending because some of the people proclaiming such messages have been beneficiaries of bail. I do not want to mention them; they are in this Parliament.

Finally, Madam Speaker, what happened to the spirit of talking as citizens? What is so difficult about Government sitting down with the leadership of the cultural institution to finally resolve this matter? You do not even need mediation. You mediate the Head of State? I saw the President extending a helping hand to the late Queen Mother in this institution.

Has the Government taken an effort to discuss with the cultural institution and resolve this matter? After all, these people never killed. Instead, they were aggressed. Who is taking up the matter of the people who murdered at the palace?

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs does not have a minister. Therefore, there is nobody to provide justice. You are talking about the poor people you have impoverished by denying them jobs so that they cannot even seek justice. One day, we will regret the boom that we are setting up when it explodes on all of us. Martin Luther King Jr. said that injustice anywhere, is a threat to justice everywhere. 

Honourable minister, I want to trust you. My young brother, the Attorney-General and I went to school together. As you would know, I was ahead of him. I am, therefore, qualified to counsel him on that. 

You have a duty to educate those people that gave you the job, which they do not know. You know it and you are judged by different lenses. And the weighing scale is higher on your part. I thank you, Madam Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue that arose was on the matter of the health of these people who are in prison and we wanted a speedy trial of the said people. That is what is on ground. 

We are not saying they are innocent, we are also not saying they are guilty but what we want is for Government to take note of their health and then have a speedy trial for the people who are inside.

I do not want us to debate this thing in depth because one of you will rise up and talk about sub judice because the issue is in court. But what we want Government to do is on the issue of the health of these people, and then a speedy trial. If Justice Eva Luswata left, is that the only judge we have? Doesn't that court have a judge now? Can we make a follow up on that?

5.02
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really want to thank my esteemed brother, hon. Sseggona and my brother, the Attorney-General. 

To begin with, I really want to thank you for according space and attention to this very important matter. It is true that those that are incarcerated, and have been incarcerated now for five years, those that are still incarcerated seem tragically to be following the path of the nine members of our community that have painfully lost their lives in prison. 

Since we are trying to look at how we can step in or encourage Government to ensure that there is no further addition to the nine citizens that have perished in prison, I think it is very important that without even mentioning or reading names, to lay on the Floor of Parliament, the names and residences or places of aboard of those nine citizens that have lost their lives in prison. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where did you get the document from? 

MR KATUSABE: From the prison and also a representative – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it authenticated? Are the death certificates attached?

MR KATUSABE: If that is your wish, Madam Speaker, I will make that available.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please bring it when it is complete.

MR KATUSABE: I will, thank you very much. But, Madam Speaker, this borders on nothing but dehumanization.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins I want us to discuss this in a way that helps the people. We want to ask the Attorney-General, what are you doing to ensure that these people who are sick in prison, do not die like those ones? That is the first thing.

Secondly, what are you doing to ensure that we have a speedy trial of these people? 

Three, let us not forget what hon. Sseggona said. What has happened to talking? Can’t we talk? Can’t we get a moment and we discuss these issues? And we have a kind of reconciliation? That is what we want you, Attorney-General, to capture. 

As a Chair of the House, I do not want to go so deep into this debate. We want those responses.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your wisdom and I am alive to the fact that this matter could be in some court or going through a court system. 

So, my submission will be specific; on angles that would not contradict or make some legal contradiction. It is a known fact and I think those that are hearing this could be shaken, because it is public knowledge now that we have lost nine citizens in prison. The reason we lose them is that they need medical attention, and they do not find medical attention on time. 

I really want to appreciate you, Madam Speaker, but you see, this matter is anchored on life and death. There are people that are lined up in prison that need urgent medical attention. 

I will ask and implore the Attorney-General, that all we need as a community and as representatives of the affected community, is nothing less than a specific timeline. I think our patience has been exhausted and depleted and we do not want to entertain any element of dehumanisation, because we have been dehumanised enough. 

We are saying, one life matters and as a community, we are not ready to have any one addition to the nine lives. How shall we, on planet earth, ever account for the lives of the nine citizens that were picked up from their homes, taken to prison, only to die there without ever seeing the light of justice? 

I do not know who among us right here in this House, would be taking this as a simple, ordinary matter if the person dying on a prison bed was your mother, was your father, your son, or your daughter, your sister or your brother? 

I am just wondering whether the indifference that we have in this House is as a result of us not being like them. In other words, it is us versus them. I think it is very important in any culture, and specifically the African culture, that we desist from a situation where we dehumanise people that do not look like us.

As I sit down, we are asking for nothing less than Government immediately going to the prisons, to pick up our people, our relatives, that you dumped and you have incarcerated, kept in prison at your pleasure; go get to them, take them to the hospitals. Jails are not hospitals, please. 

We are human beings. We do not want to sit in this House and continue to carry titles of honourable members and look on as our fellow citizens, fellow people, fellow human beings, fellow tribesmen perish in prisons. You want to keep them in prison at your pleasure. We are not ready, as a community and as a people representing our people, to tolerate that even for a moment. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to put to notice this country or the world that this murder will persistently be brought to the attention of our country. Just like the Attorney-General, my honourable brother said, an attack - I come from that community - and an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us. Injustice anywhere becomes a prey to justice everywhere.

Madam Speaker, just like I said on Tuesday, for evil to thrive anywhere, you need one raw material to facilitate it. (Interjection) - I will give you room for information, my brother. It takes good women like you, Madam Speaker, and good men like these honourable ministers and honourable colleagues to do nothing. I would like to give information to - can I conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, I have never known you as the chairperson of this House. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, can I then conclude if I can’t give information to my -?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please do. 

MR KATUSABE: But my people will be asking me why I did not give my brother. Just one minute. They will ask me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe and members, I am referring this matter to the Committee on Human Rights and must report back to this House in two weeks. We want all these issues resolved. We are tired of them. The health of our people matters.  

As said before, we are representatives of these people and because we are their representatives, we must be seen to work. This issue is referred to the Committee on Human Rights and report back in two weeks’ time before we break off. We want the issues of the health of the people, speedy trial, what is happening to the people that should be reported back to the House.

I will give terms of reference to the committee on what they should do. (A Member rose_) My muko, I am making a ruling; please sit down. That is what is going to happen; Attorney-General, work together with the committee of Human rights. We cannot have these people incarcerated for all these years without trial. Let us have them tried. Let us have the people who are sick in prison to be treated; they are human beings.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, one, we are liaising with the judiciary to get a judge for this matter as soon as possible. Two, we got in touch with the prisons authorities to see to it that for those whose health needs urgent attention - if it cannot be very well attended to while in Jinja Prison, they should be evacuated and relocated to a better facility.

Indeed, we are making efforts to see that there is a speedy trial once we get a judge allocated to this. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Attorney-General. I adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)





