
Tuesday, 20 December 2016

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I adjourned the House to this day, we had planned to continue with our work as arranged by the Business Committee. However, I have instead invited you to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, the late hon. Nsubuga Mathias Birekeraawo. As you have already been informed, this has not been a very good week for us. One of our colleagues, the honourable member for Kisoro Municipality lost his wife. That is hon. Sam Byibesho. His wife Vivian passed away on Sunday at Nsambya Hospital. As we sit now, she is being laid to rest at their home, in Kisoro. I would like us to pay our condolences to him.

On behalf of Parliament, we pay our condolences to him and the family and we pray that he gets the courage to withstand the loss. On another sad note, the honourable Simeo Nsubuga, Member of Parliament of Kassanda South, also lost his brother, John Bosco Galiwango Musisi. He was buried yesterday, Monday 19 December, 2016. I would like to request that we observe a moment of silence in their honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

Now, honourable members, as indicated, we have come to pay tribute to one of our colleagues. I would like to introduce the members that are sitting in the VIP gallery and many of them are former MPs: Hon. Anthony Butere, Hon. Chris Mudoola, Hon. Milton Muwuma, Hon. Jacob Wangolo, Hon. Peter Mutuluza, Hon. Beatrice Byenkya, Hon. Asuman Kiyingi, Hon. Sarah Mwebaze, Hon. Tim Lwanga Mutekanga, Hon. Mary Mugyenyi, Hon. Sarah Lanyero, Hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante, Hon. Joseph Balikudembe, Hon. Benson Obua Ogwal, Hon. Mariam Nalubega, Hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, Hon. Capt. Babu, Hon. Emmanuel Dombo, Hon. Brenda Nabukenya, Hon. Huda Oleru, Hon. Baswale Kezala, Hon. Imam Makumbi, Hon. Gerald Kiranda, Hon Michael Mabbike, Hon Mukasa Mbidde, Hon Mawiya, Hon Tom Gaba, Hon. Michael Sebalu, Hon. Tashobya (Member of the Electoral Commission), Hon. Susan Nakawuki (EALA), Hon. Norbert Mao (President of the Democratic Party), Mr Sulaiman Kidandala and Mr Samuel Muyizi Mulindwa. They have all come to pay last respects to our fallen colleague. Thank you so much for coming.

(Entrance of late Hon. Nsubuga Mathias Birekeraawo)

The Uganda National Anthem (One Verse)

The East African Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we lay the wreaths, I would like to welcome you to this special sitting. On behalf of the National Assembly, we offer our most sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Nsubuga. For the new Members, he used to sit where hon. Katuntu is seated and he would walk in - you know he had a way of walking as if he had springs in his feet. He would walk in and sit there.

He was a man who believed in dialogue, issues of transparency, peace-making and he was a bridge builder. We shall really miss him, and I would like to appreciate his contribution.

We have a massage from the Parliamentarian SACCO signed by hon. Jalia Bintu. He has been a member of this SACCO since 2007. They acknowledge his contribution and pray that his soul rests in peace.

We have a massage from Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus saying: “We remember during the debate on oil, he defended the strong desire for Bunyoro sub region to get a high percentage of royalties. We cherish the values he held and promise to keep carrying the banner for the love of our country and fighting for promotion of democracy in Uganda”. They have put in a contribution of Shs 600,000 to assist the family in the burial arrangements.

Honourable members, as you know, we have an arrangement called the Inter Party Organisation for Democracy (IPOD), the Secretary General of the NRM Party has written a condolence message: “Hon. Nsubuga has been a patriot and nationalist who cherished dialogue as a best way to resolve political contradictions and differences with his political opponents”.

He did not believe in defiance as a means to conflict resolution. He was candid, forthright and a tolerant politician, a trait, which is increasingly getting rarer in Uganda today.

He has been the chairperson of the Interparty Organisation For Dialogue (IPOD), which in itself is recognition of his political demeanour and acumen as a reconciliatory pillar and anchor not only within the Democratic Party but also at the national level. I wish to state without contradiction that he stood tall to be counted as a peer champion of political dialogue. 

He blended the love for his family with that for the people of Bukoto South whom he represented here. He has been a good Catholic, who loved and feared God and he served the church diligently. Testimonies abound for generations and people of all occupations of his kindness, friendliness and generosity.

He has also been a very loyal subject of His Majesty the Kabaka and the Kingdom of Buganda to the extent that he has contributed to the royalty lineage. Hon. Nsubuga’s daughter is married to Prince Wassajja,  the young brother of the Kabaka of Buganda. We also offer our condolences to him. 

 I will eventually give the letter to the family. However, they want to thank all political parties especially the Secretary Generals for working with him and advancing the cause of the common good of our country.

They thank the Prime Minister, Dr Rugunda, the national chairperson for National Consultative Council for working with him and honouring hon. Mathias Nsubuga, with this official burial today. Thank you. If I get other messages, I will let you know.

The Buganda Parliamentary Caucus; they have written in Luganda (Laughter). They send their condolences to Mrs Nsubuga, the children, family, DP fraternity and all Ugandans. They have contributed Shs 1,000,000 for the funeral arrangements. Signed by, Muyanja Johnson, the Chairperson Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. 

LAYING OF WREATHS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE   HON. NSUBUGA MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR BUKOTO SOUTH IN LWENGO DISTRICT

3.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing me to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga Birekeraawo, for his dedicated service to the nation. I am moving this motion under Rule 47, of the Rules of Procedure of this august House.

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt with sadness of the demise of hon. Mathias Nsubuga Birekeraawo, which occurred on Sunday, 18 December 2016,  at Case Hospital in Kampala;
AND WHEREAS hon. Mathias Nsubuga was born on 26 November 1956, to Vitali Wesswa and Matilda Mmeeme, in Manja Village, Kiseka Subcounty, Bukoto county, Masaka District;

AWARE THAT the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga served as the Member of Parliament representing the people of Bukoto County South from 2006 to 2016, where he made enormous contribution on the various committees on which he worked;

FURTHER AWARE that the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga at the time of his death was the Secretary-General of Democratic Party (DP), through which he also served as a member of the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) and in fact at the time of his demise, he was the Chairman of IPOD. He also served in the National Consultative Forum (NCF), where he worked diligently to promote consensus and dialogue among the various political parties in Uganda;

COGNIZANT THAT he also served Uganda in other various capacities, such as an accountant in the Defunct Uganda Airlines, and rose to the senior positions responsible for Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia;

SATISFIED THAT the late hon.  Mathias Nsubuga dedicated his life to the development of Uganda in his service to his country and, therefore, deserves the recognition of this Parliament and the state;

 NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys deep condolences to the grieved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished son of this country;
    2.  That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga has in the course of his illustrious life rendered to the people of Uganda as a Member of Parliament representing Bukoto County South and the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party;
    3.  That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the grieved and grant hon. Mathias Nsubuga eternal rest”.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Motion is seconded. Can we invite him to speak to the motion that has been seconded?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is with deep sorrow that Government received the sad news of the sudden demise of our colleague, hon. Mathias Nsubuga Birekeraawo, which occurred on Sunday 18 December 2016, at Case Hospital Kampala, where he had been rushed after suffering a stroke.

Hon. Nsubuga Mathias had gone to Mukono Bookshop to buy a present for His Eminence Emmanuel Cardinal Wamala who was celebrating his 90th Birthday on Friday 16 December 2016, a function which I and several other people attended. Sadly, he did not make it to the function and now we are mourning his passing on.

Madam Speaker, hon. Mathias Nsubuga was born in Kisekka sub-county in Masaka District in the present day Lwengo District, on 26 November 1956, to Vitali Wesswa and Matilda Mmeeme.

Hon. Nsubuga Mathias education journey took him through Kanus' Primary School, Bukalasa Seminary and Seeta College where he qualified in Financial Accounting in 1979.

Madam Speaker, immediately after college, hon. Mathias Nsubuga started his work with Uganda Airlines from 1979 to 1986 when he left to serve as Chairman of Makindu Growers till 1997. Between 1998 and 2005, hon. Nsubuga served as a political assistant to Ssebaana Kizito then Mayor of Kampala City Council now KCCA.

Madam Speaker, right from his youth, hon. Mathias Nsubuga was a political activist who championed democracy and challenged the dictatorship of Iddi Amin, though he was at that time an employee of Uganda Airlines. After the 1980 elections, hon. Nsubuga ran into exile in Nairobi, where he joined the forces that were fighting Milton Obote Government.

It is, therefore, not a surprise that when the National Resistance Movement took over Government in 1986, hon. Nsubuga and DP leadership worked closely with the NRM - (hon. Sam Kuteesa rose.)

THE SPEAKER: We welcome the presence of the former member of the DP – (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I have worked very closely with hon. Mathias Nsubuga, in the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue and the National Consultative Forum. In these platforms, hon. Nsubuga was always regular and constructive in his contributions. He looked at Uganda as a whole and worked for a peaceful, prosperous and a united country.

He was vibrant and passionate in his contributions in Parliament and above all, he has been a friend to many. Madam Speaker, the fact that this House is full, both within the House and the gallery, is clear testimony to that fact.
Madam Speaker, early this year, hon. Nsubuga led a delegation of IPOD to meet President Yoweri Museveni, the NRM Chairman. In that meeting, political parties agreed to work closely together to resolve national issues through dialogue and building consensus. 

Early this year, hon. Nsubuga and I met in Bukinda, Kabale,during the burial of Robert Kitariko, former Secretary- General of the Democratic Party. After the burial, hon. Nsubuga and hon. Issa Kikungwe visited me at my home in Bugongi in Kabale where we held very fruitful discussions for the development of our country.

Hon. Nsubuga was willing to go an extra mile to ensure that consensus is reached. He was willing to listen to people and work with all irrespective of their political views or opinions. Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga served as a Member of Parliament representing Bukoto South County from 2006 to 2016. He was a Democratic Party Whip in this august House. Hon. Nsubuga has been a dedicated, hardworking, honest and dependable person.

Cause of Death

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga died on Sunday, 18 December 2016 at around 8.00 p.m. at Case Hospital after suffering a stroke. 

The late Nsubuga is survived by a widow, Mrs Jennifer Nsubuga and eight children: five boys and three girls.

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to convey my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the widow, children, the family, the Speaker, the DP fraternity and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished and gallant son of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, at the sitting yesterday in Cabinet, under chairmanship of President Yoweri Museveni, the demise of our late brother Nsubuga was considered and Cabinet observed a moment of silence in recognition of his contributions. His Excellency Yoweri Museveni directed that an official funeral be carried out in recognition of our brother’s distinguished contribution to Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister. I would like to announce that the House will convene tomorrow at 10.00 a.m., but I also would like to inform you about the members who are in the gallery. Hon. Emiro Tekata, hon. Bwambale, and hon. Akol Rosemary have joined us.

3.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I rise with a heavy heart to second the motion by the Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to honour our fallen colleague.

Madam Speaker, the year started well with merry making; people burnt candles and we had all these fun, but little did we know the year was going to end in sadness. Ugandans all over are in pain and tears for the loss of many who have died at the end of this year and this has not spared our dear one, Matia Nsubuga Birekeraawo.

I rise to convey our sincere sympathies to Mrs Nsubuga, Jolly Jennifer Akiki and the children, the entire Nsubuga family, the people of Uganda, especially Members of the Democratic Party where Nsubuga was serving as the Secretary General; IPOD which was being chaired by hon. Nsubuga, the Catholic Church where he found pride in associating with his mother church, the Kingdom of Buganda where he was and still is even in death - I know he still believes in the Buganda Kingdom. Our sincere condolences go to the entire nation for the loss of this great son.

This man we are saying bye to, colleagues, needs no explanation. He lived a life that was really distinguished from the ordinary Ugandans. Nsubuga was a true believer in democracy, no wonder he is a member of Democratic Party. He believed in truth and justice. He believed in fairness and humanity. Nsubuga knew the value of friends and he had time for all of his friends. Even when you were not a friend of his, he would find time for you as long as you have approached him. For those who got the chance of travelling out of the country with him, as long as you told Nsubuga that you were going to a particular country, he had a contact for you there. He would say, “When you get to that country, reach out to so and so and this is the address”. 

He is a man who was not selfish; he was a family man, a committed husband and politician. Actually, Nsubuga had distinguished himself as a national leader. Whereas some of us debate in terms of constituencies, tribes and religions; Nsubuga had gone beyond that. Every time the late Nsubuga would stand up to speak, he would be speaking about issues that affect the people of Kasese, Karamoja, Sudan, Sri Lanka- He was a Pan-Africanist. Hon. Nsubuga, you have been a candle to many of us in politics and a hero too. 

I remember when we were coming to this House; I told him that when I was growing up, my family believed in true democracy. My mother was a member of the Congress Party and my father was a member of the Democratic Party. My mother was the leader of the Women’s League of UPC while my father was a leader in DP and never at any one time did I see them fighting in the house even when at that time, people of different political affiliations would not want to meet each other. When I told Nsubuga, he saluted me and he said from that day I should call him the Secretary General of my father. (Laughter)

I told him that I could not look for any other party except one that could unite my mother and father – that is why I am a member of the Forum for Democratic Change. (Laughter)

The late hon. Nsubuga and I had a lot to share. Every time I would find him, I would refer to him as the Secretary General of my father.

I happened to serve with the late hon. Nsubuga - I was the Opposition Chief Whip and he was the DP whip. However, whenever I wanted to bring him to order, he would always say, “Remember that I am the whip of your father and therefore I have the right to whip you as well.” I would reply, “Fine. As the whip of my father, I salute you.” 

I share a birthday with this gentleman here. We were both born on 26 November – (Injections) - do not worry because the years are in the Parliamentary records and so you do not ask which year. Just go to the Parliamentary records. This is public information and all you have to know that we do not share the same age.

The late hon. Nsubuga believed in democracy. As the Prime Minister said, the late provided issues that he believed if were handled properly Uganda would toe the correct democratic path.

The late hon. Nsubuga talked about the militarisation of elections. This was one of his core issues. I recall the moment when he stood here to ask if the National Resistance Movement still owned the Uganda People’s Defence Forces because the ranks in the army still had RA001 – Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and there is RA002.

He simply wanted to know whether the army was Uganda People’s Defence Forces or still the resistance army of that time. He cautioned us to desist from using the army in elections if we are to create a democratic path for our country.   

Like the Prime Minister mentioned, when we were enacting the public order management law, hon. Nsubuga was at pain trying to explain the consequences of this law. I still remember him pointing to the then Prime Minister and saying, “My brother, hon. Amama, you are seriously marketing this law. Don’t be like the Ibingiras of those days because this law that you are working on is going to work on you some day.” (Laughter)

I also recall my brother, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi standing on the Floor saying that hon. Nsubuga was dreaming. But as if hon. Nsubuga had prophesised, I did see the law work on hon. Amama Mbabazi.

The life of hon. Mathias Nsubuga teaches me a lot; that at all times we should as much as possible try to remain ourselves and do to others what we would want them to do to us.  

Hon. Mathias Nsubuga has been the chairperson of the Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue. I am glad that the Prime Minister alluded to the fact that the late led a delegation of IPOD members to State House. He brought the issue they were going to discuss to my attention – an electoral commission that will provide a levelled ground for all political players.

The late was trying to guide that we go into elections when we have really worked on the laws that guide the elections early enough. In that meeting, he said that we should try to find a way on how we can have a transition to the time we can have a levelled ground in the name of the electoral commission. However, this is a process he has not lived to see because all this dialogue was not respected. 

Honourable members, I would like to say that the gentleman lying before us has been a believer in dialogue. He conducted his issues in a manner that would bring peace and harmony to this country.

There is a day when we were discussing about who was more democratic than the other and I remember that my colleagues from the other side were raising issues of NRM being applauded because it had brought democracy. 

On 28 October 2012, the late Nsubuga was quick to remind us that when we are talking about democracy in Uganda, we should never forget the Democratic Party. He reminded the House that one cannot talk about oneself and forget to talk about your mother and father because they made you who you are.

When you  talk about the independence and democracy in this country, the Democratic Party is a key player in the democratisation of Uganda because it ushered in the Independents that we are talking about.

The gentleman lying before us today has been a library of sorts in the political events of this country in that when you walked up to hon. Nsubuga, regardless of time, to ask about when an event happened, he would give you the details. He was like an Ipad that provides information at a single click.

We shall miss hon. Nsubuga. He created his mark and distinguished himself as a leader of unquestionable character. He was ready to share everything; even if one needed a coin from hon. Nsubuga and he did not have it, he would borrow on your behalf; many of us cannot do this. 

When we were paying tribute to Gen. Oketta, I said that people of such calibre are taken advantage of. Many people find it easy to get to them asking for help. Hon. Nsubuga was always ready to help and, therefore, a father to many. 

As we say goodbye to hon. Mathias Nsubuga Birekeraawo, I would wish to request that we try to bring on board the issues that the late was advocating for. He advocated for enforcement of electoral reforms. I would like to pray that these reforms are dealt with in time and in precise manner.

Hon. Nsubuga continuously asked Government to bring on board a constitutional review commission that would help us in reviewing our constitution. If we do that, then we would have answered his needs and aspirations. 

He also believed in the revival of the Uganda Airlines. If we do that, we shall have paid him even in his death. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and Government for allowing us to have this opportunity to speak about our colleague. A colleague we have shared a lot with, a colleague who has done a lot to ensure that Uganda becomes a better place for all us to live in.

Hon. Nsubuga has played his part and I know that wherever he is, it does not matter at what age he has gone; what is most important is what you did while you were still alive. We shall miss you, your counsel and wisdom. May the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As I invite hon. Baryayanga, I would like to share that hon. Nsubuga was a member of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy and they have sent a message of condolence and a contribution of Shs 200,000. 

We also have a delegation from Kapeke sub county in Kiboga District who have come to attend the tribute. They are represented by hon. Nankabirwa, the Government Chief Whip and hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka.

3.32
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale):  Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a personality that makes me proud to associate with; a leader that was accommodative to all. A politician of amiable resolve and a brother we freely ran to for counsel, hon. Matthias Nsubuga Birekeraawo. 

Not long ago, we were eulogising hon. Fred Oketta who died at 60 years. Today, we are here with a body of our brother hon. Nsubuga barely a month after hitting his 60th year mark. Sixty years is prime time for harvest of life’s sweat.  This has not been the case for hon. Nsubuga.

I join the multitudes of people here and beyond the borders who are grieving the unfortunate departure of hon. Nsubuga.

To the family, the Democratic Party, the Obwa Kabaka bwa Buganda, the people of Bukoto South and Lwengo as a whole and to all who knew and associated with hon. Nsubuga, please, accept my condolences.

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga was a certified Accountant as it has been elaborately put. Hon. Nsubuga spoke on the Floor of this House with finality of a man well versed with figures and facts. His points remained crispy and pointed; he never wavered from his submission because facts speak louder.

His confidence on the Floor as well as in the committees was enviable.
He was never afraid to share knowledge with those who cared to consult him. I believe those who could have got a chance to serve with hon. Nsubuga, if he did not make you he would definitely influence what you are today because he always preached the gospel of democracy and more often than not, he used to ask, “Why are you independent? Why don’t you come and join the Democratic Party.”

I believe the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when he visited you in Bugongi, he could have told you to borrow a leaf in the Democratic Party; he really loved his party.

Madam Speaker, it is not only painful but scary when one of us departs. It is even more painful when the departure is untimely and very fast. Hon. Nsubuga visited the Parliamentary building mid last week and he was well and jolly as usual. He made his usual pleasant jokes and greeted all he met with his usual respectful demeanour.

The news, therefore, of him being rushed to hospital unconscious and then in a few days pronounced dead caught many of us off guard.

Hon. Nsubuga served this country both within and without her borders with diligence and unwavering commitment. Many Ugandans have wonderful experiences of his great personality and hospitality while he worked and lived in Kenya. This never stopped when he came back to Uganda. His desire for democratic growth and service to country knew no borders of both party and faith.

He stood out sometimes at the risk of being misunderstood as the face of reaching out to dialogue and consensus building where stalemates were imminent. 

More often than not, whenever there would be a stalemate in Parliament, he would be the one to make sure we get a win-win situation. He would come on the both sides of the House and make sure either side accepts what is coming out.

Where a collective and official decision was made, hon. Nsubuga never acted contrary even when some voices almost sounding louder demanded so. He was a dependable leader and colleague who would tell you the same thing during the day and at night.
He associated with everybody not because of his affiliation but the desire to forge a way forward.

Madam Speaker, this country has lost an icon of truth and a committed democrat. We have lost a crusader for meaningful societal transformation, a humble and religious, an astute politician, a loving and ever fulfilling family man.

Hon. Matthias Nsubuga, your time on earth has been cut short; the works of your hand have shone and are now deemed.

Your legacy is now glaringly visible from afar; your ideals and values espousing humility, commitment, assertiveness, bravely, professionalism and love for human kind remain for those who value your time on earth will emulate and propagate. Fare thee well my brother comrade Mathias rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much the movers and now that the movers have made their submissions, we shall go back to our speaking time of three minutes.

3.39
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I shall speak about hon. Matthias Nsubuga in two ways; as my uncle and as a fellow politician.

Hon. Matthias Nsubuga married my aunt when we were young in the early 1980s and he has since joined our family and really been a pillar for us. If you found him with us, you would not know whether we were not born together.

I remember when we came together to Parliament in the Eighth Parliament, I always used to kneel down to great him here in the lobby and he would always say, “Please, muwala wange, you are now a Member of Parliament you do not have to kneel for me.” He gave me so much respect because we were colleagues. But as a politician, I remember when the grandfather, his father-in-law died, he used to tell me, “Please, do not join political fights. Whenever you have a fight in politics, be calm follow your line, be composed do not cause commotion for nothing this world is not ending today.” Indeed, when I saw him as a leader of IPOD leading a delegation to State House to go and dialogue with the President, I saw a leader who was really exemplary and I hope from now on, we need to emulate, hon. Nsubuga. 

I have never seen him in a demonstration, I have never seen him in lawlessness, I have never seen my uncle involved in any confrontational politics. He was very refined and polished politician. 

As the Leader of Opposition said, he was extremely generous and many people took advantage of him because of his generosity. Whatever he worked for here in Parliament, he really used to give it away to people, whoever would come with a problem, he would help. He has helped many people by paying fees for them. My aunt worked hard and even went to London at one time to work to support the family due to the generosity of her late husband. Everything was given to war victims, friends and DP fraternity, such a person is not easy to find.

Hon. Nsubuga would invite the whole DP fraternity to come home whenever there would be a function. At one point, I remember, I told him one time, “Uncle, you are the only person I know who is left in DP but he would say, ‘No, we are quite a number, but next week, I will go to Gulu to mobilise DP members.’” I would ask where he would find DP members because all people I knew were now in NRM. Imagine in our family, he would mingle with only us in NRM because there is no one in DP or in other parties. However, whenever –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the family, colleagues, relatives and all people in grief as we send off our comrade, the hon. Mathias Nsubuga.  I got to know the hon. Nsubuga in 1979 and he was a very polite gentleman, the attributes that he has lived with were there at the same stage and time. He convinced me to join him in 1980 at Uganda Airlines. We worked closely together up to his last time.

The late was a gentleman not that because he had grown to another stage but I found him a gentleman at that young stage. I would like, therefore, to join his family, the wife Jolly with whom we were at Uganda Airlines. 

Madam Speaker, the late Nsubuga was a very staunch Catholic that no matter how one would convince him to change to other religion, he would not accept. He was a democrat at that early age and in the company of the late Kafumbe Mukasa and as for me at that early age, he persuaded me to become an activist and I joined UPM. Therefore, we were under different political parties but we still worked closely.

Hon. Nsubuga was a smart gentleman who believed in dialogue whether you had divergent views; he would sit you down and tell you what needed to be done. He contributed heavily to the liberation of this country in Uganda Airlines with the late Masiko, we had our own network. Sometime back, he wondered and said, “Anifa, when shall I get my medal?” And I was waiting because I had been trying to bring him over but he said, “No matter what, even if you give me the medal or not, I believe in truth and justice and I will remain in my Democratic Party.”

During the last elections, he came to Mawagola South with hon. Ssewungu and they wanted to talk to me and find ways of supporting their Members of Parliament who were standing. I was hard and he said, “I did not know you also believe in truth and justice.” Hon. Ssewungu left my home and I had around 400 people in my house, they started convincing some few; I went after them and they left us - (Member timed out.)

3.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and pay tribute to an avid human rights defender. Hon. Mathias Nsubuga worked and engaged tirelessly in advocating for the good governance and well-being of the people of Uganda. He did this in humility, friendly manner and always with a smile.

I agree with those who say that he believed in dialogue. If you said anything on the Floor of Parliament or in any other meeting that he did not agree with, he would ensure that he looked for you, sit you down and talk to you. Of course, in hope that he would win you over to his side and you would see it his way. He was peace-loving.

Hon. Nsubuga was indeed committed to his party but at the same time, he was embracing because he worked for the good of everyone. He was a man of integrity and would not be swayed from what he believed in, as Ugandans we have really lost a lot. I would like us to emulate the character and work methods of hon. Nsubuga because he has left a lot for us to copy from. To the family, I urge them not to mourn as those who mourn without hope; he was committed to serve his God and we know that the God who gave him to you will surely strengthen, support and see you through.

Much has been said about hon. Nsubuga. He lived giant footsteps for us to follow but in everything, we should ensure that we work for the good of others and peace. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.49
MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join colleagues to pay tribute to the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga. He had virtues that are rare in many of us; like patience, dialogue and friendship, among others. I remember him during the by-election for Bukoto South constituency. The Buganda Caucus members due to the character of the hon. Nsubuga could not take a decision based on our parties. At the end of the day, he won the by-elections because of his virtues.

I strongly remember him during the death of my father, the late Prosper Ssentamu Kabanda. My father was a very strong activist in DP up to the time of his death. However, I remember the dialogue and virtues of the late hon. Nsubuga, he called on me at our home and he said, “I know you support NRM party but you must ensure that you do not ignore the legacy of your father”. I understood him and indeed, he represented his party at the burial of my late father.

However, since then, just like he had always been telling hon. Winnie, he too had been mentoring and counselling me as the Secretary-General of my father; and whenever I behaved in a way he thought was not well, he always looked for me. He always said: “Yes, you belong to the Movement but the Movement has been nurtured by the Democratic Party.” Those were his words; take it or leave it, in Buganda, the majority of the politicians were in the Democratic Party.

The last time I was with hon. Nsubuga was on 26th September at the Serena Conference Centre when he had come to receive his medal; I was seated next to him and his son - and I can see the son over there. My condolences to the family.

What I remember – as it has been said – is that he has been a library of the political events of the country. He indeed showed his gratitude towards the Speaker of Parliament who organised that function of recognising the Members of Parliament since Independence. He was very proud to get his medal. What I remember is that whenever they read a former parliamentarian’s name, he would tell us: “We were with him; we worked with him; we were in exile with that one.” He was a real library.

Madam Speaker, I can continue speaking until morning but what I can say is, may the Almighty God rest his soul in peace.

3.53
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences to the family, the Democratic Party and to the nation from the people of Igara West Constituency in Bushenyi. We mourn with you and we are sad with you; your loss is ours.

Madam Speaker, last night, I watched a television interview of His Excellency, Paul Kagame. And somebody asked him: “If you were to give a piece of advice to the young people, what would it be?” And he said; “We are different but we must focus on our common aspirations. Emphasising our commonality to the young people is the sure way to build a nationalistic thinking among our people.”

If the children of the late hon. Nsubuga were to meet me and ask; “As somebody who sat with him in the Ninth Parliament, what do you remember about our dad?” To me, he was a national leader, who minimised our differences and expounded on our common identity. And we owe this to him. A look at the coffin here and the name “Birekeraawo” – “Birekeraawo”  means “leave them there” but also if you put it in Runyankole it would be, “Birekyeraho” it would still mean “Stop there.” It is actually an order to stop the negativity. And as a democrat, a lover of peace, a bridge-builder, I am sure that where he is now, to those who believe in violence as a method of resolving even the slightest differences, he is telling you, “Birekeraawo.” As an astute accountant, manager and a Secretary General who has held one of the oldest parties together, I am sure where he is, to those who are selfish and looking at amassing their own personal wealth at the expense of this nation, he is saying: “Birekeraawo.” (Applause)

You look at him as a nationalist, somebody who believed – because as much as he was a leader in the Opposition – Yes, he would criticise the Government and keep it on its toes but he was quick to give credit where it was due. To me, as a nationalist, looking at us as Ugandans, he represented a constituency but if you listened to his articulation on the Floor, he was talking as a Ugandan and a national leader.

So, to those who are promoting sectarianism, trying to divide the people of this country along unprincipled lines, I am sure he is telling you, “Birekeraawo.” (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, this is a legacy –(Member timed out.)

3.57
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion of paying tribute to the late hon. Nsubuga.
 
Hon. Nsubuga can be described as a co-operator, peace-lover, a composed person and somebody who stands above his party.

I have known the late hon. Nsubuga for the last 15 years. I remember a time when we were discussing how to dispatch the UPDF to bring sanity in Somalia. I remember vividly that hon. Nsubuga stood up and supported that motion; he went beyond his party line. That shows us how patriotic hon. Nsubuga was. No wonder he participated in the Liberation War.

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga was known in the whole country. I remember one time, when I visited a small village in my district. An old man stood up and asked me if I knew hon. Nsubuga. I also asked him how he knew hon. Nsubuga and he told me: “We have been with hon. Nsubuga and even last week, he was here, doing his business.” This is the hon. Nsubuga that we are talking about.

Madam Speaker, allow me to make this observation. In most cases, at the end of every election year – after elections – we have been losing both sitting and former Members of Parliament. We need to find out what the problem is. And this is because of stress; with stress, one is likely to develop non-communicable diseases, which, if not well-handled, can easily result into death. No wonder he died of a stroke.

Madam Speaker, even at the party level – our different parties do not organise post-election counselling sessions. And yet, they would be bringing together the members of their parties – counselling them and trying to settle them down. This has not happened in any party. I challenge any party to inform us if they have done it.

I think that the IPOD and the Government need to look at this because I know that as we mourn hon. Nsubuga, there are other former members – those who contested in elections – who are hospitalised. Today, I was told of two members and I reported to you, Madam Speaker.

So this is an issue which the Government – and the good thing is that we have the Leader of Government Business here. This is an issue, which we need to investigate and be able to put in place rehabilitation or reconciliation mechanisms, which can manage some of the effects of the elections. For us here, we are mourning but very many others are dying – those who did not make it at the LC III and LC V levels. So, this is an issue that I wanted to bring out, Madam Speaker, so that we can be able to – (Member timed out.)

4.01
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring you and the House condolences from the people of Kumi, particularly the very few supporters of DP in that district.  I bring these condolences to the entire DP fraternity, members of the family – Madam Speaker, members are surprised that I am talking about DP in Kumi District. My first encounter of DP was in 1996 elections. My father was a very staunch member of DP when I was a very young girl.

In that election, it was hon. Ssemwogerere who was contesting together with President Museveni. As children, we went home running with posters of Yoweri Kaguta – very beautiful posters. We wanted to convince our father that this is the right candidate that we must support as a family. I remember him chasing us away, in 1996. We had to flee our home and never slept there that day. That is when my political understanding started to grow.

I eventually joined NRM when I grew up. When I joined this House, I have learnt and have kept growing with my colleagues in the Democratic Party and I discovered that it was actually a very good one then. The values that they espoused as members of Parliament are never changeable. My father had very strict values about politics and life. All these things, I kept seeing with the DP supporters and, therefore, I credit them for that. 

My first encounter with hon. Nsubuga was here in this House. Knowing that he was Secretary General for such a great party, I started interacting with him. However, I remember that in the conversations that we had, all the time, he would be counselling me to grow up as a national leader, with values that are permanent and strict on the development of the country.

Beyond that kind of counselling, as a young politician, I remember that I had a very cordial relationship with him. When I found him, I called him “papa” or “Taata” and we would exchange greetings. I would ask about my siblings – for some reason, I loved Nankya before knowing her. This is his daughter who got married in the royal family. I would ask him about my siblings and he would be okay about it.

However, one thing struck me about his personality; his simplicity. Even having that kind of title and associations in life, he was a very humble man. At my level then, when he would talk to me and counsel me, I saw that this was out of humility; a humble man who reached out to every person. At my position, as a very young politician – I could call myself a little known person. Therefore, the man that we are mourning is a very important man in my life but also to this country as well.  I can describe him as a patriot because the values that he embraced stood for Uganda.

He was a very committed servant to humanity. If you ever called him for an activity, he would always be there. He was very committed, not only on DP issues but country over – (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today is a sad day for me because I am the Member of Parliament for Bukoto South. Today, is a very sad moment as well for the family of hon. Mathias Nsubuga. He has been my long-time friend, since 1977. We have gone through thick and thin.

When he was in Uganda Airlines, we transacted, he found me in Kenya, we transacted and eventually in England and London, we still transacted. We eventually found ourselves in the same constituency, Bukoto South and we transacted. (Laughter) You can wonder why at times we had to compete – he was a friendly dialoguing force. We could dialogue about politics because we knew each other very well; he was a friendly opponent. He will be missed by his family because he was a family man. He actually was balanced as a human being. He was never biased on any issue.

During 2012, when I was thrown out of Parliament, hon. Nsubuga came to me and said, “Look here Mbabaali, I am not the one persecuting you. Those are your own political detractors.” I told him that he could as well go ahead. That is when he ended up here for the second term.

We never hated each other. He has a son who is a lawyer but he goes to my daughter for legal opinion - that is how we have been living. We never had differences between the two of us, even in the High Court case, when it came out, he said that “Do not worry, I will collect the fees when I need them.” I only paid him recently. That is hon. Nsubuga.

Hon. Nsubuga will be missed by Lwengo District, Bukoto South, Uganda and Africa as a whole. He was a true Ugandan, and patriotic at that. Whatever was done in Nairobi, it was not his but for Uganda’s patriotic movement. Whatever was done in Nairobi, it was not for his personal benefit but for Uganda. 

I therefore stand here painfully, to pay tribute to my long time friend, who was a good leader and is gone. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Betty Kamya, let us recognise a delegation from Kapchorwa District. They have come to attend the tribute. They are represented by hon. Cheborion and hon. Chekamondo. You are welcome.

4.08
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Betty Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The family of the late Matia Nsubuga, the DP fraternity, led by hon. Norbert Mao, my heart deeply goes out to you. I join mourners to celebrate the life of hon.  Nsubuga and to mourn his death. Many things have been said of hon. Nsubuga; he had great attributes and endowments. They have been said during his life and they are being said even now after his life.

Many people have got attributes but what I would like to talk about are the choices that we make with our attributes. That is what makes hon. Nsubuga different. Like many people, he had a mouth but the words that came out of his mouth were strong, firm, clear, intelligent and measured. He also had a temper like other people but his choice was to control it.

He could get angry like all of us but he controlled the anger. He also had free time on Sunday like many people but he chose to use his free time to go to Church and to participate in Church activities.

He had money, he could have done a lot of things and got wealthy with his money but he chose to be very generous with his money. 

He was a politician like many of us and just like we have heard from hon. Mbabaali, he chose to be friendly with all his political competitors.

When God created man, He gave all of us attributes but what He left for us is the choice to use those attributes.  

I would like to thank God that hon. Nsubuga chose to use his attributes in a way that makes him stand out from many people. I remember, back in the day, when we were The Democratic Alliance (TDA), the choice came down to who had more support than the other? Is it Dr Besigye or hon. Mbabazi? 

Hon. Nsubuga stood and said: “It is not about who has more support because many of us know that probably Dr Besigye has more support but the question is, how can we add to the support that we have?”

The choice was that mostly the supporters of Dr Besigye will most likely support hon. Mbabazi if Dr Besigye leads them there but the supporters of hon. Mbabazi, who are most likely NRM, might find it a little difficult to support Dr Besigye.

Therefore, the choice is how we can add votes to the supporters of Dr Besigye. That is why he chose to support hon. Mbabazi. I saw a very clear-headed mind and for that reason, I respect hon. Nsubuga, a man I have known for a very long time.

I stand here to pay tribute to the hon. Nsubuga for the choices he made with the attributes that God gave him. 

Therefore, I support the motion on the Floor. Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'un. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Madam Speaker, sudden deaths make fools of us all. When somebody is okay this minute and the next minute, he goes to meet his maker, we are made fools of and this is what happened with our dear departed brother.

It is very sad. I remember during Amin’s time we would hear announcements on radio that so and so regrets to announce the untimely death of his grandmother who has passed away at the age of 125. This is untimely death at 60. Therefore, we really mourn hon. Mathias Nsubuga.

Nobody is going to live forever. We are all passengers on this earth. However, what is important is what testimony you leave behind. Our brother hon. Mathias Nsubuga has left a fantastic testimony for all of us.

Madam Speaker, many people have said it and I am not going to repeat what they have said about him. However, many of us used to call him “mukwano gwa bangi”, a friend to everybody. I used to meet him and call him DP “egumire” which means DP is very strong and he would reply “egumire.” 

You respected him - I am not saying that I believe that it is “egumire” (Interjections) but it is there in whatever form. Madam Speaker, you respected him in his party and he also respected your views in your own party.

Most people have alluded to it and they have stated it that he was a man of peace and dialogue. Indeed, he was nearer President Museveni than many people I know of because we know that one of the hallmarks of President Museveni’s rule is dialogue.

Hon. Nsubuga was calm, measured and when he was making his contribution, he would not have wanted people to interrupt as I am seeing some of my brothers doing. He was a man of peace and he was a sorted person.

When you looked behind his back, you could not see any grey area. Everything was in the open. The man who lies there is a gentleman. 

In this era, when you ask is so and so a gentleman, they say go and look in the fiction section of the library. In other words, the word “gentleman” is elusive now. He was a true gentleman. That is why he was called “mukwano gwa bangi”. We shall miss him very greatly.

He was championing something in this country and that is what we should emulate. There are people who think that when they spit fire, that is a show of bravery. He was calm, he spoke his truth calmly; and you were inclined to agree with him. Our deep condolences to the family; it is not easy.

Lastly, I will quote the words of a poet, Robert Frost who said that you hear the bell toning and you think it is toning for the dead but the person who has gone cannot hear it. Therefore, these words, which we are saying, they are not for our brother because he cannot hear them. He is listening to better music. These words are for us. Therefore, let us emulate those good things that he was doing. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

4.18
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf for the people of Agago, I condole with the family and Uganda on the death of hon. Mathias Nsubuga.

Just a few days ago, I was talking about him with hon. Oboth Oboth when we were in London. I was with him in the United Kingdom a few years ago and he took me to his shop where he sells matooke. He told me, “My daughter “- that is how he used to call me – “you see we talk about imports and exports and how we can improve our economy. I am making a lot of money from matooke. This business has done for me great things and the taxes I pay are a big contribution to the economy. Therefore, as much as we are not able to make industries, at least I am exporting matooke.”

Madam Speaker, it is not a surprise that most of us, who were in the Eighth and Ninth Parliament, have personal testimonies to make about hon. Nsubuga. He used to call me his daughter and I called him “Taata.” It is because in 2007, when I lost my mother and I was just a year old in Parliament, hon. Nsubuga took time and came over to my house. The reason he called me his daughter was what he told me when he came to pay tribute to my late mother at my place.

He said, “My daughter, you see your late mother was my good friend. When I was a young democrat, we used to come and campaign and your mother being one of the serious mobilisers, she used to cook and sing for us some songs.” 

I want to try to sing for you maybe if you know you will help me sing. I want to remember him by singing this song Madam Speaker, which he used to sing. It was a DP song [Member sings] (Laughter)  
Translated the song went: “Paul Ssemwogerere is our leader and a strong nationalist, DP is the winning and only party, Obote must be speared.” (Laughter) I am not sure what it actually meant but according to my late mother who was a very strong supporter of DP –(Member timed out)


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a delegation from Mukono Municipality which has come to pay tribute to hon. Nsubuga Mathias represented by hon. Kusasira and hon.Nambooze.

4.23
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last Friday, afternoon, I missed a telephone call and in the night when I returned the call, the person I did not pick had been hon. Nsubuga. It was while I was trying to find out why he was not picking my call that I learnt that he was in hospital and in coma.

Madam Speaker, people should imagine the pain we have to bear as DP, losing our Secretary General exactly one year after we lost our deputy woman leader hon. Suzan Namaganda. It is so sad for us in DP but anyway we are not so lonely.

I have been listening and you have all been saying that DP was the party your fathers supported and this might be the problem in this country, where children abandon their fathers’ dreams. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, hon. Mathias Nsubuga has been a bridge in our party because of his capacity to relate with people of all generations. Our elders in DP would call upon him whenever they wanted to raise anything. You would find hon. Nsubuga among the UYDs and you would mistake him for a youth. 

He would relate with all groupings in the party because DP like any other political party has people with different views and positions at any given time. But hon. Nsubuga the bridge builder would be able to reach out to all of us.

Even in the most trying times hon. Nsubuga would try to build consensus by offering an opportunity and a window for dialogue. That character must have made him to be part of the Nairobi peace talks of 1985. 

Madam Speaker, dialogue can only succeed when you are dealing with honest people. We should remember that the last attempt hon. Nsubuga made to dialogue with His Excellency was about the composition of the Electoral Commission. 

According to him His Excellency promised to discuss and revisit that matter on Friday but on Thursday evening, His Excellency released a list of the nominees. What would be the importance of dialoguing with such people? 

Hon. Nsubuga has been a very patient man to the extent that he would talk with people who are not honest over and over –(Member timed out.)

4.27
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you. Madam Speaker, you know that whenever I am talking in this House I do not read and being the DP chief Whip the DP party gave me a message to read and I do not know whether I will find time-but I know you are a very good Speaker, you will allow me to read. And if time does not allow you would give one minute to make my final contribution because I am the voice of the party here. 

I read what comes from the DP and from the President: In 1989 hon. Mathias Nsubuga contested as a member of Parliament of Uganda in Bukoto South. He faced hon. Gerald Sendaula he mounted a strong campaign and lost by only five votes. 

The core of NRM was shaken to the extent that even President Museveni took note and sought to meet hon. Nsubuga. He wanted to know which DP young man was mounting such strong challenge against NRM stalwarts. 

Museveni wanted hon. Nsubuga to join his Government and embrace NRM but he stood his ground refusing to yield to any coercion or inducement.

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga was a consistent man committed to a fixed set of principles and values. You could negotiate provided it was not violent - as for the aims of truth and justice it was non-negotiable.  

He was persistent that is why he was able to win the parliamentary seat in 2006, he lost it in 2011 but he captured it after the courts nullified the results and ordered a by-election.

This country will miss hon. Nsubuga because in him we had a man dedicated to solving problems through dialogue. He was the founding signatory for the Inter Party Organization for Dialogue (IPOD).

In a country with a history of violent political conflicts those promoting dialogue are frowned upon. Hon. Nsubuga believed that it is in the best interest of Uganda to engage in dialogue in order to break the cycle of violence. 

The only memory we can erect to honour hon. Nsubuga is for all parties to commit to honest, sincere and constructive dialogue. He was not in politics to settle scores or to promote friends. He never engaged in petty squabbles; that is why he was such a pillar in DP. He was a bridge between the old and the young generation. 

Madam Speaker, the party wishes to send word of thanks to these people: Dr Angelina Etima Kasozi, who helped hon. Nsubuga when he had just got a stroke at Mukono Bookshop and Dr Senyonjo of Case Clinic. We thank the Government and the President of Uganda - I rarely do that here but still, we appreciate the President.

Madam Speaker, the Democratic Party appreciates you, for giving us this opportunity. We thank the Leader of Government Business, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and the Vice President for according us this chance to pay tribute to this gallant son of Africa. 

We thank the Leader of the Opposition, political parties, all the churches and all those who have stood with us and have continued to stand with us. Above all, we thank hon. James Kakooza, who has been at the centre of all this, since hon. Nsubuga passed on.

Madam Speaker, this comes from the Democratic Party, which designated me as their Whip, to submit. Now, with my three minutes, Madam Speaker –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, the three minutes are together.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, once there was a lorry driver who had a turn boy and they had lost somebody. They had a coffin at the back of the lorry. Incidentally, it rained yet the lorry had no tarpaulin. The turn boy took shelter in the coffin but the driver was not aware. As he drove along the road, people stopped him and boarded the lorry and they sympathised with him on his loss of the coffin and everybody was shying away from the coffin. 

Incidentally, the turn boy who was in the coffin wanted to check whether the rain had stopped. He opened the coffin and pushed his hand out and everyone on the lorry jumped off in fear.

Madam Speaker, what the Democratic Party has faced is what I have just narrated - the story of the driver and the turn boy. This man has been a pillar in the Democratic Party. You will remember, in this House, I moved a motion here not to support the former Prime Minister for misusing the PRDP funds– (Member timed out.)

4.34
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we pay tribute to our beloved hon. Mathias Nsubuga; the family and the country has lost but we, members of the Democratic Party, have lost an icon. We have lost a mentor. As young democrats, we consulted him and he advised us accordingly. Our mentor is gone. We have lost a father. Personally, he always addressed me as his daughter. He addressed all young girls as his daughters and referred to young men as his sons. 

Hon. Nsubuga was the library of DP. If you wanted to know the history of DP, he could narrate the entire history without even consulting in the textbooks. Indeed, we have really lost a helper. Hon. Nsubuga was a very generous man that he could give out what he did not have. He has been a helper of the poor.  

Everyone is asking why hon. Nsubuga has gone. I could not sleep yesterday because I was trying to think why hon. Nsubuga has gone but by 4 o’clock, I had the answer. God takes His holy people early enough such that the world that is full of corruption, with unfair politics, does not change them. God wanted to take him such that this country does not corrupt him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.36
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that hon. Nsubuga was my personal friend. I met him in 1977 in Eastern Nairobi. His brother had removed him from the seminary and told him, “Please, we are very few in the clan. If you become a seminarian, we will get extinct”. His brother was called Sserwadda and he believed in him. He sponsored him at school. After that, I left him in Nairobi since he was a staff of Uganda Airlines. I came back home and I met him in 1980 when he was in the Democratic Party.  

There was a man in my constituency called David Livingstone Kiyingi. He was my uncle and a DP supporter. He visited my constituency and I asked him what he was doing there. He said, “You found me in Nairobi fighting against injustices but we have to continue to fight against injustices.” I asked him why and he said he could not accept the extrajudicial killings of human beings. This man believed in the principle that every human being must have peace because he had tested life in exile.

He was a peace maker, a team builder and that is why when he led a group to go to the President, to negotiate for issues of national importance – recently, he told me that he was disappointed. He had a group but when time came to meet the President to negotiate for issues of the country, they betrayed him and even went on the radio to condemn him. He was very disappointed.

However, because hon. Nsubuga was principled, he had a choice. He mobilised us for a struggle. As you have heard hon. Anifa Kawooya say, we had a network. He was working with the Uganda Airlines. Guerrillas were not known in Uganda until he got a journalist called William Pike. He gave him a ticket from Nairobi and took him to Entebbe and because he had a network, the people who took Pike from Entebbe to Luweero were Muhwezi and Fred Rwigyema. You can see how this man took a risk; he was working in Government but still fought for peace.

Madam Speaker, the last statement that I would like to put on record is that he was a gentleman who was non-discriminatory. We were in a meeting in 1983 when Prof. Yusuf Lule was the chairman of the liberation struggle. People complained about sectarianism. Some of the complainants were the late Sserumaga and the late Dr Kayira. They condemned Prof. Yusuf Lule for mobilising funds to boost certain groups of people in Uganda and not him. Hon. Nsubuga was in that meeting and he advised us not to think about anything but mobilising funds to go back to Uganda as a family - (Member timed out.) 

4.41
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for moving the motion and Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity. When I came to Parliament in 2006 at the beginning of the Eighth Parliament, I got a warm embrace and welcome from the greater Masaka then when they found out that I was an in-law in Villa-Maria Bwanda. Actually, hon. Nsubuga was very close to the late Sserumaga and my other in-law, the late Monsignor Fr Deogratias Bukenya in Germany. We shared a lot. 

He told me about Zac Kaheru who was heading finances in Nairobi in their mobilisation. He was so much a patriot. He always spoke of national dialogue and for me, from the first day I came to this Parliament, I have said national dialogue is the solution - polarisation does not help. 

One day, in the Eighth Parliament, the Opposition walked out. I remember before he walked out, he asked hon. John Patrick Amama – and that was the first time I heard the name “Patrick.” He asked him whether that was what they fought for in Nairobi. He was referring to Kategaya. This really reminds me and if we are really paying tribute, we can only mourn and celebrate his life if the Tenth Parliament puts to reality his dream. You have heard what he has been doing in the IPOD.

The late Mathias Nsubuga was a true democrat because he was tolerant and for co-existence unlike most of our politicians. We look at our opponents as adversaries. You cannot be a democrat the moment you call your opponent an “adversary” because the intention is to work for the common good of the country. It is really unfortunate that at the time when we are looking forward to a national dialogue and expect a Constitutional Review Commission, that such a gentleman, who has, even at party level, been able to bring together DP at the time when the party had most factions, just dies.  

He was not selfish; he was not a dealer or mercenary. He could have even become a very senior minister, possibly the Prime Minister, if he wanted but he remained very solid. (Applause) He did not have a price tag like most politicians now would like to have if they can fall into things and forget their conscience - (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have worked closely with hon. Mathias Nsubuga in the Democratic Party and in other capacities. In 2000, hon. Nsubuga was the Personal Assistant to the Mayor, hon. John Ssebaana Kizito in Kampala City Council and I was a councillor. 

Despite being a member of my party, we have shared a lot in politics. He has advised us on a number of issues. We have worked together on the IPOD council. Madam Speaker, when we took a decision, as IPOD, to go and meet the President, we had a number of national issues to discuss. Indeed, we carried a document to the President. It is very unfortunate that when the President instructed the Prime Minister to convene a meeting of leaders, this meeting has never taken off. All the time we shared with hon. Nsubuga about this meeting, we have been waiting. 

I am taking this opportunity to ask the Prime Minister to tell the President that he should live by his words. It is     because hon. Nsubuga had been waiting and probably he had a lot to share that would benefit this country. If we do not see this meeting take place, then I do not see other means of having peace in the country other than dialogue and consensus. What else does Government want apart from dialogue and consensus? 

I am so hurt that when we went to State House, we were condemned. Some people said we had gone to State House to take tea and others thought we had other motives but we had a reason. We would like this country to know that we went to State House with hon. Nsubuga for a purpose to benefit Ugandans. Even when hon. Nsubuga is gone, hon. Prime Minister, you still owe IPOD. 

Madam Speaker, finally, I would like to thank your Office so much because when we called on your Office, you made the environment possible for us to be here in the Chamber. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and Government because they have worked with us in this trying moment. The Prime Minister has gone ahead to sit with us and see that we give a decent send-off to our colleague. I thank you so much and that is the spirit we should always cherish. 

4.50
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Oyam, the members of IPOD, the UPC and Lango, I would like to thank you for giving me this chance. 

Madam Speaker, recently in June, my party appointed me to serve on the IPOD council as a member. I really enjoyed the short time that I have been with hon. Nsubuga as our chairperson. I enjoyed working with him and I saw a lot of hope that would really transform this country into what all of us would like to see.

Hon. Nsubuga, as the chairperson of IPOD, gave all of us opportunities to express our views irrespective of the political party one was coming from. It was not only that but also during this short time, he initiated the idea of IPOD members visiting the party presidents. Some of us found it very difficult to go to Najjanankumbi, State House or Uganda House. However, during his good leadership, all the IPOD members started visiting other political parties’ offices, beginning with Uganda House and we had a very successful meeting as brothers and sisters. The members of NRM, DP and FDC all converged at Uganda House and deliberated over a cup of tea. Our next stop was Najjanankumbi, State House and then the DP office. If God had given hon. Nsubuga that chance to live, I think that the country would have moved forward in the right direction. 

Now that hon. Nsubuga has left us work to do, hon. Prime Minister, can we take over from where he stopped?

Madam Speaker, I also enjoyed a great moment with the late Nsubuga when you sent members from different political parties to China. I would like to say that hon. Nsubuga was a father not only to his family but to all MPs across the board. For example, we went during winter but he made sure that all the 21 members were very comfortable. We chatted a lot and he tried to market his party just like I also tried to market mine because our parties are the oldest parties in this country. (Laughter)

We had that kind of peaceful competition. I would joke with him that since he called my party president, hon. Jimmy Akena his nephew, then the old people like him are supposed to sit back. Now that hon. Akena is a nephew, I would love for him to cross over and allow the young generation to take over. The late Nsubuga would laugh at my jokes. 

This is a man who was very committed and loved everybody across the political divide. Even if you were a young person – (Member timed out.)

4.53
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come along with condolences of the people of Kampala Central where the late has been performing his duties and operating as the Secretary General of the Democratic Party. I offer my condolences to the family, the Democratic Party, the people of Lwengo and the Republic of Uganda.

The beauty of life is something that every one of us desires to enjoy but when God wills so, then His command is and that is the end of life and beginning of a different journey. 

I recently visited a cemetery in Mombasa because it was near the stadium from where we were playing football. I noticed there were written words which I shared with hon. Atiku. The words were, “Where you are is where we were and where we are is where you are destined to come.” I asked myself what this was all about. Indeed the words are true but the living do not realise that this is only a path for us to meet our Creator.

I met the late on Wednesday by Cafe Javas with his grandson and daughter whom I think is the one here dressed in a gomesi. He introduced me to the grandson and told me that he owed me something. I told him that we would clear our scores.

My expulsion from the NRM party was as a result of campaigning for the late. My first point of indictment was that I went to Lwengo, donned a DP cap and campaigned for hon. Mathias Nsubuga who made it into Parliament. I am proud of doing what I did and I do not have regrets. 

When the late told me he owed me, I told him not to worry because he would return the favour one time. I do not regret that even if he has not returned the favour, I am comfortable. I reminded him about my school times in Kibuli Secondary School where I studied with his daughter, Nankya, who was some classes below me. When he visited one time, he called me out and said he had something for the son of the speaker. He gave me Shs 30,000 which was a lot of money in school. I reminded him that I was paying back for what he had given me back that time.

I have a simple story for us to reckon with; one time in history, a very strong man donned in black and with swords entered into a place of worship and asked who the believers were. They all scampered because they had seen him with swords but one man said that he was a believer. 

He went with him and returned with swords dripping blood. He again asked who the believers were. More people scampered through the windows. He then went out with another and returned with swords dripping blood. When he came back and asked how many more believers were still around, there was none. He then went out again and returned with the other two men carrying sheep.

He explained to the people that he was only looking for believers in Islam who could help him slaughter all the sheep and he would reward them with 10 sheep each. On hearing this, they all responded that they were all believers - (Member timed out.)  

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Moses Kizige): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to a friend.

At about 4 o’clock last Tuesday, I was walking out of Parliament and at the check point, I saw hon. Nsubuga drive in. I turned back and followed him to where he had parked his car. He stepped out of the car and we talked for about five minutes. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga had a message for you which he requested me to give to you. I told him you were out of the country but I would still deliver the message at the earliest opportunity. The message is now irrelevant as he is gone. 

Earlier this year, hon. Nsubuga took me to his social club at Pope Paul Memorial Centre. I had never been there. He introduced me in the presence of His Excellency, the Vice- President, and I felt so good. 

Over the last six months, hon. Nsubuga has been to my office four times. I did not know that he was an accountant until today and yet I am also an accountant. From his name, I thought he was from the mamba clan. We also have clans in Busoga and I belong to the mamba clan. In our interaction, we did not talk politics. We mostly centred on business. 

From my experience, it is therefore possible to be friends when you have so many similarities but only focus on issues. That is what hon. Nsubuga was. 

We shall miss him as a nation. The people of Kamuli will in a special way miss him because he was interested in development in Kamuli. He had worked with us on so many occasions. 

I offer you, Madam Speaker, my sympathies because he was your friend. Time and again he said you were friends and that you had dined in his house. He said he would always be there to support you in whatever form that was required. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR VETERAN AFFAIRS (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to the late Mathias Nsubuga on my behalf, the people of Isingiro County North and the veterans. 

When we come to this House, we are referred to as “honourable” and we are supposed to behave in a manner that is actually honourable. The late Mathias Nsubuga was somebody that actually fitted this description.

We belonged to different parties, tribes and come from different places but there is one thing that binds us and this is our country, Uganda.

Madam Speaker, hon. Mathias Nsubuga was a statesman. He interacted with all of us here and did everything with objectivity. He had a trademark smile and when I saw the papers this morning, I really felt sorry for his family.

When people pass on, we should sit down and reflect that at one time, people will talk about us. Madam Speaker, Mathias was a great man and his contribution left a record to the politics of this country. I sympathise with his family, relatives and the Democratic Party. 

Madam Speaker, I don’t have much to say. May his soul rest in perfect peace and I thank you, for allowing me time, to talk about my friend. 

5.02
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moyo District in general and West Moyo in particular, and on my own behalf, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved family members, to the Government of Uganda, the Parliament of Uganda, the people of Bukoto South, relatives, friends and in-laws for the demise of our beloved uncle, relative and law maker, hon. Nsubuga.

Madam Speaker, our hearts are torn apart in the sense that we are both mourning and celebrating. We are mourning because we have lost the honourable at the time when we needed him most. He has been a champion in the leadership and governance of this country. We have missed him; at the age of 60, he has gone too soon that is why we mourn him.

However, on the other hand, we are celebrating his life because of having left for us a good, young and vibrant family. He was a father and friend to everybody. He has been my role model. In 2006, I came to register my school with the Ministry of Education here at Development House and I saw him being escorted by a mob from his constituency to be sworn-in as Member of Parliament. I then wondered when I would stop teaching and become a Member of Parliament. From that day, he became my role model and at last, thanks be to God, I am now here in the House because of hon. Nsubuga.

He was a very good leader, a resourceful person, a reconciler, a uniting personality, a distinguished legislator and a consensus builder. Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga has always come to West Nile to attend to high profile funerals. He has been leading delegations to West Nile. One time he came and attended the funeral of the late Gaspiro Oda, who was murdered in 1979. He even went up to Yumbe, while leading the delegation of the Opposition in West Nile; I remember him for that.

I would like to console the family members by saying that please take heart; remain united even though he has gone. Always use dialogue whenever there are contentious issues in the family. Please sit down and solve them amicably and take heart.
Now, to all of us Members here, can we go for routine health check-ups and once in a while, let us visit the gym that has been set for us in the Parliament by the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, so that we can remain fit and able. Thank you very much.

5.06
MS ROSE MUNTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to say something that has always struck my mind about the late hon. Nsubuga.

In 2001, I was the Resident District Commissioner for Masaka and hon. Nsubuga by then was working with hon. Ssebaana Kizito. He came to my office and introduced himself and said that he was going to stand as MP for Bukoto South and was seeking my support. I asked him on which party he was going to stand and he said DP. I told him, “Mr Nsubuga, my father was a strong DP supporter and I grew up knowing him as a DP member. However, please forgive me because I am an RDC and I am supposed to be neutral.” We then argued and he told me that I was even wearing a rosary, which speaks for truth and justice and I asked him whether it was wrong. He said, “Okay, we shall not argue but please do the needful.”
 
He left and the campaigns kicked off but he was not successful. I never met him again until I came to Parliament in 2014. He asked me for a favour which I did not grant him and when I met him here in Parliament, I felt a bit guilty. At one time we were seated at a table at the canteen and he came and sat at the same table.

I welcomed him and I thought he would not answer because I thought he still held that on his mind. He however said, “Madam RDC, my sister, mwana wa Maria…” and I thought he was leading to something but he continued, “Why are you worried, that is passed. I never heard you antagonise me but things turned out the way they did so never have that guilt consciousness that you never supported me.”

I, therefore, stand here to confirm that the late Mathias Nsubuga was tolerant, forgiving and he lived beyond his party.

5.10
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to deliver my condolences on behalf of the people of Kanungu and I would like to join my colleagues to pay tribute to our dear friend and colleague; and somebody who was very passionate about seeing everybody happy around him. 

He was very passionate about seeing even those who would come - I remember in the Ninth Parliament, it was my first term in Parliament. I met him in the corridor and I remember there is something which had disturbed me and he was trying to guide and counsel me despite the fact that we were from different political parties. We really have lost a statesman; we have lost somebody who did not look at one side but wanted to see everybody is okay.

It is unfortunate that what he had started with the IPOD, he has not seen it pass but I believe the God who had put him there has a good plan and will do something like he had wished.

I would like to thank him so much for using the attributes God gave him. Sincerely, hon. Nsubuga was one of the Members you would find and he would not under look you even if you were young, new or not senior like him; he would still talk to you despite your level. He would talk to you and give you time too. He was such a kind man that all of us should emulate. Sometimes after joining Parliament, we under look our juniors and do not pay much attention to them. However, hon. Nsubuga was somebody special. I would like to thank God for that character that He gave to the late Nsubuga, which he used well.

Madam Speaker, sometime back, I met hon. Nsubuga at a meeting in Munyonyo and we talked about our usual politics. He asked me about the Kanungu issue with the former Prime Minister. We really chatted for long. However, what I realised in him was somebody who wanted to see our nation come to a level where everybody would enjoy it without looking at one’s party or where one came from. (Member timed out.)

5.13
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, we have lost a colleague. I have known the late Nsubuga for more than 15 years. I learnt that he got a stroke on Saturday when I was at a wedding at night. On Sunday, I came to Case Clinic where I also met hon. Kiyingi and hon. Mbidde. We were told to hold on for about 10 minutes so that they could allow us to see him in the intensive care unit. The 10 minutes elapsed and they again told us to wait for another five minutes and the five minutes also passed. They then told us to try later in the evening and that is when I suspected that Nsubuga’s condition was bad. We left the hospital and in the night, we learnt about his death. 

Madam Speaker, people have talked a lot about the late Nsubuga. He was a uniting factor. For the years I knew him, we interacted almost daily because he was my chairman in our social club. For Members who have got the opportunity to interact with that class of the club, he would allow them to come there.

The late Nsubuga was a uniting factor because in our social club, we have people of different political affiliations. However, on a club day like Thursday, where my colleague also came, we normally discussed political topics but he would calm us and we ended up as sisters and brothers. He was an objective person; he would not make one get annoyed but he would reason with you.

I realised that the late Nsubuga had an extra special character when I lost my elder brother a month ago. He died on a Sunday and we buried him on a Monday. I had informed a few people but towards the end of the burial, hon. Nsubuga arrived at the burial place. I asked him how he got to know about the demise of my brother and he replied that since he was my chairman and had learnt about the bad news, there was no way he could sleep without attending the burial. From everything that people have mentioned about the late, he was a uniting factor and we shall miss him.

The day he died, Madam Speaker, was the day we were supposed to hold our annual delegates conference to elect new leadership. Hon. Nsubuga was already nominated unopposed but due to his death, the delegates conference could not take place. The late Nsubuga was a person of the people regardless of his political career. We will miss him and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.17
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mpigi, I wish to convey our condolences to the family of the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga, the DP fraternity, the Catholic community, Buganda Kingdom and the public.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Nsubuga was a man of peace, somebody committed to peaceful coexistence. The late was a mentor and counsellor to all irrespective of one’s holdings, party and faith. I belong to the mamba clan, which we shared with the late. In the Ninth Parliament, he identified all the MPs that belonged to the mamba clan and he always mobilised us to go and attend the meetings organised by our clan leader, the Gabunga. If one missed that meeting, the following day the late Nsubuga would ask why you missed the meeting. He would still wear that smile and say, “Please, do not mind, we have another meeting” on such and such a day.

A few years back when he was marrying off his daughter, he mobilised us and asked us to attend. He said, “We are marrying off our daughter, you must attend because you are the aunties of the daughter and this is our thing.” He was a man that loved and wished good for everybody.

When I was elected the vice-chairperson of our caucus, he rang and congratulated me. He kept asking me for a meeting with the executive so that he would come and guide us. We shall miss him and the country too will miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.20
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kiboga and on behalf of thousands of people in the diaspora - there is a vigil going on today in East London - I bring my condolences to the family of a dear friend, the late Mathias Nsubuga. 

I had known the late for over 20 years. I will never forget the time I lost my mother in 2006. I was in the UK at that time and I spent the night travelling. To my surprise, I found hon. Nsubuga, who was a Member of Parliament at that time, at the airport. He drove me to my home in Kiboga and that is how dear he was to me.

At all times, I used to ask him, having understood his background and how he contributed to the liberation struggle, why he did not join the NRM. He would tell me that he was not in DP by accident; he was born and raised in DP and that he would die a DP supporter. I also used to tell him that I was born and raised in Kiboga, which is the cradle of the NRM. However, that did not get in our way. We did many things together, and I am glad that hon. Ssewungu is here because he witnessed some of those social get-togethers and interactions we had. It is a real pity that he is now before us in a casket. 

I know that he always had that powerful mobilising power of getting people together. In Nairobi, in South Estate B, his house was the meeting point for most of the Ugandans. I know that because he has always told me that many of the people in the Executive and the army went through his house at one point or another. 

In London, we owed him a lot. You have all heard of the matooke shop that he started. By the way, it is not just a matooke shop; there are a lot of things there which you may find in any market here. However, more than that, you have heard about the many Ugandans in East London; two or three out of every five people on a street are Ugandan. We owe that to hon. Nsubuga and that is why there is a vigil at this moment in London in his honour.

In all the bereavements that we had in the UK and many other parts of the world, hon. Nsubuga was the focal point here because he would help in coordinating and getting things done. I think that is why many times he would give you the contacts –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I got to know the late hon. Nsubuga way back in 1980. He was a friend to my late father, Africano Ssembatya, who was the Shadow Minister of Commerce in 1981. He was very friendly to me as well because of that background. Since I joined politics, wherever he met me, he would call me the “lost sheep” just because I refused to join his party, the Democratic Party, and yet our entire family is part of DP. 

He was hard working, very encouraging and he has been giving me parental guidance. He was a friend to everybody. He was politically mature, advising everybody especially on matters of national importance. We shall greatly miss him. 

I convey my condolences to the family, to the people of Bukoto South and to all Ugandans. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Mathias, we shall miss you. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion.

Madam Speaker, you may have observed that for some time I was not in the House and it was a little bit deliberate. I almost got scared; I did not have what to say about my friend. I was watching from my colleague’s office but I later on realised that I was letting down my friend. I thought I should come and say something. 

I had earlier on broken down because we have lost a very good man. You know some people are good and some are very good. Mathias was in that class of the very good people in this country. Mathias brought some of us into politics, those of us who were just slightly below him at university. We will always remember him for what he did for us. 

He was a man of integrity, a man known to stand by his words and never tell lies. He never lived a double life. This man before you was not a blackmailer or double dealer. A story has been told of how he agreed with his colleagues to go and meet the President. At the eleventh hour, they betrayed him and never went. When he went, he was called terrible names. We want to vindicate him; Mathias was a great man.

Mathias was a very entrepreneurial gentleman; my colleague has just alluded to this. Sometime back I was in the UK and I was told what he has just been telling you, that the first shop in the UK that sold matooke was opened by him and it still runs to-date. He was not only contributing to the economic wellbeing of this country but every month he would send truckloads of matooke to that same destination. We will greatly miss him.

Madam Speaker, my heart goes out to the family of the late Mathias. You are not the only ones who have lost a loved one; Parliament, Uganda, the DP and everyone in Masaka have also lost a loved one. Can we emulate what he espoused? Can we try to remember him by doing exactly what he stood for? For truth and justice he lived. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.28
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The late hon. Nsubuga was a friend to many. As hon. Muhanga said, one time he told her that he was going to the north to mobilise for his party and indeed he went. One day, the honourable Capt. Lakot and I bumped into him in Gulu town and later he was joined by the DP President, hon. Norbert Mao. We had a very good time together; the four of us even took a photo together and yesterday, when my husband asked me who the former Member of Parliament who died was, I showed him that photo.

Madam Speaker, if hon. Muhanga underrated the mobilisation capacity of hon. Nsubuga, he proved her wrong. That is because in 2006 when the country voted for the first time under the multiparty system since President Museveni captured power, from Acholi sub-region no single Member of Parliament came to this House on the DP ticket. Even in 2011, no single Member of Parliament from Acholi sub-region came to this House on the DP ticket. However, this time in the Tenth Parliament, we have two Members of Parliament on the DP ticket. We have hon. Lyandro Komakech, representing Gulu Municipality, on the DP ticket. We also have hon. Peter Okot, representing Tochi County, on the DP ticket.

Madam Speaker, I attribute this to the mobilisation that hon. Nsubuga did because he was indeed there. It has also been said on this Floor that he was committed, hardworking and principled. I think we can prove this from the results that are right here in this House.

To the bereaved family, we know that God has power over life and death is not a stranger to us. However, when it comes the way it has come and taken away our brother, it is really difficult to accept; it is difficult to bear and understand.  However, you have our prayers. We will continue praying for you so that God, who alone has power over life, strengthens and comforts you. May the soul of our brother rest in eternal peace. 

5.31
MR CLEMENT ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to pay tribute to this fallen giant. Ever since the news of his collapse broke, I have been following the outpouring of emotion on social media, in the newspapers and on radio. It has been unbelievable that everybody agrees that hon. Mathias Nsubuga was indeed a great man. If you did not know him, you would think that they are talking about a giant of a man. However, I remember this was a very simple man who was full of humility. Because of that, we all stand here to pay respect to him.

I have been in this House for six years now and I have watched as our friends or colleagues, one by one, have been brought into this House for one last time. Eventually, like our friend, they leave through this door and they are soon forgotten. I say forgotten because a few days ago, I was talking to some of my colleagues about the Ninth Parliament and we could not even remember who died first; was it hon. Oromait or hon. Nebanda? 

I wondered what was wrong with our Parliament; why don’t we have a memory of the dead. I have done research on this and I have found out that most parliaments have a way of preserving the memory of their departed. It is that memory that binds the living to the dead, that binds the dead to those who are yet to be born and it keeps the spirit of what we do alive. In the UK, you find writings all over the place about who did what, who stood where – “Richard was executed here” - and when someone stands there, they feel that they are part of history.

I was in Zambia and they have a gallery for their dead Members of Parliament, their colleagues. Madam Speaker, I propose that this is something that we should do to preserve the memory of our colleagues and friends. (Applause) People who come thereafter will then get to know that they are not the first but that they are just walking in the shoes of great men. That way, they will tread carefully. I propose that we do this.

Secondly, my friend, the hon. Jalia Bintu, spoke about the rate at which we lose our former Members. This is something for which I have done a little bit of research as well. I have discovered that once our colleagues lose their seats, we turn our backs on them and yet they will have spent all their time in this House working for their constituents, building churches, burying people and they never have time to plan for their retirement. By the time they retire, it is too late. 

Madam Speaker, most parliaments in the world keep their former Members of Parliament on half pay for five to ten years, to give them time to plan for the new life they will be going into. Therefore, I propose that we do something. We have served this nation - much as out there people may not understand this – and we cannot just throw our colleagues out the way we seem to be doing now. I propose that something be done about this. May the soul of hon. Nsubuga rest in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)

5.36
MR MEDARD SSEGOONA (DP, Busiro County East County, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you invited the hon. Obote to speak, some people saw me stand up and they thought I had mistaken myself for him. I was actually moving to tell him something, which I will tell him later.

I would first of all like to thank God for the life of the hon. Mathias Nsubuga, somebody I had known all my life. I would like to thank God again for giving us hon. Nsubuga for the time that He decided to give him to us. Sometimes we make the mistake of mourning and we forget to celebrate a good life well lived. This is one of the occasions when we must come and celebrate a good life. I think the hon. Babirye Kabanda attempted to get to this direction. 

One thing we need to understand is that by the time God decides to take you when you are still a good man, He loves you. Who knows whether two days after today, hon. Nsubuga would have been judged as corrupt? Who knows whether the hon. Nsubuga, two days after today, would turn into a bad man? So, my thanks to God is for the reason that He has kept him a good man and that is why we are here to celebrate and even be tempted to mourn. That is number one. 

In my capacity as the chairperson of the committee organising his burial, I would like to thank you, colleagues, for standing with us and with the family. In particular, I would like to thank the Government of Uganda. I would like to thank my brother, the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who has led the Government team so far in achieving what we have been able to achieve as we look forward to more. 

Many people have talked about the good in the hon. Nsubuga but have not addressed us on the way forward. I have heard people talk about their history in the Democratic Party and I started planning on our next line of attack because these are the people who either escaped from us or were stolen from our party. We shall reclaim all of them without exception. (Laughter) 

Two, if you liked this gentleman called hon. Mathias Nsubuga, how do you intend to take forward the values that he stood for, even if you do not return to DP? By the way, it should not be ritualistic that we invited you to come back to DP, you must come back to DP with and for the values we stand for, and those are the values Nsubuga stood for, the core values of democracy and human rights. 
We can invite you to come back as you are, we cleanse you and do some rituals, but at the end of the day we stand for those values. (Laughter)

I would like to thank the President of Uganda. I saw his Tweet and one of the things he praised the hon. Mathias Nsubuga for was his patience and love for dialogue. The only way we can pay hon. Nsubuga is to see some fruits of dialogue. I have spent the last five years in Parliament dialoguing with the Government over KCCA issues, unfortunately they remain unresolved, I must say, and yet the Government, particularly the Prime Minister, has the capacity to address them. The hon. Nsubuga took me to negotiate with Government over the same issues; it is one of the issues he would have wanted to have resolved before he died. However, he has died and left that work unaccomplished. 

The hon. Nsubuga lamented over and over – as Prophet Amos said, “over and over again” – about the brutalisation and criminalisation of the Opposition. We are not your enemies. Treat us with decency and love; we deserve nothing but love. Give us the love before we die. We need that love more in life than in death. 

As I conclude - (Member timed out.)

5.40
MR MUHAMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to a good friend and a mentor. 

In 1996, I was the national chairman of the Uganda Young Democrats (UYD). Hon. Nsubuga came back from UK and by that time, we were going for general elections. A group of young people and I travelled with him across this country, campaigning for Dr Kawanga Semwogerere. He was a friend, a father, a brother and a colleague.

We also had the occasion to spend our days and evenings at his home. Hon. Nsubuga was a loving father. He greatly loved his wife and his children. You could tell that when you visited his home. It was like a college of equals. That is the kind of gentleman lying before us.

However, most importantly, the late hon. Nsubuga was the Secretary General of the Democratic Party. The story cannot end with us attempting to answer the big questions that he grappled with. The Democratic Party is the only independent party in Africa that has not been in power and has not collapsed. (Applause) It is the only one! Uganda People’s Congress, the ANC and others are there – by the way they are about four only – but it is only DP, which has not been in power but has not collapsed. It is the party of the future of this country. 

I know, as the former chairperson of UYD, that today we virtually run NRM. I know the young friends that are there and at point Z - our point of destination - we are going to reshape this country tremendously. It is not going to take long, just watch the space; I can tell everyone here that in the next two to five years, the children are coming back home.

The story of DP and the question we have grappled with is: how we can belong to a party for 62 years that has not been able to get into power? The question also is: how could DP, with its values, manage to come to power in a country like Uganda? In 1962, DP was denied leadership of this country because of an unholy alliance and the rest has been violence, murder and killings. Those are not the values of DP. Uganda People’s Congress defeated DP in 1980 through gerrymandering but by all intents and purposes, Ugandans spoke and voted DP. 

Now the question is: what must we live for as DP? Our party will only go forward. By the way, there is a certain character we have. If you look at people who have belonged to DP like Sam Kutesa and others, they are different by character. I have seen our children who have spoken here; they are different - (Laughter)- by character. This is so because in this country, what has been tremendously disappearing are ladies and gentlemen. The notion that in order to survive Ugandan politics, you need to be street smart is not necessarily true. For us, we strongly believe that the future of this country belongs to a party that will offer a certain character to this country, one that gives hope and inspiration. Ladies and gentlemen, you can only find those values in DP. 

The Democratic Party is a non-violent party. We do not believe in shading blood, rigging elections, corruption and nepotism. There are those who believe in them but I cannot use this occasion to say so. However, what I want to tell this country, as hon. Nsubuga lays here, is that young people and most of you who are here, come back home -(Interjection)- It is not stagnation; it is because the politics of the country is bad and it is our obligation to right things.

I want to thank the late hon. Nsubuga because he used his interpersonal skills. By the way, he was a simple man but his greatest asset as a person was his interpersonal skills. For him to be the Secretary General of DP for the last five years has been a difficult calling. He had very errant characters like me, Medard, Nambooze and others - fairly very undisciplined in some aspects - but he was able to somehow keep the party together. 

Now with the leadership of the hon. Norbert Mao and others, we strongly believe that we can reorganise the party. Let us use the death of hon. Nsubuga to forge unity in DP. There is nothing we can give back as a tribute to hon. Nsubuga than a united DP and you coming back home. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want the family to leave before it gets dark. I am cutting the time to two minutes only.

4.47
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, hon. Nsubuga was not known to me when I was a young boy. I only got to know about him the time when hon. Norbert Mao became the President General of DP. We have been informed that he is the only president general in Uganda and I think he is present in the gallery.

The information I got is that the people were ignoring the hon. Norbert Mao because he is from northern Uganda. However, they listed in the newspapers those who were standing because of Norbert Mao’s capacity and his integrity. I then met him when I came to visit Nobert Mao at the time he was very sick. I actually thought we were going to bury Mao before we bury this great man. However, God’s timing is different. I found this gentleman, the honourable who is lying here, taking care of Norbert Mao in a way that you would think that he is a real son of the soil in northern Uganda. If Mao had the opportunity to speak here, he would tell you how much he has lost because of the death of this great man today.

Madam Speaker, we should never be divided because of the region we come from or the boundaries of the districts. We should never be divided on the basis of being from the southern, western or northern region or by the rivers and lakes that divide us. We have limited time in this world. I read a very interesting book one time, and you can read it too. I will always quote for you from books. The book I read was entitled, “Who Will Cry When You Die” by Robin Sharma. We all have different periods; some of us still have five years, some two days, some 10 or 20 years. Why should we hate each other? Please, dialogue when you have problems. 

That is the message that this great man has left for us today that we are speaking about. Never plan to kill your fellow human being because whether you like it or not, he or she will die and you are going to also die. He has left a legacy for us to follow as a country, to make sure we dialogue. He has left a legacy to the effect that we should be friendly to each other irrespective of where we come from. Thank you very much. 

5.49
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send my deepest condolences to about five groupings - the family, the King of Buganda and the Buganda Kingdom, the Catholic community, the DP community and the country.

Madam Speaker, we have lost hon. Mathias Nsubuga when the country is facing one of the toughest challenges, and that is a leadership crisis. He has been one of the people that we could look up to. The loss of our dear friend, hon. Mathias Nsubuga, grieves my spirit.

Just on Tuesday last week, he came to Parliament with his son - I can see him there; my deepest condolences. He was looking for me because he had read in the newspapers and had been watching television and he was told that I had survived the massacre and genocide at the palace. He said, “I just wanted to say that I feel the pain with you.” That is our brother lying right here.

He was a full believer of the international justice system. I would like to encourage us, especially Parliament, to pay special tribute to our late brother by doing, if we can, four things: One, the restoration of term limits; two, keeping our membership in the International Criminal Court; three, fast-tracking the electoral reforms; and four, putting the country above ourselves. This is because those are things that our honourable colleague lived for. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: For the record, I have it on good authority from the Attorney-General that we are not going to leave the International Criminal Court. He will be coming here to make a statement. He has told me about it himself and he will come to here to speak about it. (Applause) 

5.52
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on that good note of Uganda not leaving the International Criminal Court. I also rise on behalf of the entire group of northern Uganda Members of the Democratic Party to pay tribute to the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga, who has been one of our greatest pillars in building and mentoring young leaders in this country. 

I remember in 1996, he was one of those, together with the late Kayondo, the lawyer, who made sure that as young people we galvanise capacity to run and mobilise Dr Ssemwogerere’s campaign and we did it. We did it with a lot of sacrifices but he encouraged us even where there was no money to just continue with the struggle. He asked us not to look at money as an end in life. He advised us not, in any way, to cross for purposes of money. We stood firm on the principles of the party - truth and justice - and this is what we live by today. 

In politics in this country, one needs to have crosscutting principles that reach the national level and those that make one appear a national leader with national interests, and that was what hon. Mathias Nsubuga had. When he was in Gulu recently, you cannot imagine but he walked on the streets like a local leader in Gulu town just because of his love for the people and the way he brought young people into leadership.

As the young democrats, who I led then as president, we stood firm and never wavered. He gave me a word that I will never forget - “tosagasagana”, literally meaning never just move around. He also said one word that I will never forget - “kubendabenda”, literally meaning an uphill task. I have been told that is where Mubende derived its name as a district. These are the things that we have learnt from the hon. Mathias Nsubuga. 

He one time told me that it was very important to leave a legacy, no matter how short, and it ought to be clean. We pay tribute to that statement. The Democratic Party is one of - (Member timed out.)

5.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, as I sat here and listened to Members deliberate, I kept wondering why good people die very fast. However, I was consoled by what one bishop one time told me, that even God needs good people and that that is why they die so fast.

Listening to the character being described here, there are a few names that come to mind of personalities in this House that would relate to the late hon. Nsubuga. One is Dr Rugunda. The personalities of these two people are alike. The late would never get annoyed and he would never raise his voice. I wish we could emulate that character. We have talked about the attributes in these people. Why don’t we emulate them and make Uganda a better place to live in? That is the question I pose to you, honourable members. No wonder hon. Nsubuga and hon. Nobert Mao were like twins because they both had similar characters; they were soft spoken. They matched and were able to move the Democratic Party ahead.

I came to know the late honourable colleague in 1996 while we were at the university. At one point we were almost being shot at University Hall because we supported Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere. That is when I got to know the late. We have come a long way despite belonging to different parties. 

Finally, I think one of the things that stress human beings is when a person is goodhearted and kind and people take it for granted. I think none of us here can lend somebody Shs 110 million without an agreement because we have crafty human beings. However, hon. Nsubuga did that and hon. Chris Baryomunsi can bear witness because we were on the investigative team together. 

The late honourable lent somebody Shs 110 million, which had been meant for a car, without an agreement, but it was so disappointing and it stressed him a lot. When we called hon. Nsubuga, he broke down in tears in the Speaker’s Boardroom. If that gentleman has not paid that money, he should pay it to the family. (Applause) These are some of the times that people take you for granted when you are a good person. Someone lends you money on a gentleman’s agreement then you disappear and you walk around without shame.

That incident came to mind when hon. Mbabali said that the late told him that he could pay that money when he got it, after hon. Mbabali lost the court case to him.  That was late hon. Nsubuga (Member timed out.)

5.58
MR EMMANUEL KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, my official name is Ssempala Kigozi Emmanuel although I also like the pet name Ssajjalyabenne. 

THE SPEAKER: You are the one who told me that name, so what is the problem? (Laughter)

MR KIGOZI: I would like to thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. Most of what I should have said has already been mentioned. However, I would like to say that as a teacher, I have really learnt a lot and I would like to share just about three points that I have learnt this afternoon. 

The first point is that I have learnt that the Democratic Party is the strongest party we have in Uganda. (Applause) This is because when I look that side, I only see defectors and former members and people who at this time in politics detest defiance but they are defiant themselves. 

The second point is that the late hon. Matia Nsubuga Birekeraawo could have lost this election but maybe he could have been with us in this Parliament. However, because he was too nationalistic, I think he concentrated more on national duties and the Democratic Party and maybe his constituents did not understand him.

The last thing that I have learnt, and this comes from my youth, is that when we were growing maize and beans in the village, my mother would always pick the best seeds and reserve them for planting. However, at the time of planting, just like everybody knows, one has to bury the seed and it dies and in a few months, you get the best harvest. I think this is exactly why we are here. The late hon. Nsubuga - (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR ABOUD KITATTA (NRM, Bukoto County West, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring condolences from the people of Bukoto West to the family and people of Lwengo because hon. Nsubuga was the leader of Bukoto West and at the same time a colleague.

Madam Speaker, I would like to sympathise with the family because it is indeed hurting when a person dies in an accident or dies the way the hon. Nsubuga died. The family missed the last words from a friend and from a person they have been living with. We always long for someone’s last words before they die. I sympathise with the family because I am sure the family really longed for that. I have that experience because my brother passed on in the same way and his family always longed for his last words before he died.

Secondly, hon. Nsubuga Birekeraawo is remembered in greater Masaka for moving a motion to split Masaka District into four districts namely, Kalungu, Bukomansimbi, Lwengo and Masaka.  Madam Speaker, I am sure you remember during those days the struggle between Kalungu and Bukomansimbi among others. He moved the motion before the President and the President accepted to divide the greater Masaka into the present four districts. That is one reason for which he will be remembered in the greater Masaka.

Lastly - (Member timed out.)

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to extend my condolences to the family of hon. Nsubuga, the Democratic Party, the people of Bukoto South County, whom he represented in the last Parliament in this House, and Ugandans at large.

I know we can use very many words to describe the good character and the life of hon. Nsubuga but I would like to confirm what hon. Okupa has said. Many of us when we come from elections, we are really exhausted both in body and also financially. However, this man came from a by-election and found a friend of his who was financially handicapped and was about to be arrested. He got Shs 110 million and lent it to him. How many of us can do – 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, that was the money for his car.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Absolutely! It is unfortunate we left the commission before we recovered that money. However, we shall give the Speaker the brief to follow it up so that it can be recovered because the “gentleman” is a public servant. This shows you the kind heart that the late hon. Nsubuga had; he got his money and instead of buying the vehicle, he first rescued someone who was in a financial problem even when the person was not honest. We would like to thank him for that kindness.

He was a friend to many. He always wooed me to join DP but I advised him that he should make steady progress and move on but not be stuck in an old party because we shared a lot in common. I used to tell him that in Kigezi, we have since moved on and made progress. Maybe if he was here, I would convince him successfully to join. That is the progress.

Madam Speaker, his life and character were a very big commentary on our politics. Hon. Nsubuga was a member of the Opposition but he never associated himself with defiance. He never played politics of extremism. He never believed in a radical approach to politics. He never believed in belligerence and street politics. We definitely respected him.

Madam Speaker, hon. Sseggona said there is need for us to respect  each other and I agree with him, as long as we follow some of those tenets which hon. Nsubuga actually followed. He was respected across the political divide because he always gave us advice in many ways. We have a lot to learn from him as Members of Parliament as we try to run our multiparty politics. Although we have different political orientations, we should be able to learn from him and see how to live together as political players in this country.

Lastly, I think the cause of death of hon. Nsubuga is a very sad reminder to all of us about these non-communicable diseases, especially when we go past the age of 40; we are at a high risk of these challenges and we must always keep watch. When we were in the commission, we did agree, Madam Speaker, to strengthen our own clinic here in Parliament by even recruiting a specialised doctor to be a resident here so that in addition to the health insurance that we have, Members of Parliament and former Members of Parliament can regularly be checked. This is because it is a challenge and many of us are dying in this manner. I think something has to be done. (Member timed out)

6.08
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about hon. Mathias Nsubuga. I will not go back to what has been said. 

What the death of this Ugandan invites us to be is exactly the kind of things you have listened to for the last one or two hours. The question I would wish that this death does invite us to look at seriously is this: when your time comes, what will be said about you? That is a key question. My brother over there represented the kind of Uganda that continues to be illusive - stable, united, happy, free and prosperous.

The nonsense - Madam Speaker, if you allow me to use this word - of some citizens, and I speak in general terms, who are small-minded and look at everyone else in terms of our tribes or religion have got something to learn from this man who has left. The invitation to us all is that we should stop being small-minded; we should be broad-minded because in the end when the time comes, you will have to be held accountable. God will indeed ask you; He did not send you and me to this House to be divisive and narrow-minded in the way we do things. The hon. Mathias Nsubuga did represent a new Uganda that I would wish we all work for. 

Madam Speaker, he is gone but the family is left behind. What I suggest we do is pray for the family members and where possible, support them so that we are in that process of building a nation that truly represents the kind of Uganda that our brother did stand for. Thank You.

6.11
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to convey my sincere condolences, on the behalf of the people of Butaleja District, especially to the family – Mama, it is very sad; and to the children, please take heart. 

Many things have been said about the late hon. Nsubuga but as a former journalist, I had time to interact with him when he was still a Member of Parliament and I learned a few things from him. The late was a down-to-earth man who respected each and everybody in this august House. I have borrowed a leaf from the legacy of the late hon. Nsubuga that while we are in politics, we should not promote political intrigue and hatred. You know, when some people go into politics, they develop this character of “political bring him down”, which is not good for this country. 

I learnt that the late was an eloquent speaker. I used to watch the plenary sessions and when he would stand in this Parliament to speak, I wished I could also speak like him. Back home, I would stand in front of a mirror and practice to speak like a Member of Parliament. Indeed, that built my courage and that is why when I also stand on the Floor of Parliament, I emulate such people. 

I am very proud of the life of the late Nsubuga. It is very sad that he has gone too soon; 60 years are few. However, let us celebrate his life and legacy and borrow a leaf from what he has done for this country.

Secondly, many people have spoken about Pan-Africanism, but the Bible tells us very clearly that we should always do what we speak. We cannot tell others to do what we do not do. As leaders in this country, let us learn to walk the talk.

Lastly, to the family, when I lost my father, the preacher then read Psalms 23 and it has always comforted me –(Member timed out.)

6.13
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my family, the people of Nakaseke North Constituency and my behalf, I would like to register my condolences to the family, the DP fraternity and the people of Uganda at large upon the death of the late hon. Nsubuga. 

Madam Speaker, I first met the late Mathias Nsubuga in London. We met at a clearing agency. He was clearing his matooke and I had also gone to load a few things. After talking for a few minutes, my two boys who were with me showed interest in the matooke and he offered us one box of matooke. He said, “Let my sons take that matooke”. I remember that at that time, a box of matooke in London cost over £20. For somebody to give £20 to a stranger abroad was not a very easy thing. That showed his generosity.

Madam Speaker, I later on met him through association with my brothers-in-law who were in the same party with him. We became close and he started calling me mukyala. From that time, whenever he met my children, he became a mentor, like a biological uncle. Recently, after the just concluded general elections, there was a colleague of mine who had turned very hostile to me from his party because I did not support him in the election. When hon. Nsubuga heard about it, through his own initiation he mediated between us very successfully.

Madam Speaker, this is a man who had high interpersonal skills. He was a mentor, a peace maker, a nationalist and an advisor. When I was in the Executive, I used to consult him quite a lot especially on controversial issues. Whenever I was going to bring them to Parliament, he used to give me a balanced opinion. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by thanking the Almighty Allah for his life and contribution to this country. Many people come and go without leaving a trail but the late Nsubuga has left a trail. Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, close your statement.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute to the late, I would like us to follow God’s greatest commandment, which says, “Love thy neighbour as you love thyself”. The late hon. Mathias Nsubuga loved everybody. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Forty-six Members have contributed. I understand there is Mass that will be held at Nalumunye in the next few minutes; I would like to release the family to go. However, before we do that, I also wanted to say just a few things about the late hon. Nsubuga.

I first heard his name in my father’s house during the 1980 general elections. My father was the chairperson of DP in Buzaaya County. (Laughter) Before those elections, he would inform me that he was coming to Kampala to meet Kafumbe Mukasa and Mathias Nsubuga. That is how I first heard about his name. Therefore, I liked and respected him. When he came to Parliament, he also became my friend and I became a friend of the family. I visited him a number of times in his constituency for public functions but also for private ones.

When Nsubuga was a friend, it was for real. I just have two examples. When we were doing the contest for the Speaker and thereafter, the mafias in this country had paid the press to continuously malice me, he was not in Parliament but he came to my office and said he had deployed himself to dialogue with the media for me. He asked me to remain in office and say nothing and it worked. Whenever he visited my home, I would tell him to sit in the chair, which used to be my father’s, because he was his friend. That was where he would sit. Therefore, it was that kind of friendship that I had with him.

Last weekend I was busy. We had a wedding and then on Sunday, I went to Bugiri for some work with the Kyabazinga and I then went to another place. At 5 o’clock, my Principal Private Secretary (PPS) rang and said I should talk to the doctor of hon. Nsubuga because he was not well and I could see what more I could add to his treatment. Where we were, the network was not very good, so I told my assistant to drive to the main road, the Kamuli-Jinja Road, and check whether there was better reception. 

We reached there and called but the doctor was not responding. So I told my driver that we continue to Jinja; maybe by the time we get there, there would be better reception. We reached Jinja and we tried again but still failed. We decided to come to Kampala, but just as I entered my house, someone rang me and said my friend had died. It was really very traumatising. He was an exceptional person. We are really going to miss him.

We would like to thank you for taking time to pay tribute to him. I really would like to thank the Prime Minister. Yesterday, things were a bit hazy; I was not sure how we were going to move, but thank you so much for acknowledging his contribution. We extend our condolences to his family, the DP team and the country.  Let us learn from his examples.

Honourable members, today there is a night vigil at Nalumunye at his home. Tomorrow, there will be Mass at 9 o’clock at Rubaga Cathedral. After this, the body will move to Manja village, Kiseka Subcounty where he will be buried on Thursday. The final Mass will start at 10.00 a.m. and it is hoped that by 2.00 p.m. he should be laid to rest. So, Members who are able to give support, let us go and give support to the family.

I now put the question that this House pays tribute to hon. Mathias Nsubuga as proposed by the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the text of the resolutions and give it to the family. Also, one should be sent to the Democratic Party headquarters so that they can have a record of his performance. The Hansard should also be given to the family so that they can use it for future reference. Thank you very much. We are going to have the band playing the final dirge.

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Mathias Nsubuga)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for supporting this tribute. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 December 2016 at 10.00 a.m.) 
