Thursday, 6 December 2012

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. There is important business to be handled. 

I wish to report that I have been out of the country to attend the special sitting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of the African Caribbean and Pacific Countries - European Union in Paramaribo in Suriname. Suriname is in South America, just above Brazil. I led a delegation that represented our Parliament in this meeting. This conference resolved to uphold the initiative by His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni on resolving the conflict in the Great Lakes Region. Likewise, the conflict on Mali featured and it was resolved that the territorial integrity of Mali be observed. 

Although the issue of homosexuality came up, I explained the position of Parliament of Uganda, that the matter will be given due regard and concluded in accordance with the wishes of the people of Uganda.(Applause)

Honourable members, I also wish to report that our Parliament sports teams, that is the netball and football teams, have travelled to Nairobi, Kenya to join parliaments of other East African countries to participate in the games organised under the auspices of the East African Legislative Assembly. As you may recall, in 2011, our Parliament football team won the tournament in Bujumbura, Burundi. Please, join me in giving them moral support and praying for the success of our two teams, which are now in Nairobi. 

I came back last night and on arriving at the airport, I found instructions that there was a call waiting for me from the Speaker, that immediately I get back, I should be notified. So, I received a phone call from the Speaker; she briefed me on what has happened in the House and told me that today’s meeting was for purposes of taking decisions on matters that have been long discussed. That is, that we will take a vote on some matter. That is my brief; and so, I guess that is what we are going to do.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

RECOMMITTAL OF CLAUSE 9 OF THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my brief is that we were to take a vote on this matter. That is the brief. So, can we move and take this decision. It is Bills - Committee Stage.

MR KATUNTU: Can I seek some guidance, Mr Speaker? May I seek some guidance, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to welcome you back to the business of this House. It is true that when you were around, you steered this House in this particular matter to almost 95 percent of its conclusion. Yes, you have briefed us about the instructions you got from the Speaker, but the record does not reflect exactly what you are saying and the Hansard can bear us out. 

At the time we adjourned, the Speaker had given instructions to the Committee on Natural Resources and the Cabinet was supposed to be looking at a particular business and inform us on the decision they had taken. That is what the Hansard states. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I am being as honest as possible. If you have doubt in what I am saying, just take the opportunity to look at the Hansard. That is what happened; and when we adjourned, we were expecting to receive a report from the committee after that committee has received a report from Cabinet, and some of us who got sort of involved in the discussion, thought we were to appear before the committee to harmonise the Cabinet decision and ours. Whether we would disagree or not, that is another matter, but let us at least follow the rules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the appropriate time to raise those matters would be at committee stage. That is where we were going. The report of what was discussed was on amendments. Not so? (Interjections) It was at committee stage. (Interjections) Not so? So, we go to committee stage bring out those reports; hear what they have resolved on the matter - it was at committee stage that these decisions were taken.

MR KATUNTU: A committee will not report to a fellow committee. A committee will only report to Parliament. It is a committee of Parliament. It is not a committee of a committee; and the direction had been issued when the Speaker was sitting as a Speaker. She had already left the chair as chairperson and in any case, a committee never reports to a committee. A committee reports to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am informed that this Bill had been recommitted back to committee. That is what I have been told; and that there were decisions that were taken to move this Bill forward and that, at committee stage, if there are any reports - for example, I have seen a letter from the Leader of Government Business touching on those issues that are at committee stage. So, the proper stage of handling this would be at that stage, because we are not going to discuss amendments now. Are we? (Interjections) So, Leader of Government Business, what was the situation then?

3.07
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Last week, Mr Speaker, the situation in this House was very chaotic and you have probably been briefed that the House even started voting. This House started voting and because of confusion, your colleague was forced to call us back from voting. (Laughter) [HON. MEMBERS: “The Speaker.”] Yes, the Speaker – Yes; this is English. You must understand Oxford English. (Laughter) So, from that confusion, the position of voting was lost and spontaneously, we found the Speaker in the Chair, having moved away from the position of the committee. (Interjections) For that matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I listen? I am trying to get a brief of what happened in the House. (Interjections) Can I listen, please?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: That is exactly what happened. When the chairperson went back to where you are sitting, the debate was opened. The Shadow Attorney-General was talking of waving a paper, which paper we have no background on, I said here that it was not binding.(Interjections) That that paper he was raising was not binding and he complained that the minister who sat with him up to midnight was being abandoned. At that stage, we asked the Chairperson to allow the minister time to report to Cabinet what they had agreed upon, which was not binding.  (Interjections) This is the position. If it is binding, it is not binding us. It may bind you people, but it was not binding us. So, from that time, that was the confusion. 

Now, when we went back, Cabinet met. We have written to the Speaker, we copied to you and copied to the Leader of Government Business. The position of Cabinet and, therefore, the government -(Interjections)- if you have not seen it, you have not checked your papers. Please, go and check your documents. I have given you a copy through the Clerk. So, for that matter, I think we have nothing to report even to the committee for the committee to discuss because for us, we have seen nothing. So, the committee must then decide whether to report or not. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. It is on record that the government, through the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, on Tuesday, promised before all of us here that the message which had been communicated to this House regarding a side understanding of the committees would be reported to Cabinet and Cabinet would communicate back. We are representatives of the people. Is it in order for the honourable Leader of Government Business to start meandering over an obvious point, which should be communicated to us, because we are representatives of the people and the people represented are expecting a message? Is he in order? If he does not have anything to say, let him keep quiet so that we proceed ordinarily. Is he in order to meander around instead of reporting back to us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a copy of a letter written to the Speaker, signed by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business on the subject of clause 9, and the proposal by hon. Katuntu, Shadow Attorney-General and Member of Parliament for Bugweri County. The letter states:

“I would like to inform you that Cabinet is not in support of this proposal. This means Cabinet stands by its original proposal on clause 9 as stipulated in the Bill.”
That is the letter I got when I arrived. It is copied to the Deputy Speaker, copied to the Leader of the Opposition, copied to the Chairperson, Committee on Natural Resources and to the Clerk to Parliament. That is the letter. So, the way to proceed is to go and resolve this matter the way it has been presented. We go to committee stage. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”]

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is an official record of this House called the Hansard. I find this House a bit unfair to you, in the sense that we are putting you -(Ms Ruth Nankabirwa rose _)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have some order, please.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I did not want to interrupt hon. Ssekikubo, but ever since the Minister of Energy tabled a motion for recommittal, she spoke for it; we debated it; and we voted and agreed to recommit clause 9. The whole House agreed, and that is why on the subsequent day, when Parliament debated, the Speaker was always in her chair as a Chairperson of the Committee of the Whole House. When we adjourned, we adjourned when the matter was being debated at committee stage. Hon. Ssekikubo was present. Hon. Katuntu, a prominent lawyer, was present and many of us were present. Are we really in order to allow the Speaker to begin debating? (Interjections) I beg your pardon. (Interjections) It was a slip of the tongue. May I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is on a point of order.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I apologise for the slip of the tongue. To err is human. Therefore, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to persuade this House to begin debating before we have proceeded as per rule 127, which talks about how recommittal is handled in this House, yet the correct procedure which is known, is that the Speaker has to call for committee stage and then issues begin because we are debating a clause proposed by the honourable Minister of Energy. Is the hon. Ssekikubo, who is not listening to me, in order to mislead this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was recommitted to committee stage and the business on the Order Paper is Bills Committee Stage to deal with the recommittal of clause 9. That is what was done. I was not here. Hon. Ssekikubo, was it recommitted? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was recommitted to committee stage – (Members rose_)- Please, if this Bill was recommitted, that means we go to committee stage. That is what it means because that means the Bill as it stands now is at committee stage. (Interjections) That is what it means. You recommit a Bill to committee.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We may have different views on this matter as Members of Parliament, but there are facts which are already recorded, which we cannot change. Fact No.1 which we cannot change, is that a motion for the recommittal of clause 9 was passed by this House; that is a fact we cannot change any more. Fact No.2, following the adoption of that motion, the Speaker left the chair of the Speaker and assumed the chair of the Chairperson of the Committee of the Whole House; that too is something we cannot change. 

So, as you rightly observed, Mr Speaker, we expect now is begin from where we stopped, namely, that the Speaker assumes the chair of the Committee of the Whole House, and because clause 9 was recommitted, and the merits of its recommittal were argued –(Interjections)– yes, the merits of recommital were argued and the motion was passed, we have no choice under our rules, but for the Speaker to assume the chair of the Committee of the Whole House and we vote on clause 9; those are facts we cannot change anymore. 

Nobody has moved a motion, Mr Speaker, to rescind the decision which this Parliament took –(Interruption)
			
3.19
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I have respect for hon. Mwesige. In the last couple of days, we have been –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, you need to protect me from one of the wealthiest Ugandans, in the name of Hon. Sam Kutesa. (Laughter)

Every step we have taken in this House has been abandoned midway. The Leader of Government Business has even reported that at one time, we were even voting, but that did not happen. Even on the day we were supposed to have recommitted, that did not happen; and that is why the Speaker presiding over the House at that time resumed her seat and gave the instructions as reported by hon. Katuntu. Therefore, to suggest that things moved normally and, therefore, it is normal business, we come here and go back, is a misrepresentation of what happened. (Ms Kabakumba rose_) Can I conclude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have made the point. Let us hear the point of order.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The day we recommitted clause 9, it was properly recommitted using our Rules of Procedure and hon. Ssemuju was not in this House. Is he in order to mislead this House that this clause was never recommitted, even when the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, had rightly informed you that the clause was recommitted and what is remaining is voting? So, is he in order?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There were a series of events that took place and I would entreat my colleagues to be fair to the Speaker because the Speaker needs to step in after knowing the situation. On the 27th November, when there was chaos, it happened when the Speaker was in the Chair. And even on Tuesday, 4th December, the Speaker was presiding over this House in the Chair, and I want to go by rule 57 of our Rules of Procedure. Rule 57 talks about debate interrupted by adjournment of the House: “Any debate interrupted by a motion under rule 56 shall, on coming again before the House or a committee of the House, be resumed at a point where it was interrupted as if it were a continuous debate.” The Hansard can bear me witness; the Speaker was in the Chair, not in the committee, and it was at that point that, Mr Speaker, that you should allow any interventions because we had not moved to committee stage. 

For that matter, honourable members, since these are our rules, let us go by the Rules; let the Speaker continue in the Chair and preside over this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was in the Chair when the motion for recommittal was made. I had finished with the Bill; we had finished everything; we were preparing for the motion for third reading of the Bill. That is when the minister moved a motion for recommittal. We could not take the decision that day because we did not have the numbers to taken a decision on the motion for recommittal. So, the only thing that was pending before I adjourned the House that day was that motion for recommittal on this Bill; it was the motion for recommittal; then I left. 

Now, I have been informed that a decision was taken and the Bill was recommitted. (Interjections) The Bill was recommitted to committee stage. (Interjections) Clause 9 was recommitted. [HON MEMBER: “When?”] No, you are not going to ask me when, honourable member. Please, have some dignity in yourself. Do not ask me when. The clause was recommitted by a vote of this House. Those are the facts. 

So, that is why the brief from the Speaker is that what was next for me to do was to go back and take the decision on clause 9 as it was already recommitted. That is the brief I received.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have rightly said that when you were in the chair, we failed to get the numbers to recommit this clause and the House adjourned after we failed to get the numbers. 

Mr Speaker, there is no single occasion after the time you were here and we failed to get the numbers - that we have ever realised the numbers to recommit the clause. (Interjections)  If anybody has that record of the Hansard, let it be produced here, and we shall accept. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to consult. (Ms Amongi rose_)  Okay, guidance.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would appeal and request that to get a true record of what happened, we need to get the Hansard -(Interjections)- yes, because Mr Speaker, you are being told - I want to state that on 22nd November 2012, is when the motion was moved –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure –(Interjections)- she was on guidance.

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This House is composed of two sides. (Interjections) As far as this debate is concerned, I know there are two sides; and whenever there is anything that we are not clear of, Mr Speaker, I believe in the impartiality of your Chair. At the beginning of the session, you rightly said that the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, briefed you and informed you of the true record of what transpired in this House in your absence. Is the Member procedurally right to challenge the decision of the Chair; both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just requested for the Hansard to be brought. But the information I have from the clerks at Table is that a decision was taken to recommit the Bill. The Hansard is being brought. The decision that was not taken was to vote on clause 9 as it is in the Bill, but the Bill had already been recommitted. That is the information that I have. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the point of guidance I would like to seek is in respect to the last day on which we sat. The last day we sat, as the Deputy Prime Minister rightly stated, the Speaker noted that there were two issues. One issue was a harmonised position, which was rejected by the Prime Minister; and at the moment, the Prime Minister has written a letter objecting and standing by their position. So, would it be fair to ask the committee – because the Speaker guided us that the forum which met with the minister should go before the committee and the position of the Cabinet also be communicated. 

So, Mr Speaker, can you guide on whether the chairperson of the committee might not have something to say; and also, whether the side that met with the minister may have something to say. Let me be guided on that as the Hansard is being brought.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. When we come here, we are referred to as honourable members, and it is good that we own up. The Speaker was in the Chair as a chairperson. A paper was presented here by hon. Katuntu for a harmonised position on clause 9, and it was something new; so we did not accept. And I think the only way to discuss even that report is at that material time; at committee stage. The brief you got is the correct record because this clause was recommitted. And rather than spending a lot of time, I think we proceed to the committee stage and people can argue there; that is the way forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the Hansard of 22nd November, 2012. And at 5.35 p.m. -(Interjections)– can I read? You are not looking at the document I have. At 5.35 p.m., the Bill went back to Committee Stage. The following people spoke: First, was hon. Ssekikubo; then the Chairperson, hon. Tinkasiimire; Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama; hon. Tinkasiimire; Chairperson, Tinkasiimire; Peter Lokeris; Tinkasiimire; Amos Okot; Chairperson – this is at committee stage - hon. Niwagaba; hon. Ssekandi; hon. Peter Nyombi; hon. Niwagaba; hon. Muloni; hon. Niwagaba; hon. Kasule Sebunya; hon. Aleper; hon. Ann Nankabirwa; hon. Opendi; hon. Betty Amongi; hon. Ssekikubo; hon. Migereko; hon. Akena; hon. Bakkabulindi; hon. Kawoya; hon. Mariam Nalubega; hon. Amama Mbabazi; hon. Ssekikubo; hon. Oboth; hon. Ssekikubo; hon. Kabakumba; hon. Bakkabulindi; hon. Amongi; hon. Rose Namayanja; the chairperson; hon. Ssekikubo; the Chairperson – that is when the Chairperson said: 

“Honourable members, we are taking a count; give us a few minutes, the Sergeant-At-Arms, ring the bell. (A count of numbers present in the Chambers is taken). Chairperson: honourable members, we have 86 Members and yet we require 125 to take the vote. So, we are short of a few Members – yes, you were counted and you were No.86. Honourable minister, please, move for resumption of the House. Motion for the House to resume is at 6.44. 

THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES: (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report Adopted.

(House was adjourned at 6.48 p.m. until Tuesday, 27th November 2012.)”

So, when the House was adjourned to Tuesday 27th that was now to take that decision on clause 9, according to this record. Therefore, a decision was not taken. That is what happened. (Interjections) Honourable members, we have asked for a copy of the Hansard that can guide us. It is clear that on Thursday, 22nd –(Interjections)– honourable members, would you like to listen? On Thursday 22nd November, 2012, this Bill went back to committee stage, which, means that the only way it could have gone there is that a decision should have been taken for it to go back to committee stage. And it could only have gone back to committee stage through a recommittal. I think that is straightforward, Members. 

MR KATUNTU: Since Thursday the 22nd, we have sat twice. It would be erroneous on our side to refer to the record of Tuesday last week, without referring to the two sittings of the House that followed. What we are trying to do now –(Interjections)– what we are saying now is that the sittings that followed are irrelevant for purposes of the sitting on the  22nd November 2012, and that is wrong. 

3.39
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, last time, this week, when the Speaker was in the Chair as a chairperson of the committee, there is clear evidence which is known to all of you that the Speaker made a decision that we vote on the recommitted Bill. This is what happened; it is not a question of challenging –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, His Excellency the Vice-President is speaking.

MR SSEKANDI: They need sympathy. And, Mr Speaker, there is a record for that; the chairperson of the committee ordered those in favour to go on this side and those against on the other side. The fact is, Members moved on both sides. (Interjections) I think you need to consult your spiritual advisor. And as the voting was going on –(Interjections)– under what rule? I am not going to move – let us not turn this House into a theatre.  

MR SSEMUJJU: I did not want to interrupt the MP for Kyanamukaka, His Excellency the Vice-President. Mr Speaker, when we come here, we can only be referred to you or the Rules of Procedure, and not witchdoctors or spiritual doctors. Is the MP for Kyanamukaka in order to begin using unparliamentarily language by referring Members of Parliament to witchdoctors and spiritual leaders? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Everyday, before we open our sitting, we pray to God, and that is a spiritual matter. (Applause)

MR SSEKANDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. But the fact remains, honourable members, that the last time we sat here, before he took over the Chair today, a decision was made that we go to vote on recommittal of clause 9. That is the fact. Unfortunately, the voting was interrupted. So, what I am stating is in support of the fact that clause 9 was recommitted and what remained was to vote on it. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You had made a wise ruling by referring to the Hansard. Let us not rely on people’s memory. We have something on record. Can we have the Hansard of Tuesday to sort out this matter on how we ended on that day? There is something written.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is Tuesday 4th December, the day before yesterday. (Interjections) (Mr Bakkabulindi rose_) Guidance -

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I got you right in the beginning, you told us that when you came, you got a brief from the Speaker, Rt Hon. Kadaga, which I am sure is the procedure you are following. She must have briefed you on where we had reached. In light of that, and from what the Vice President has said, and from what you have read as a record of Hansard, Mr Speaker, I would like guidance. In the circumstances that you have failed to know who is telling the truth –(Interjections)– all of us are telling you that we were at committee stage. A few people are telling you that we had not reached that stage –(Interruption)- I am seeking your guidance; what is the way forward?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have listened to hon. Bakkabulindi’s submission. (Interjections)  Hon. Bakkabulindi has made a very big statement referring to the dignity and decorum of this House. I heard him say that the Speaker has failed to guide this House, yet, hon. Bakkabulindi is one of those trying to mislead the Speaker into adopting a position that is contrary to our record of Hansard of this House. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to state that the Speaker of this House has failed to guide this House when, indeed, the Speaker is guiding this House well? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I heard the honourable member clearly. He said, “The Speaker has failed to know who is telling the truth.” (Interjections) Honourable members, this is the brief from the Clerk of the House, who is also sitting at Table today: 

“The Hansard is coming. On Tuesday, as we were voting, one side pointed out that a position had been reached and then the Rt Hon. Speaker called off the voting and requested the Minister for Energy to present that position. Later, the Prime Minister requested that they be given time to consider the position and report to the committee. The committee chairperson was to present the position on the Floor of the House. Mr Speaker, I have ordered for the Hansard and the Hansard is coming.” (Applause) 

Honourable members, there is absolutely no contradiction. The contradiction that does not exist as of this stage is this; that this Bill was at Committee Stage. It is clear that this Bill was at Committee Stage. It was recommitted; it went to Committee Stage and debate took place. It was debated and this is how the matter came last Tuesday.  When it went to voting, a proposition was made. 

Now, the question is, at what stage do you receive this report? (Interjections) [HON. MEMBER: “In the committee.”] Honourable members, there have been many instances where clauses are stood over at Committee Stage. And, when we go back to Committee Stage, the chairperson reports to the committee on what has transpired. It has happened many times. The chairperson reports that on this clause, which we stood over, this is now the new position, which we have adopted. That happens all the time. 

Members, please, let us get to the root of this.

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Thank you. Mr Speaker, we are trying to establish the truth of what happened. It is good that the Clerk took note of what happened. When the House went into voting, it was called back, and the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources stood up and stated that the stand-off at that point – even the committee did not have a say. I stood up on guidance that as the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources had already raised a complaint and there was a stand-off on that clause, I needed guidance from the Speaker. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker guided that the two differing parties go back to the committee to harmonise their positions. 

We have come a long way with this Bill and I am very happy that what has brought us all the way is the consensus which, actually, you have ably guided this House on. I also still plead with you - when this clause was recommitted, the biggest Opposition party, despite the fact that we are under a multiparty dispensation, was not in the House. (Interjections) We were carrying out a national duty of electing democratic leaders of this country. When the issue was raised, we who were not there as the biggest Opposition party, Forum for Democratic Change, requested that when this recommittal takes place, we would like to have the opportunity to debate and have our input and reach a consensus. That was the basis that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Hansard I read showed that there was debate on this matter from 5.35 p.m. up to 6.46 p.m. This debate was on clause 9, which was at Committee Stage. This was on the 22nd November. So, that is the debate you had requested that if it was recommitted, there should be debate, and this debate was done. That is what the record shows. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the procedural concern I am raising emanates from the various rulings you have just made. It is not disputable that the clause was recommitted. There is no dispute that we were at Committee Stage. There is no dispute that no motion was moved to either re-open debate or move that the House resumes. There is no dispute there. 

In the last sitting of the House, the intervention of the Speaker that called off voting suggested that since there is some harmonisation trying to emerge, can’t that be looked at, at the Committee Stage? We adjourned at that level. 

You have rightly guided that even if there are other amendments to the recommitted clause, they will still come at Committee Stage. The procedural point I am raising, therefore is, why should we continue to rotate over a matter you have ruled on, once, twice, which is very clear?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, an issue is arising from colleagues as to whether a committee of Parliament can report to the other committee. We can only sort this out by looking at our Rules of Procedure. And I will invite your attention, Mr Speaker, to rule 147(e), “General functions of committees of Parliament- The functions of Committees of Parliament in addition to their specific functions under these rules shall include the following: (a), (b), (c), (d) (e)...” I will read (e); “...to report to Parliament on their functions.”

There is no way a committee of Parliament can report to another committee. I have searched throughout these rules and I have found nothing like that. The reporting of a committee of Parliament is to Parliament under Rule 147(e).

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, there is nobody who is insisting that a committee of Parliament must report to the Committee of the Whole House because the Committee of Parliament made its report on the Bill; the second reading was adopted by this House. What we are saying is that at the time we left this House, the House was in the Committee of the Whole House. That is a fact. (Interjections) At the time hon. Katuntu brought his proposals -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you Mr Speaker. The last time we handled this matter, the Leader of Government Business requested, and made a commitment; the Speaker chairing the House asked the committee to go and work in the evening of that Tuesday. She stated thus, “You can even do this work at 5.00 p.m.” At least she mentioned that. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is on a point of order, honourable member.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, if that was a responsibility given to a committee of this Parliament, is it, therefore, in order for a whole honourable minister to come and misguide the House by saying that the House was at Committee Stage when the Speaker clearly stated that the committee responsible works that evening to report back to Parliament the harmonised position? Is it in order? Why can’t we really help the country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a vote was called at Committee Stage –(Members rose_)- No, no. Wait, please; there are things you can change, but there are also things you cannot change. One of the things you cannot change is the fact that a vote was called, and the Speaker called Members away from the vote because some position had apparently been reached. But that vote was at Committee Stage; and it could only have been taken at Committee Stage because you were voting on clause 9. That vote could only have been taken at Committee Stage and not any other stage. 

Because the debate went on and the vote was called on whether to approve clause 9 or not and that was at Committee Stage, certainly –

MS AOL: Guidance, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: But I had not finished. Please resume your seat. I was still holding the Floor.

MS AOL: Guidance. Please, sit.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I had not finished. (Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, when the Leader of Government Business requested for time to harmonise the position, and the Rt Hon. Speaker of the day referred this matter to the committee, she requested that committee to even go and work that evening. She actually said that they could even sit at 5.00 p.m. of that day. Now, the chairman of that committee –(Interjections)– I need your guidance, Mr Speaker. Can the chairman of the committee report to the committee or to the House? Is he reporting to House or to the committee?

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From your ruling, it was very clear that when we were at Committee Stage and proceeding with the voting, there was an interruption because consultations were being made. Therefore, the Speaker of the day called off the voting.

Basing on the letter you read, which was written by the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, he categorically stated that the consultations were not binding.

Mr Speaker, is it, therefore, in order for our colleagues to keep insisting on something you have already made a ruling on? (Prof. Bukenya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Mwesige finish before I take the hon. Gilbert Bukenya.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the time hon. Katuntu brought in a written proposal, we were already in the Committee of the Whole House. That is a fact. At the time the Leader of Government Business requested the Speaker for more time to consult Cabinet, we were already in the Committee of the Whole House. And at the time the Chairperson, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, advised the House to go back for a harmonised position, we were in the Committee of the Whole House.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR MWESIGE: Those are facts! Those are facts! Mr Speaker, it is only proper and fair –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have the Hansard of that day. So, can I –(Interjections)-  honourable members, I now have the Hansard. Does the hon. Gilbert Bukenya still want to make a comment? Can I guide through the Hansard?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the only one in this House who has the Hansard for that day’s proceedings. Let me read it. This is Tuesday, 4 December 2012. 

“Bills Committee Stage. THE SPEAKER: May I have the opportunity to welcome back the Leader of the Opposition who has been deepening democracy in the countryside. (Applause)”

At 2.56, the Leader of Opposition spoke, but the Speaker said thus: “No, hon. Leader of the Opposition, these items are independent of each other. Honourable members, I understand the Minister of Energy and a number of Members have been working …”

Honourable members, I wish you could listen. “ … on a consensus strategy and they would want us to get a briefing. So, they have asked me to suspend for 15 minutes so that they can inform their members about the strategy. Is that okay, minister? –(Interjections)– okay, honourable members, let me suspend for 15 minutes and hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Niwagaba, the minister and hon. Odonga Otto can arm the Members with information before we get to the next stage. (House suspended at 3.03 p.m.) (On resumption, at 3.24 p.m. The Speaker presiding.) Bills Committee Stage - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already taken the vote on recommittal. What was remaining was to re-instate clause 9. That is what we are required to vote on today, and we shall go to the Division Lobbies. Honourable members, please go to the Division Lobbies. Those “For”, go to my right; and those “Against”, to my left; abstentions, find your level. (Members voted by division lobby.)”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am reading the record, please.

“THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, can I invite the Minister of Energy to come and report about the discussions on the harmonisation. (Applause) Minister of Energy, please, come. Please call the minister. Minister of Energy, please, come and report on the harmonisation. Minister of Energy, please, come and report on the harmonisation. Please, report to the House on the harmonisation. 

Order! Members, can you sit down and let me invite the minister. Minister of Energy, please, come and report on the harmonisation...”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is at Committee Stage; it is at Committee Stage. 

“...Please, report. Please, can you report to the House on harmonisation? Minister, please, report.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no. Please, Minister, can you - I invited the Minister of Energy. Leader of the Opposition, please wait. I want the minister. Please, Minister of Energy.  

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Chairperson and honourable members, you recall the last time we were here trying to conclude the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and  Production) Bill, 2012, I recommitted clause 9, which talks about the functions of the minister and my request was that the clause remains as submitted in the Bill before. What was remaining was voting because the recommittal was agreed on. 

Chairperson, as we have been waiting for this day to vote on this clause – yes, we are waiting. We have been waiting to vote because that is the stage where we had reached. Members were still desirous of trying to understand what the contentious issues were on the two key sub-clauses which give the minister powers to grant and revoke licences and also negotiate and endorse petroleum agreements. (Interjections) The various engagements, which have been going on, were to clarify to Members to have a better understanding of what is involved in the licensing process and where the Authority plays a role -(Interjections)

Honourable colleagues, as I have – the clarification which I have given to the various Members who were desirous of understanding what the role of the Authority would be in this whole process is that, when it gets to negotiating the petroleum agreements, the minister indeed liaises with the Authority. Secondly, before endorsing the petroleum agreements and granting the licences, they have to be approved by Cabinet. Thirdly, when it comes to revoking the licences, the Authority plays the role because it is the one which is supervising, monitoring and enforcing compliance of the licencees and administering the agreements. (Interjections) It recommends before the minister can again seek approval from Cabinet before the licences are revoked.

Those were the two issues, which had generated a lot of debate and that is the explanation, which has been given, discussed and I hope the Members have understood and appreciated the role which –(Interjections)- the Authority plays. [HON. MEMBERS: “Irene, we are supposed to vote.”]”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is in brackets, I don’t know what it means.

“Chairperson, I beg to report.

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, this is a point of procedure here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members. 

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, there is a point of procedure because this morning, you constituted the House as a Speaker. We dealt with business and this business of the Bill came up. Therefore, the committee was constituted. While in the Chair, as Chairperson of the committee, you advised that we vote by those against, this side. You know and some of the Members have voted. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members.

MR SSEKANDI: When you say, “No,” that will make it interesting. The fact is –(Interjections)- some people have voted. The clerk here – because –(Interjections)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Members. Order! Members.

MR SSEKANDI: I am reporting what I have seen. The Clerk on this side got a sheet of paper. (Interjections) No, I cannot have procedure. The point of procedure is this. It is on record. It is on record - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, allow the Vice-President to speak, please.

MR SSEKANDI: It is on record that we had two debates in the past. One was to pray that we recommit clause 9. When that was carried, we started debating clause 9 in the committee and debate on that clause was closed. It was. That is the record and then we adjourned to come on an appropriate day to vote. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Members.

MR SSEKANDI: I am used to that kind of behaviour. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please - 

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, it appears some people want you to reconstitute another rules committee to investigate today’s conduct. What happened is that we sat here and were directed that those in favour go this side; those in – and we did, and the clerk responsible for this side –(Interjections)- I am explaining. I think I have the right, I have -”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It went on like that. Should I continue like this? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

“THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please respect each other. Allow the Vice-President to speak.

MR SSEKANDI: I have been permitted to stand here and I will hold the Floor. The position is really - and there is evidence. There is evidence that people have started voting because they were directed this side. Making that kind of noise will not mean that is a vote. It is not a vote. We are here to persuade each other, but the procedure must be followed. Procedure must be – in the middle of voting and then you say, “We will open debate.” No, I must state the government position. It could be that yesterday or the other day, there was some unofficial talking to the minister about this and the other, and it maybe good. But if it is good, I feel, let us follow the procedure of effecting it. 

The right procedure is to say that we bring in an amendment when actually the debate was closed. The best amendment could come after the Bill has been passed. Nobody will stop you from bringing an amendment, but let us follow the procedure. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the procedure we are about to adopt is unprecedented in the rules of this House because a motion to recommit was moved. It was argued and adopted by this House. Accordingly, clause 9 stands recommitted to the Committee of the Whole House and today, you turned up – Madam Chairperson, pursuant to the proceedings you had started; we only vote on clause 9. The ruling is already on the Hansard that we vote by division lobby and Members have accordingly proceeded to the divisions to vote. That procedure as far as I am concerned, is now irreversible. I pray that we go back to the division lobbies and proceed with the voting -(Applause)- and the votes will be counted in full view of everybody. That is the way to go. There is no other way.

MR  DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. At the time I came in, the Minister of Energy was making a statement on the Floor, and this House is fully constituted. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Energy on the issues she has raised at the time when I came in. 

We have informed positions on what we want to do, especially on clause 9, which was recommitted to this House and was carried. I even wrote to the Vice-President last week seeking the same clarification. The clarification I want to seek is, we are talking about changing clause 9, to which we agreed, but no one is raising on this Floor the consequential amendments and it seems we want to make a black cover of the consequential amendments without Hansard capturing the details of the consequential amendments. 

My worry is, in the event of litigation, when there is no capture in the Hansard of the intention to pass that, what will be our fall-back position? That is what I want the Minister of Energy to help me to clarify.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, with a heavy heart. I stand to raise a few concerns. When we are elected leaders of the people, we need to act honestly, and I say this because since yesterday, I was one of the people who were invited by the line minister - the owner of the Bill - hon. Irene Muloni. We sat with her, her permanent secretary and technical staff up to around midnight yesterday. 

This morning, we resumed this meeting, and that meeting involved her ministry and I imagine the Executive and the leadership of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. The reason, colleagues, who were not party to this meeting - I wish you could just listen - I was elected to come here and discuss not to shout at people. 

We left that ministry and this afternoon, there was some middle position we were trying to come and market to both sides. This document I am holding was even typed by the Minister of Energy. I feel so bad because the honourable minister has kept quiet about that consultation and the Vice President is looking at it as casual consultations. We can shout at each other and vote, but this issue will actually remain. No amount of shouting will take away this issue. 

The Rules of Procedure being referred by the His Excellency the Vice President and my brother, the Minister of Local Government, are meant to achieve justice. Rules of Procedure are not meant to defeat justice. Do not rely on technicalities; rules are hand maids of justice. We are saying, can we move together as Parliament. We should have a negotiated position, which we must sell to the general membership of this House so that we can move together. There is a section of honourable members in this house which is crying, ‘we vote, we vote.’ Fine, go ahead and vote, but this issue is going to remain.

This form of behaviour is unprecedented because this sector is a sensitive one. We either get it right from the beginning or we end up having a curse. I really regret why I spent nights trying to reach a harmonised position and then be denied by His Excellency the Vice President so openly.

Why were we invited? Was the Executive inviting us, yet they were busy doing the opposite? Were you fooling us? How can a government indulge in foolery? How can a government be dishonest to its own Members of Parliament? 

Madam chair, I want to say that even when we were meeting, we were informed that there were consultations going on in the highest level. The talks were blessed by His Excellency the President and now you are denying it. Where is the good faith? We have walked all the way to get consensus; we have done the unprecedented. If some anarchists want to take over, so be it. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Chairperson. Colleagues, the efforts of engaging my fellow Members of Parliament was to build consensus and have a clear understanding of the issues. So, the essence of engaging a smaller community, which was strongly opposed to those two sub-clauses was to make them understand the position.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, by the time we left that meeting this afternoon the ministry had drafted a different position which we felt would be towards a win-win situation. In fact, some of us were already agreeable to a greater extent to this win-win situation.

This paper I am holding is from the ministry and I beg to lay this on the Table. 

HON. MEMBERS: Read it. 

MR KATUNTU: I think for the benefit of our colleagues, let me even read it. 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR KATUNTU: The position that we were given by the minister after discussion – when we left the ministry board room, - just a minute - this proposal was supposed to be read by the minister and it states, ‘I will propose to separate the granting from the revocation of licenses in clause 9 and provide for both of them separately. In so doing, I will also propose to merge granting of licenses together with negotiating of agreements and come up with the following amendments; substitute the current clause 9 with the following - the one people are voting on or are attempting to vote on, the minister had already proposed to substitute with what I am going to read.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please listen. 

MR KATUNTU: The minister shall be responsible for: a)Negotiating petroleum agreements with liaison with the authority, b) Endorsing petroleum agreements and granting licenses with the approval of Cabinet. Revoking licenses with the recommendation of the Authority is where the contention was such that the role of negotiating this agreement is now a shared responsibility and we have agreed. (Applause)

I think the position we wanted to sell to the Members of Parliament for the Members of Parliament Forum on Oil and Gas we had also after discussing with our technical team, madam chairperson, agreed that since the Authority is the one responsible for monitoring the sector and sees the oil companies faulting on their obligation, they can recommend to the minister to revoke the licence with the approval of Cabinet. It is a win-win situation, which we are having now.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Information Sir.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Information from honourable Leader of Government Business.

MR KATUNTU: Okay, I will give way.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I thank you, Madam Chair. I want to inform the House that this document is not binding. Let me explain. Much as it is being discussed by the minister who is part of the Executive, it is not binding because the minister has not completed the procedure of committing Cabinet. The document that has been arrived at should have come back to Cabinet, and Cabinet should adopt it. 

This is the information that I wanted to give. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Therefore, it is not binding at all.

MR KATUNTU: I have got the information. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: It is not binding and you can talk until morning without any – this is the document which we are not going to – we should go back to voting. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam chairperson, I  -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Information from hon. Muhwezi_ 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. Honourable members, lend me your ears. (Laughter) I was not present last Tuesday, but I have been present and listening to witnesses in the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beseech you to listen to each other like honourable Members of Parliament. When someone is speaking, let others give him or her opportunity.

Secondly, this matter no doubt is of a national importance. I came here and I will be honest with you. I had discussions with His Excellency the President of Uganda. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please listen.  Please, listen.

MAJ GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: Listen to me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please listen.

MAJ GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: We have to respect each other and guide this country. There is no other House except this one to help Uganda. I came here and I had a copy of the New Vision from which I read and re-read the minister’s statement and I formed up my mind on where to vote and if there is voting, I will vote. 

However, I am speaking as a revolutionary person; if we can get consensus, it is the best position [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Therefore, when I heard the words of the minister and when I heard that she had consultations whether formally or informally, it is great news. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Because, it is better for this country if we can resolve this matter amicably. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] And I think that we can, the way I see things going. Therefore, I discourage speaking on technicalities. Let us examine what is being proposed and legislate for this country. I thank you. (Applause) 

MR KATUNTU: I am concluding. I have stayed on the microphone for too long and I would like to retire. I would propose hearing from Gen Moses Ali, if Cabinet has not yet had the opportunity to look at what the minister had consulted on and discussed, it would have been reason to say, ‘Look here, we stand over this matter for a few hours - one day. Cabinet can even sit this evening and look through the proposals.’ Even us, who are leaders of the forum, have to sell this position to our colleagues. 

So, we would seek for one day, Madam Chairperson, and both sides of the argument – it is not both sides of the House but both sides of the argument - to consult and we come with a consensus. I really plead with you, honourable colleagues; can we sleep over it and have consensus? Cabinet shall meet; and the forum shall meet; and we come tomorrow or the other day and we sort out this matter. That is what I pray, Madam Chairperson. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”]”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But for all this, it is at Committee Stage.

“THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Werikhe.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I have been listening to the honourable members who have been contributing, but nowhere have I actually heard the position of the Natural Resources committee –(Applause)- because it is the committee that brought the report to the House on which the debate and the discussions were premised. Now, I hear different proposals coming forward without actually having the parent committee, which caused this debate to be on the Floor of the House, brought in the picture.

If it is the desire of the House, we need to get back to the Natural Resources Committee. It is the Natural Resources Committee that will come to the Floor of the House and report. There is no way you can harmonise without the committee of the House which was mandated to do this. 


Madam Chairperson, this is irregular. Anyone who wants to make any contribution – any consensus will only be developed through the Natural Resources Committee. I beg to submit. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Chair, the matter we are dealing with as a Parliament and as a country, is very important and very emotive. It is very ugly for the government side to appear to have a contradicting position on the Floor. It is not in our interest and it is not good for posterity. 

I would like to seek guidance from the honourable minister whether it would not be prudent now to move a motion for the House to resume. We go back, and come back when everybody is ready. I wanted to seek the guidance of the minister if that cannot be helpful.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chair, when we come to the House, we have a Leader of Government Business. I have heard claims, ‘I talked to the President’; ‘I talked to so and so.’ I can only take those as claims. But we have a Leader of Government Business and I believe that if Government had taken a different position, the Leader of Government Business should have communicated this to this House. 

I pray that we ignore these claims that, ‘I have talked to the President’ –(Interjections)- and we listen -(Interjections)- Madam Chair, I think the government position should be communicated by the Leader of Government Business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members –

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chair –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order. You were guiding the House and we must treat your Chair with decorum and respect. 

Is the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, General (Rtd), Counsel and Deputy Leader of Government Business, in order to jump from his seat, almost over the Speaker, and interfere with proceedings when the Speaker is speaking? (Laughter) Is it in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, he walks in a very interesting manner; so, you may not know whether he is walking or sitting. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chair, I always admire you for your wise ruling. This document from the minister did not follow procedure. The procedure is, after discussing, she should have reported back to Cabinet. Cabinet would then own it or disown it. As of now, if you ask us to own this document – the minister might have got clearance from one or two positions, but the Cabinet is the collective position. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, I want to request that the House adjourns until tomorrow. Tomorrow, we will have a Cabinet meeting and we shall discuss this paper and then come back with our position. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for that magnanimity because we are legislating for the whole country. It is okay to vote and defeat a side, but you leave unhappy. If there is an opportunity for consensus, let us go back to Cabinet tomorrow, then back to the committee. If there is a chance for consensus, I think we should use it. 

Minister, please, move the motion.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.20
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012” and has stood over clause 9. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
4.21
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Report adopted.)

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. While we were in the Committee Stage, the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee raised a concern that as a committee which is in charge of this sector, they have no input on what we are proceeding with. The chairperson actually literally indicated that we need to build consensus.

The guidance I am seeking is: Wouldn’t it be prudent that this issue be referred to the responsible committee from where consensus can be built before we come to discuss it in this House? I seek your guidance.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to seek guidance on an issue that is related to what hon. Beatrice Anywar has just said. If we all know that clause 9 has got consequential amendments to other clauses - I would like to also propose that we refer this issue back to the responsible committee to study those consequential amendments and report back. That will help us when deliberating on it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the Committee of Natural Resources, I would like to say since Parliament is in session, you can sit at 5 o’clock today. Look at that proposal and report to us tomorrow in the afternoon session.

On the areas affected by clause 9, since it has not been passed, there is nothing affected at the moment. But also, if consensus is sought and accepted, then the amendment may probably not affect those other clauses that hon. Niwagaba enumerated.

So, let us first get the feedback from Cabinet. I think, Attorney-General, you said you were going to look at the 23 clauses which might have been affected if clause 9 had remained as it is.

4.24
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, we looked at the entire Bill in relation to the proposed amendment. We have a list of clauses that would be affected by the recommital of clause 9. However, they are merely consequential – (Interjections)–they are not substantial. I even have them here.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please circulate the proposal from the minister. The committee can sit today and report tomorrow at lunch time.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for guiding the House into that decision. Since this is a very important Bill, not only to us Members of Parliament, but also to the entire country, I would like to suggest that as Cabinet and the Committee on Natural Resources meet tomorrow, Madam Speaker, you will recall that the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda – it is my wish and prayer – these are our religious leaders and our Motto is “For God and my Country.” You also know that sittings of House cannot commence in here before we say a prayer.

Therefore, I would like to request, as the Imam – because we cannot receive such communication from the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda, which brings together all religions, without asking Cabinet and all those who are concerned, to put into serious consideration, their views.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have settled the issue of – Cabinet is going to look at these issues tomorrow and they will come back to us. Committee on Natural Resources, please also sit, consider those proposals and give us a report – no, there is no other position. Okay, let us go to the next item.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development – what is it? Okay, let us go to the next item.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, this is what the records show. There were two directions. One was to Cabinet, which I will invite the Rt. Hon. Leader of Government Business to report on; and one to the committee, which I will ask the chair of the committee to make a statement on. The one from Cabinet?

GEN. (RTD.) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, following what happened during the last sitting, the matter on Wednesday, which was yesterday, was reported to Cabinet.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to interrupt the Leader of Government Business, but this House is guided by our rules. It has been very clear that debate on this matter was interrupted by an express request by the Leader of Government Business to consult Cabinet, come back to us and in accordance with rule 57 of our Rules of Procedure, when that happens and this House resumes, we are obliged to behave as if it were continuous debate. Accordingly, therefore, I think even before they report back - the chairperson of the committee and the Leader of Government Business - we should first go back to Committee Stage and then they report back. Mr Speaker, this is our procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to the Leader of Government Business on what Cabinet decided on the issue. 

GEN. (RTD.) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! 

GEN. (RTD.) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, accordingly, Cabinet took a decision on the document which was being waved by the Shadow Attorney-General. Cabinet, after a long discussion, did not change from the previous position. (Laughter) Therefore, there was nothing really to report to the Cabinet because we found there was nothing new.  Apparently, it seems they were sitting up to midnight without even referring to many other sections of the Bill which had covered all these issues being raised. For that matter, the position of the Cabinet is that it is not in support of these proposals. This position has been sent to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the chairman of the committee and to the Leader of the Opposition. Therefore, whatever each committee thinks about our position is for them to report. Otherwise, our position is, there is no change and therefore, we are not in support of these issues. (Interjections) I am not supposed to go to committee; I am supposed to send our information to the committee, which I did. So, whatever happens in the committee is not my business. (Laughter) 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, as a committee, indeed, we were given instructions to try and get the position from Cabinet. Yes, I got a report from the Deputy Leader of Government Business through a letter. In fact, it is copied to me as a chairperson. It is signed by hon. Moses Ali, MP. (Interjections) Would you like me to read it? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] 

It was addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Parliament of Uganda;

“Cabinet position on clause 9 on the Petroleum (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012 dated 5th December, 2012.” (Mrs Nambooze Bakireke rose_) 

Mr Speaker, protect me from hon. Nambooze, please. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: Honourable colleagues, the letter was addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker copied to the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources:

“You agreed to give us time on my request on Tuesday, 4th December 2012 during the voting on clause 9 of the Petroleum Bill to study the proposal by hon. Katuntu, Shadow Attorney-General and Member of Parliament for Bugweri County.

I would like to inform you that Cabinet is not in support of his proposal. This means, Cabinet stands by its original proposal on this clause 9 as stipulated in the Bill. I pray we proceed to vote as per your ruling. Yours,...” and signed.  (Interjections) 

I have told you I got this letter today. Now, the issue is, there is a position that the committee presented to the House which was – we have a substantive position right now where we propose that the authority would process everything with regard to licencing and revoking of the licences with the approval of the minister; that is the current position we have. And we passed that clause which precipitated the recommittal –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, let us follow; please, let him finish. 

MR WERIKHE: Honourable colleague, for us as a House, that is the position we have –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you allow the chairperson to report on what they have done; please let the chairperson report then we can deal with those. Let him say what he has to say, please.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, by the way, this time we have gone to a great extent to try and get consensus. And as Cabinet was meeting, I attended a meeting with colleagues; hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Katuntu and others. Why did I do that? I wanted to really understand exactly what had been presented on the Floor of the House. Let me tell you what we even agreed on because sometimes when we come here, you may not know how far we have come in order to arrive at the harmonised position. Most of the clauses we have had on the Floor of the House - thanks to the Rt Hon. Speaker - we have harmonised them behind the scenes. 

So, yesterday –(Interjections)– as a committee, we have not met –(Interjections)– I have told you this is a position of Cabinet, which was awaited. Now, there is no way you could cause a meeting of the committee when you have not got the position of Cabinet. The position of Cabinet is the one which was contrary to the one we had as a House. The other side did not have any position. There was a proposal which had not yet been owned by the House. So, I do not know what harmonisation you are talking about, because it was an idea that was muted while we were here and in the process, we said, let us have the position of Cabinet. And without the position of Cabinet, my committee could not have met. (Interjections) On Monday, we agreed with the members of the committee that we wait for the position of Cabinet; that was with my members. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our rules are very clear on meetings of committees, specifically rule 192, and how a committee reports to the House. 

Mr Speaker, if I quoted you right, when you were reading, it was an explicit direction that Cabinet meets and harmonises the position, but also that the committee should meet and harmonise on that position, and report back to Parliament –(Interjections)– the position that had been presented to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources.  To the best of my knowledge, we have not had a meeting like the chairman has said. So, would it be procedurally right to present a report to the House disregarding the explicit directions of the Speaker? 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also speak as a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. Aware that after doing its work, the Committee on Natural Resources presented its report with its position to this august House; the report was debated, and a position was taken earlier on. The minister recommitted; the motion was carried and debate was done. 

So, we were at a point of taking a decision; that is when the honourable Shadow Attorney-General raised an issue that they were trying to build consensus. That is when we the members of the committee represented by the chairman, contested in the last meeting of the House, that how could the minister and the Attorney-General go into consultations when the members of the committee were unaware? They were flouting the rules because there had already been a position. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, because of what happened in the previous sitting, the Leader of Government Business requested that Cabinet goes and looks at that position as had been reported by hon. Katuntu. So, there is no way the Natural Resources Committee could sit without first of all, the position of Cabinet. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, if there is any person who sticks to the rules, it is me. –(Interjections)– Because, not only do I believe in them, but I am also schooled in them. And that makes the difference between me and somebody shouting at me. 

The honourable colleague has alleged that we violated the Rules of Procedure. Can she point out which single rule I violated by consulting or by the minister consulting me and coming up with a position? 

Secondly, she is also alleging that I brought my position to this House, yet I informed this House and it is also on record that this was a negotiated position with the line minister; the owner of the Bill. Is she in order, therefore, to allege that a decision that had been arrived at by the Minister of Energy, together with the Permanent Secretary and the technical staff, to be my position? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 127(4): “When the Bill has been recommitted in respect only of some particular clause, amendment or amendments, the Committee shall consider only that amendment or those amendments and any amendment which may be moved to them, unless the Chairperson in his or her discretion, is satisfied that the clause, amendment or amendments proposed are substantial and it is necessary or desirable, to reconsider the whole Bill as provided in sub-rule (3) of this rule.” 

(5) At the conclusion of the proceedings in committee of a Bill recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular clause, amendment or amendments, the Member in charge of the Bill may move, “That the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto” and the question on it shall be put without amendment or debate.

(6) 	If the motion is agreed to, the House shall resume and the Member in charge of the Bill shall report to the House and the House may then proceed to the Third Reading of the Bill.”

Honourable members, there is a point of order raised as to whether the rules were violated in the conduct of the processes. You see, if we had got a very deep analysis of the rules, when a matter is put to vote and the vote is being carried on, can you withdraw the motion to vote on the matter? If you want to be very legalistic about the arguments on the rules - can you withdraw from vote and open debate on a matter that had been put to vote without a motion? 

We do not want to go into all that. What we want to do is this –(Honourable members rose_)- and those who stick to the rules know that when the Speaker is speaking –(Laughter)- What we want to do is that we have a situation - a rather peculiar situation - where a minister asked for recommittal of her original clause and accedes to arrangements to amend her clause which she sought to recommit and put back. It is a very strange situation. 

The minister recommitted clause 9 as it is and she wanted a vote taken on it as it is. But the minister also proceeded to accept some arrangements to again talk. This is the situation we are dealing with. Now, once the minister does that, then she has opened it up. Because if the minister herself has said, this is it, recommit; I want my clause the way it is in the Bill, period. We would have proceeded to do the discussions. But from what we have just read, the issue was re-opened. I think even Madam Speaker found herself in a difficult situation because you can no longer follow sub-rule 4 of rule 127 strictly; because new avenues were opened. And there were undertakings that this matter be referred to Cabinet and to the committee. This is the situation we are dealing with.

MR KUTESA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I have been listening to you carefully this afternoon. This afternoon, more than five times, you have ruled that when this House adjourned, it was in Committee Stage. Five times this afternoon. You have also pointed out that there was recommittal of clause 9 as was. That was last week. That was still at Committee Stage.

Subsequently, the minister may and it has indeed happened in this case, had some proposed amendments, still in the Committee Stage. It is not abnormal that even when you are in Committee Stage and there is –(Interjections)- yes, I can declare money from DFID, which I have just received. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, it is not abnormal in Committee Stage that when you have recommitted a clause, there could be proposed amendments even to the recommitted clause. But we are still in the Committee Stage. 

Therefore, if the minister did say, “Okay, let us consider what you are saying”, that can be put to vote in the Committee Stage. (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we had a problem earlier on, in stating what transpired on Tuesday. The Hansard was brought to you. You have read and understood what transpired. Is the honourable minister now in order to come back here and start narrating - misleading and diverting our minds from what you read as stated in the Hansard as the true position. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the substance of what was referred to Cabinet was at Committee Stage. So, the only way you can handle the substance of that referral can only be at the Committee Stage. (Applause) The only way you can entertain additional amendments is at Committee Stage. That is because it is a clause; it is not a motion for second reading where you are supposed to be debating the principles of the Bill. We are not at second reading where we are supposed to be debating the principles of the Bill; it is a clause. The fact that the minister opened this issue up by accepting a discussion, we can only deal with that issue now at the committee stage. The proposal for the amendment cannot be discussed by Parliament; that proposal can only be introduced at committee stage when dealing with that clause.

This is how we are going to move forward. The issue is, you have matters raised and referred to the committee, but to deal with a matter whose substance is at committee stage. If the committee is to report, what do we do with its report? Should we debate that report on an amendment?

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are making exactly the same point. Five times now - and now it is the sixth time - you have ruled that any business that can be done must be done at committee stage. The next stage, Mr Speaker, is for you to move from that Chair to here and we deal with the business. Nothing more and nothing less, because then –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, as we sit in this House, we are still expecting a report from the Committee on Natural Resources. However, is a whole honourable minister, who only appears here when there are contentious issues to vote on –(Interjections)– yes, let it be on record. After you took off time to read this Hansard where the Speaker – let me even read –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just make your point.

MS AOL: It is a point of order and that is why I want to read it out thus: “Honourable members, on the issue of the Committee on Natural Resources I would like to say, since Parliament is in session, you can sit at 5.00 o’clock today. Look at the proposal and report tomorrow during the afternoon session.” That report was supposed to be made on Wednesday during the afternoon session, which is now - today!.

So, is it in order for a whole honourable minister to come up and say that the report is supposed to be submitted to the Committee of the Whole House yet he knows very well that he should be the one guiding us on the fact that the report of the committee should be submitted to the House and not to the Committee of the Whole House? Is he in order to do that and completely order the Speaker of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said this before, but let me say it again; that we have had several instances – countless - in this House, where at committee stage, clauses become controversial and they are stood over. Members of the committee and some other Members will be asked to go, consult, and come back to inform us on what they have agreed upon; at committee stage! That is what we have been doing. Even with this very Bill, after we had passed a single clause, I adjourned for the committee to consult. When the committee returned, it did not report to the House; the Bill was at committee stage and we proceeded to discuss it and the committee said, “We now have a harmonised position on this clause” and we proceeded to deal with the Bill - at committee stage!

So, I don’t know which authority says that all reports of committees must be submitted to the House. When a matter is before the committee and it is deferred for that purpose, the report is given at that level because that is when the decision is taken. So, the question we should be asking is whether there is a report or not. But as to where it should be reported, it is very clear; you report at the level where the House was because you are not going to say that when the committee reports, the you open debate. On what?

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to wind up by saying that all these matters that honourable members are raising, can be raised when we are at the committee stage. The clause was already recommitted. So, if there is any proposed amendment to that clause, it can be tabled and voted upon, here at the committee stage, and exhausted. 

The procedure normally is that you start with the most distant of the amendments as you move closer to where the substantive amendment is. Therefore, if, Mr Speaker, you moved and sat here as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole House and anybody wanted to bring the motion they allege to have been discussed with the Minister of Energy and Minerals, they can do that so that it is debated and disposed of and we move on to the substantive matter. That is my proposal as I seek your guidance.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the concern I have, which I would like the House to be guided on, is the spirit behind the proposal, that the committee looks at that proposed amendment with the present one. Forget about the one the minister has withdrawn or the one on the harmonised position; even the present one of re-instating the original position in the Bill. I think that the key principle that should guide us as we proceed now is to address matters of consistency in our legislation.

This particular clause 9 – and I will tell you as a member of the committee who has gone through this Bill over five times – whatever amendments that come to it now have the capacity to affect over ten clauses substantially. First of all, it will affect clause 10 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are aware of that. What is the procedural point?

MS ALASO: What I am asking is, wouldn’t it be okay if the committee re-convened, received this proposal, indicated and educated the House on the substantive clauses that are going to be affected? Otherwise, we risk –(Interjections)-_just a minute; listen to me. I am going to speak only this once. Actually, I want to educate you people on the other side. We will vote and you will even take the vote so do not worry about that. Yes, because you have the numbers. What we need to worry about is that at the end of the day, the law that we are going to pass is consistent and is not going to be clumsy for the people who are going to use it. 

The rest of us, with our views, will remain just for the record. So, why you should hurry and not listen to the committee is another matter. Give the committee an opportunity to indicate to us, which clauses are going to be substantially affected and then the House moves in a consistent and acceptable manner in legislative drafting. That is my prayer, if you could guide the House along those lines.

5.20
DR GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been here debating for about an hour and a half, and it reminded me of something which happened to me in 1978, when I was at Nyeri Consolata Hospital. I had a patient who came with a carotid abscess. It was around the jaw; around the jaw there are very many vital things. One is the carotid artery, which takes blood to your brain. If you cut it, you have knocked off that person.

Then there is a nerve, which goes to your stomach. Mr Speaker, that patient had a big abscess and she was agonising in pain because this is a very painful place. My question was, do I cut or not? Or do I wait? Every hour that passed, that patient was in great pain.

I touched the abscess and the place was hot, but when I touched again, it was also pulsating. I said, this could be blood or an abscess. In the end, decided to take a knife and cut it. My expectation was blood, but what came out was pus. The patient was relieved because the pus had been removed.

We have spent almost two hours here on technicalities; on this and that; and I wanted to go home and do some other business. The issue is one; that is clause 9, which is really the abscess. Some people do not want to cut it; while others want to cut it. The only way you can help us, Mr Speaker, is for you to come down here in the chair of the chairperson. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, could you restate it because I was reading something.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, that I beg you very kindly to come down here in the chair of the Chairperson for the Committee of the Whole House, and we debate this issue, so that we and cut that abscess. I want to beg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let me say this. It does seem to me that we would have some difficulty proceeding properly. I want to do things according to the rules; that is how I always do it, and anybody who will follow me after I have made decisions can cross-check with the rules. After insulting me, they will come back and say I was right. That has happened many times. So, I respect the rules and live by them.

There are decisions that we can take at committee stage if we fail to make a proper decision or if we are not properly guided. There were issues that were referred at committee stage and the only proper time for us to deal with those issues would be at committee stage. Even if I am going to order the committee to go back and do some harmonisation with the new proposal, it would have to be at committee stage, really. I can only make that order at the committee stage when the matter is properly before me, not when I am sitting here.

If we are saying that we follow the rules, that is the only area I can make the appropriate demands on whoever has a report or whoever does not have that report, and whoever should have made a statement and has not yet made that statement on whether we should defer and give time for people to take that decision. That can only be at committee stage, really. So, when I am here, I cannot start making decisions on things that were at committee stage. I can only make those orders from committee stage. Can we do it that way?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A while ago, hon. Bukenya, former Vice-President made what sounded to me as a very serious statement; that he is sort of tired and wants to go home, yet the taxpayers are spending money on us to be here and transact business.

Mr Speaker, you are in an educative position and you are expected to give guidance to us and interpret these laws and rules that guide us. This is because your interpretation of the rules must take into account the circumstances and nature of the matter in our hands. That is what adjudicating officials do in courts of law. They do not just read a law sentence by sentence, but they must give it an interpretation. What is it that will be adversely affected if you stick to the interpretation of the law as it is in the book?

Therefore, this world is not coming to an end today. We have experienced a lot of difficulties in this House. Mr Speaker, you will agree with me, you chaired the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee in the Seventh Parliament when this Parliament took a very important decision. I remember vividly – and you will agree with me - that it was hotter than this. People were brought even from hospital beds to come and vote and be on record in this House. Those of you who were here saw everything. 

At the end of the day, when the vote was taken, I know of an honourable member who used to sit next to me, who shed tears in the lobby –(Interruption) 

MS RUTH NAKABIRWA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have listened to hon. Kassiano Wadri and I am wondering whether he is not overturning the ruling of the Speaker. I have realised that he is actually overturning your ruling –(Interjections)– you have guided on how we are going to move forward; that if there is anyone who wants to make an amendment, they can only bring it here. If one wants to debate, they will do so when we reach committee stage. 

Secondly, the honourable member is threatening by body language -(Interjections)- he is pointing at you; and pointing at everybody! Is he in order to disregard your guidance and also to impute improper motives in those who voted at that time? I was part of the House that voted then and he is imputing improper motives. Is he in order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have known the honourable Member for Terego for a while now, and I am glad he was only using his finger to point because usually, he even points with other things. –(Laughter)

Honourable members, this is what we are going to do. We are going to go to committee stage, and look at this amendment - it should be properly brought to the House; and then we will see how we move from there. I think we need to refer it properly to the committee if we are going to do it. 

Honourable members, I am sitting above my shoulders – it is a huge brain that functions very well. So, let us follow this guidance. Let us go to committee stage; get clear amendments if they are there; and we receive them; then we see how to handle them. If it is necessary for us to send them back to the committee, which has been the situation now, we will properly submit them to the committee and give them a timeframe when they will come back with a report on an amendment which is stated on the record. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you recall that this particular clause was passed initially by this House. At the stage of third reading, the ministers sought a recommittal of this particular clause; a vote was taken by Parliament to recommit clause 9. 

At the time when it came up for debate, an order for vote was ordered. At the stage for voting, proposals for amendment were entertained by the House, which, therefore, put the issue of an immediate vote into question because a debate ensued after those ones were done. 

The proper way is for us to handle this at this stage since clause 9 had some proposals. For us to do it properly, we need to look at clause 9. The minister sought to reinstate clause 9 as it is. Are there any amendments to clause 9?

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I seek to be refreshed on the text of what we are seeking to amend; because the House had already pronounced itself on it, and now the minister is coming with an amendment. So, I seek to be refreshed on the text of what we plan to amend. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: As I said, there was a position taken on clause 9 by this House, which the minister is seeking to change. The minister now on recommittal wants us to take a decision that the Bill stays as it was originally drafted. In other words, we remove the amendments that were made to clause 9.

In substance, clause 9 had been amended in aspects that give powers of licensing and revoking of licensing, negotiating and endorsing agreements to to be done by the Authority with the approval of the minister. That is what the House adopted. That the powers of licensing and revocation of licences, and the powers of negotiating and endorsing agreements, will be held by the Authority, but it would be done with the approval of the minister. That is what we adopted. 

So, the situation now, while we are at committee stage is, the minister is proposing that the amendment be removed and we revert to the initial position in the Bill, which gave the minister full powers to grant and revoke licences, and to also negotiate and endorse agreements. That is what the minister is seeking to do now. 

We were also briefed that there was an additional amendment as a result of what would be allowed under sub-clause (4) of the rule on recommittal. So, is there any other amendment? 

I want to do things properly, honourable members. If this amendment we said was harmonised and Members are back-tracking, this is the time to present it properly to the committee. Then I will take the next step because of the background of this debate. We will not take the vote now because of the background. 

What we do is to properly put this matter before the committee. However, I want the text of the proposed amendment. That is why I am asking for any amendments. What is the text? Please, let me take amendments. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do recall that when we adjourned -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you on record?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I do recall that when we adjourned, this proposal had been formally referred to the committee. I read it out and even laid it on the Table – I am seeking your guidance. What I expected is for the committee - which is already in receipt of the proposals - to have come up with a report, one way or the other. As you can see, the instruction from this House, both at committee and at the House levels, was for the chairperson and the committee to sit and consider these proposals, and then they come up with a report. What I was labouring to say when you were still seated as Speaker, was that these proposals are already with the committee because they had been referred to formally by the committee. If in your opinion they should be restated, I am ready to do that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please restate them.
 
MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I do propose that we substitute the current -(Interruption)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order under rule 78(2). Subject to discussions on the Floor of the House today, the motion to recommit was tabled, carried, debated and the Speaker ruled and there was a motion moved by hon. Kawooya to close debate. The Speaker ruled, and even at one time, appointed a time for Members to come and take a decision. When I read rule 78 it states: “The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson, upon any point, shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made under notice.”

Therefore, is it in order for the learned Member of this House to re-open debate - and one who is very informed - without first of all moving a motion under notice as subject to rule 78?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The rules on recommital are clear. Once you recommit a clause or the whole Bill and when discussions come up on that particular clause they are subject to further amendments because now they are open. Yes, we debated and that debate was on recommitting it. Now it has been recommitted - it is okay. What we want to do is to see how to move forward properly. 

So, can I hear the amendments so that we have them on record and then we take the necessary steps on handling them, so that we can take decisions properly? Hon. Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do propose that we substitute the current clause 9 with the following:

“Functions of the minister: The minister shall be responsible for - 
a)	negotiating petroleum agreements in liaison with the Authority, and with the approval of Cabinet, endorse petroleum agreements and grant licences; 

b)	revoking licences on the recommendation of the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet;

c)	initiating, developing and implementing the oil and gas policy;

d)	submitting draft legislation to Parliament;

e)	issuing petroleum regulations; 

f)	approving field development plans; 

g)	promoting and sustaining transparency in the petroleum sector; and

h)	approving data management systems and any other function incidental or consequential to his or her function.”

Mr Chairman - I am going ahead to justify - the reason I am moving this amendment is to have this responsibility shared between the Authority and the minister, and the reasons are very clear. The data upon which the minister negotiates a petroleum agreement is generated by the department within the ministry. But the other data is also generated by the monitoring institution, which is the Authority. And we also know that negotiation regarding these agreements is so technical; it is not political. 

So, we are trying to give this responsibility to the technocrats who know the nitty-gritty of this industry and the minister’s role is to lead this delegation of technocrats who are well read - they are experts, but also experienced within the sector - during negotiations. It also helps to have a system of checks and balances. We do not want a technical transaction to become a political transaction because the minister is purely political. But we also know that this industry is so strategic, and so, we want to give the minister a role.

Our initial thinking, which was passed by this House, was to have the minister approve. But we are saying, if Government is insisting that they want to be the ones negotiating and licensing at Cabinet level, then let it be a shared responsibility. 

We have also split the granting of licences and negotiating agreements because granting licences is the tail end of the negotiating process. So, we have brought negotiation and granting licences together. Then revocation, which has been put together with granting, we have brought it under (b), and there are reasons, Mr Chairman. The reasons are: The duty of monitoring the performance of this industry is now with the Authority. It is only the Authority that can tell that a particular company is in breach of its obligation created under the agreement. Therefore, the revocation can only be by the minister on recommendation of the institution that is monitoring. 

These details, honourable colleagues - and I pray you listen to me - were thoroughly discussed with the technocrats within the ministry. These proposals were analysed and appreciated by ministry officials. They do not come from my head. We thought that we needed to move together, and we felt this is the time for us not to be divided by an issue, which should unite us, because the functioning of this sector will benefit the entire country irrespective of our political affiliation. (Applause) We are doing this in good faith. 

Ordinarily, it is not easy that you will get an Opposition Member going to sit in a government ministry. I took that decision to join the minister, her staff and members of the NRM to make sure that we have a transparent and accountable sector; to make sure that we are all beneficiaries of this sector.

I have heard Members, and I have read - including the minister, sometimes saying that, “You see, in countries like Norway, Denmark, Mozambique, this role is by the minister.” The minister should have also said that in countries like Nigeria - a failed oil state - in countries like Sudan, in countries like Angola, in countries like Congo Brazaville, these functions are by the minister! And they have been so much abused by the politicians that this thing called “oil curse” is not in the abstract; it is real. You have a country like Nigeria, which is among the 10 leading producers of oil, but they still have a crisis in that industry. The majority of Nigerians have never benefited from that industry. 

Honourable colleagues, I beg you and beg this House to really see the sense. The misconception that we are legislating the President out of this process is very unfortunate. You heard the Rt Hon. Prime Minister say on the Floor that this process was to deny the President opportunity. How do you deny the President opportunity when his minister is the one leading the delegation in negotiation? In fact, the President has the discretion to remain the Minister for Oil under the Constitution such that, that responsibility is actually with him.

These are not academic arguments. It is not the first time. For those of us who were a little bit older - and hon. Sam Kutesa has just left, I am sorry. He should have reminded this House that between 1981 and 1985, the Minister of Finance was Dr Milton Obote.  We also know that until recently, the Minister of Defence has been His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Museveni. So, if it is necessary for the President to take a personal decision, he just retains the ministry and takes the decision. It is constitutional and it cannot be abused. 

So, I request that honourable members look at this amendment. It is a win-win situation. We have conceded because our original thinking was, it is only the Authority. We have walked an extra mile so that we reach a consensus? Why can’t you listen to the voices of the people? 

Mr Chairperson as Iend; we all love our country, I presume. Let us do one thing. The best we can do for this sector is to take this clause as amended. If there is no bad faith; if some people do not just want to share this responsibility and they say, “This is our preserve,” we would be looking at the motive. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before the committee now, we have three positions. The position brought back by the minister, in the Bill, as it was; the position adopted by this Committee of the Whole House and passed by the House; and the proposition now by the honourable Shadow Attorney-General. So, they are three. We need to knock off one. 

We need to go one by one, and I want to start with the initial position, which we took as this House. Okay? Can we take a decision on each please? We recommitted clause 9. The minister’s proposal is that we retain clause 9 as it is in the Bill. In other words, she does not agree with the position the House adopted. Okay? Those are two positions; and then the position presented now by the Shadow Attorney-General. So, there are three positions. Okay? 

Now, let us take a decision on whether we want to move away from the position the House had adopted so that we can pave way for the two discussions on the –

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have been patiently listening to your guidance right from the position when you were in the Chair as Speaker. You said - and I believed you - that, “Let us reach the committee stage and then we shall ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources to come up with a report.” We would ordinarily have had a different opinion, but we took your guidance seriously and right now, we are moving to knock off one position after another, yet a position was communicated and directed to the chairperson and he is here in the House. 

Ordinarily, I would have expected that we receive a report on that, then we go through all the three options you are stating. At this stage I have not heard a position as directed by the Speaker to the chairman, to have the report here, and this is the appropriate stage. We would want to receive that report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The position which was referred to the committee by the Speaker is the position which has been presented by the hon. Abdu Katuntu. Okay? That is the position which has been referred to the committee, not the initial position of the committee, because the Committee of the Whole House had taken a decision. So, the idea of coming back to recommit was to try and bring back clause 9 as it is. We have been guided that there have been discussions. So, what we want to refer to the committee if necessary - and that is what I said from the Chair. If we feel it is necessary for us to do that, we do that; there is nothing wrong with that. But at least, we can reduce them to two.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairperson, the position I have presented was for purposes of harmony- and consensus. My preference is what this House decided. But for purposes of consensus, I am ready to move an extra step and concede the earlier position. So, my movement should be put in context. It is not that I have abandoned that, but if the other side of the argument is willing to walk halfway, I am also willing to walk half way the journey and we meet somewhere. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, in other words, do we leave all the three standing? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek your guidance. I see the good spirit that is here because my understanding is that hon. Katuntu was moving an amendment, and I realised that he moved his amendment without being seconded and went ahead to talk over the amendment. But I think that is the spirit we are trying to find in this House. t As we are thinking of where to start from, I need your guidance. 

What we have now is clause 9 as passed by the House. The minister asked for recommittal and we voted on it and we agreed to recommit it. So, if hon. Katuntu made an amendment, is this amendment to what was passed or is it an amendment to what we are recommitting? 

I think, if there are any amendments, apart from clause 9 which we are recommitting as it is in the Bill, then those amendments will be what was passed; so that we get over them, clear them, and then the minister recommits his new one. Because, the other one would be cancelling what was passed. So, any amendment would be to what was passed. So, I seek guidance on whether we should not deal with the amendment first and pronounce ourselves on that and then move to the next stage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have had two positions: One position was from February when the Bill was published and brought to this House; the other position was from the time we took a decision in this House. Those were the two positions known to the Hansards of this House. After that, there were issues which we have been trying to go through and we tried to read through the Hansard to see what actually transpired. 

So, the current situation now is that there are three positions. The minister is seeking to reinstate clause 9 as it is in the Bill. In other words, she is seeking that the House removes its earlier decision on clause 9. In other words, we do away with the amendment and we revert to that position. 

Now, the harmonised position – let me call it that because of the background that has been given – the position presented by the honourable Shadow Attorney-General is the latest position and hon. Katuntu believes it is an improvement on all the others. That is his belief. So, would it not be proper for us to take a decision on the first two positions and then, if we are going to refer to the committee, we refer the two positions? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Guidance, Mr Chairman. My understanding of your earlier ruling, which was to the effect that we recommit, receive all the proposals and we refer them to the committee, was for further improvement, and maybe, it is in the committee that we will have one or two. As hon. Abdu Katuntu has said, what is being referred to as the “Katuntu proposal” is not his proposal. It was a joint proposal by him, the Minister of Energy and her technical team. (Interjections)

Therefore, since you have said we are not voting – and I do not think this oil is going to dry up this evening so that people should get the law passed and then go and exploit it and begin selling it tonight. We should not be in a hurry. Last time, the Speaker said the committee can receive these proposals, harmonise them and then bring back a harmonised position. In fact, it shouldn’t have been hon. Abdu Katuntu to present this harmonised position, but the chairperson of the committee. But I know there are colleagues who came here as though they were instructed to come here and vote, and then go and party; and I have seen that happen here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you need to be respectful to the Members.

MR SSEMUJJU: I have said “there are some” and it does not mean all of them.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the guidance you have given us, gives us a practical way forward on this matter. First, you have said there is the original position of this House. Secondly, there is re-committal by the minister. Thirdly, there is an amendment moved by hon. Katuntu. If this House decides to maintain the decision it took, as hon. Katuntu said, his amendment is not necessary – if we revert to the position of the House. If this House decides to adopt the clause as recommitted by the minister, then the contest will remain between the recommitted clauses by the minister and the amendment by hon. Katuntu. 

So, there is no other way other than beginning by pronouncing ourselves on whether the clause as recommitted should be adopted or not. When we take a decision on that - depending on the way it goes – if the House says “Nay” the clause as recommitted is rejected. Hon. Katuntu, as he said, he would have no problem with the original position of the House. If the House says, “We have adopted the clause as recommitted,” then the contest remains between the clause as recommitted and the amendment by hon. Katuntu - then the House would decide through the vote. So, Mr Chairman, you have guided properly and I beg that we proceed that way. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I do not think we should waste a lot of your time. My proposal is only relevant if there is consensus. And if there is no consensus, I hereby withdraw the amendment. And I need to be on record; because, I moved this amendment in good faith thinking that we had partners. Unfortunately, I was duped. And I will always live to regret the day I sat in hon. Muloni’s office. I thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, there are three issues on table. The earlier proposal that the House adopted as moved by the committee – the committee had strong justification when they came up with such an amendment to clause 9 of the Bill. As of now, hon. Katuntu has provided a harmonised position. 

However, my proposal is that before we deal away with any of them, it would be proper to get the input of the committee because we have not even heard from them on whether they are abandoning the earlier proposal. (Interjections) We have to listen to each other. If you have a different view, seek the authority of the Speaker and you will be given a microphone. Honourable members, let us learn to listen to each other.

I feel, it would be better that the proposal of hon. Katuntu –(Interjection)- he hasn’t withdrawn it. He was only threatening to withdraw, but he did not withdraw it. So –(Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI: I am rising on a point of order. Mr Chairman, hon. Katuntu came here clearly and said, “If there is no consensus I am withdrawing”, and he repeated it three times. Is the honourable member in order to continue disturbing the position that has already been taken by his colleague? He withdrew his amendment and we had managed to dispose of two positions now. Is he in order to continue persisting on something that has been deleted and withdrawn?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, would you like to be clear on this matter. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, a whole Minister for Sports – sometimes he thinks he is at Nakivubo. I want to make this clear. My proposal is only applicable if the other side is willing to listen and own it with me. 

Hon. Bakabulindi, it is clear that wherever you have been, you took too much. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, I am sorry; I don’t want to be carried away. 

The point I am making, and I want to be clear on this, is that if the other side of the argument is willing to move from the position they have come with, I am also ready to move. That is it. If they are not ready to move, I have no position to present. 

MR SSEKANDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, we should recall that this Bill was handled by the chairperson of this committee and was actually completed at committee stage. I think what is lacking in some of us is not to appreciate the style of drafting. The person who drafted this Bill has his own style. I will demonstrate. 

In clause 9, which is causing us a problem, the intention of the person who drafted the Bill was just to list the functions; then somewhere else, he drafted another clause stating how you carryout these functions. That is his style. And you can also see - if you look at clause 10, it only deals with establishment of the Authority. He goes to clause 11, where he states the functions of the Authority. In clause 12, he states the conduct or functions of the Authority. So, one is just giving the functions and the other is establishing it and so forth. 

What was done in respect of the functions of the minister, outlined in clause 10, is stated later in clause 59 which you passed. Clause 59 is about granting petroleum exploration licences. How does the minister carry out this function? The procedure that is followed is outlined there; and you passed it. 

What is being done now is to bring the methods in clause 59 to draft them in clause 9, so that you have two – it is a duplication because in clause 59, the Bill provides as follows: “Subject to provisions of this Act, the minister in consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Cabinet on an application duly made may grant…” and so forth. (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank His Excellency the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, for yielding the Floor. It is good that the presiding officer now was actually the presiding officer when we were conducting this business, and the record will bear me out. 

When we amended clause 9, there were supposed to be several consequential amendments to reflect the new position in clause 9. And, one of the consequential amendments was actually the very clause His Excellency the Vice-President is talking about. We passed this clause; it had been affected by our amendment in clause 9. 

Mr Chairman, you actually guided this House so that after passing this, there is going to be a process of cleaning up such that all the subsequent provisions are brought in conformity with the amendment. I thank you.
 
MR SSEKANDI: My position is that in view of the existence of the provisions under clause 59, it is not necessary to add to clause 9 what my learned friend the honourable member has added. In any case, if he wanted to do that, in his proposed amendment, which hw read out, he should have said, “delete clause 59” because it is a repetition. What he has said in clause 9 is the same thing which is echoed in clause 59. On revocation, what was done is in clause 87. Clause 59 was granting; and clause 87 was dealing with revocation. 

Actually, your concerns are addressed in those clauses. Nobody has made an application to recommit clauses 59 and 87. So, it would be a duplication, for us to add to clause 9 and change the drafting style of the person who drafted this because his clause 9 was only to outline the functions. But as to how you carry out those functions, you go to clauses 59 and 87. 

Of course, the position - if it is about consensus with Government - is that we have considered what my learned friend tabled here and as Government and Cabinet, we found that it is not necessary.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I represent Ndorwa West County in Kabale District, where a tribe known for not “beating about the bush” hails. I want to first of all appreciate the spirit of hon. Abdu Katuntu and his effort to reach consensus. Yes, I believe in consensus building, but I think the point he has put forward is, if there is still consensus on this matter, the proposal will hold. But that if there is no consensus or if we think that the window for consensus on this particular matter has closed, that proposal will not be there. That means we should now just vote to adopt either the original position or the recommitted version of this clause 9.

But through you, Mr Chairman, can I ask the Leader of Government Business to inform the House whether the window of consensus is still open or not, so that we can move forward?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, this is a sad moment. How can a Member of Parliament proceed on a matter of national importance, and state, on behalf of the more than 200 Members of Parliament on this side – he wants the Leader of Government Business to state on our entire behalf whether there is or there isn’t consensus! (Interjections) Yes, the debate in this House is always by consensus or debate on individual understanding rather than surrendering our rights to debate and receive information to move the country forward.

Mr Chairman, we are all representatives of constituencies and we each have a conscience. So, is it in order for a Member to claim that anybody for that matter can purport to speak on my behalf, as Ssekikubo Theodore, the Member of Parliament for Lwemiyaga and I abide by that? Can anybody in this country purport to present my conscience on such a matter of national importance? Are we procedurally right and is he in order, Mr Chairman, not to allow the building of consensus and moving this country forward, by only looking at the ulterior and selfish motives? Is he in order.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a point of order and I am required to rule on it, unless you are volunteering to help me rule on it, which will really save me anyway, having to rule on it. I think what the honourable member for Ndorwa was saying is based on the statement made by the mover of the amendment, given the fact that he said his motion was conditional to consensus. So, the honourable member is seeking to know whether there is still room for consensus on the matter raised by hon. Abdu Katuntu. 

But also, hon. Abdu Katuntu said that if there is no consensus, he would withdraw his amendment. I think that is where the honourable member for Ndorwa was coming from. He is now asking the Government side to confirm whether that room for consensus is still available or not as far as the proposal made by hon. Abdu Katuntu is concerned. Since what the honourable raised is within the context of the debate, he is not out of order.

LT GEN. (RT) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I think the Government position was stated after I read the letter we wrote to the Speaker of Parliament. In that letter, we said we do not support the proposal by the Shadow Attorney-General and Member of Parliament representing Bugweri County. That was very clear and we still stand by it. And since we don’t support it, there is, therefore, no consensus. I think he has a right – I respect that - to withdraw it.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In this House we are guided by rules. Rule 74(c) states as follows: “While a Member is speaking, all other Members shall be silent and shall not make unseemly interruptions.”

However, Mr Chairman, it has become a habit in this House that whenever a Member stands to speak out divergent views, there are certain honourable members who habitually interrupt. This has resulted into you giving them more time than the rest of us, yet we all represent constituencies.

Mr Chairman, I beg your indulgence that Members respect other people’s views.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, courtesy is the order of business in the House. Extreme courtesy and civility demands that you listen to those you disagree with because that is the only time you earn the right to reply. If you don’t listen to the opinion you disagree with, then you have no right of reply. So, please listen to each other and then you will earn yourself the right to respond to statements made by other people. That is the only way we can conduct civil and honourable debates. And I am in charge of ensuring that our debates are orderly and that business before us is handled with dignity and decorum. So, these issues of rising to interrupt may not be necessary. Let us just listen to each other. That is the only way we can get our feelings and move forward.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have heard from the Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali confirming that there is no consensus. That means Government is stuck to its position, which leaves only two positions: The original one, which we agreed upon before a recommital was done; and the amended one.

Mr Chairman, the guidance I am seeking is, given that we have heard from all sides - those who are against and those who are for - you have been guiding us that indeed we are legislating for the entire country. Given that this is a Bill that is on record for having taken all this time, is it not right that at this particular time, if there is no consensus that has been agreed upon, you take the roll call for the various positions and we get to know who is who, and where each one is standing? We should move on so that our names are recorded that yes, you supported this or you did not support this. And we should do it inside here without going any further.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Mr Chairman, since 8.00 a.m. this morning, our colleagues from NRM were in their caucus meeting; and from there, they proceeded straight into the august House. That means they are quite tired -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, would it not be for them to say that they are tired?

MR OLANYA: Mr Chairman, I am speaking in view of what hon. Bukenya said. (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, all of us here are people with capacity. Some of us work for 18 hours and sleep for only two hours. Some of us have spent sleepless nights, especially during campaigns, for a whole week. Is the honourable member – my dear good friend - in order to assume that the NRM side is tired when we are still kicking and vibrant? We can debate here until 9.00 a.m. tomorrow and some of us will still be here. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I already stated that if there is fatigue, it would be for the fatigued Member to raise it. Nobody shall raise the matter of another person’s fatigue on that person’s behalf. It is, therefore, not permissible; you can only state how fatigued you are, but not how fatigued somebody else is.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman, for your good guidance. Mr Chairman, the point of procedure I wanted to raise is, since the Government side has stated that there is no compromise, I really feel that the decision we are going to make here is for 33 million people and not a few Members of Parliament or a few Ugandans. We are making the decision for the future of Uganda. Therefore, I really feel that it is high time Members of Parliament decided on the way forward. 

The position of Ugandans is, they need the power to be given to the Authority, and approved by the minister. Therefore, Mr Chairman, allow us to decide by roll call. Let the names of honourable members be read. We should stand very firm and decide for this very important nation called Uganda. What we are deciding today is not for the President or any minister, but we are deciding for 100 years to come. This current Government will go, but the law we are going to make today shall remain. No one should think that we are making the law to favour him or his family.

The point of procedure I wanted to raise is, let honourable members decide, and take their firm decision and we move ahead. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the law has taken long because it is a national concern. I agree that some of us want to make a quick decision so that we can move forward. I have been going through this Constitution and I have looked at something, but before I talk about the Constitution, I believe the law we want to pass must be a bi-partisan law. Oil is for all of us; and I think we should make these decisions in a sober manner.

Sometimes, these technicalities we are raising may not be necessary as far as this law is concerned, and that is why I agree with hon. Muhwezi when he stated that some of these technicalities should not be included.

Mr Chairman, I have looked at Article 117 of the Constitution - “The responsibility of ministers” - and it states, “Ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries, and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet.” – administratively.

When you look at permanent secretaries in Article 174, basically, the functions of the permanent secretaries are clearly stated there together with those of public servants. They are the ones who give the ministers advice; who implement policies of Government; and who handle the organisation and operation of the department or ministry.

The government wants to make the minister in charge of, for example, negotiating - I am just quoting an example. Negotiating is a technical idea -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you rise on a procedural point?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I want to raise a procedural matter, but I wanted to make a small comment first. Clause 11 states the functions of the Authority and it also states about negotiating by the Authority. The procedural issue I am raising is, wouldn’t it be prudent that this law is taken back to the committee -(Interjections)- I know you want to vote.

Mr Chairman, we could pass a law, which will be challenged tomorrow, and I would propose that for purposes - we want to build consensus despite Government saying that it has closed up; but I think there should be some opening to discuss. We should take this law back to the committee, look at the proposals -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Information on procedure? The honourable member is holding the Floor and he rose on procedure and now he is taking information on his procedure? Please, no.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would propose that - (Interjections)- I know some Members are interested in voting and I am sure the Government side may be speaking on behalf of Cabinet and some Members, but not all the Members of that side might be bound by the Prime Minister’s position. 

So, what I want to propose, Mr Chairman, is that there are so many views which have been raised here. We want to be given an opportunity to go back to the committee a look at this law again; because if we amend this law as the minister wants, there are so many consequential amendments which we would need to look at. (Interjections) I am pleading with you, Mr Chairman, to allow us some time to go back to the committee - even if hon. Katuntu withdraws his motion, we could maybe restate it in another form so that we build consensus on this matter. I am asking for your  – 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to clear the air on the issue of consensus. (Interjections) While effort has been made to build consensus and create harmony, the position that hon. Katuntu presented was not the position of Government. I want to put this on record. The proposal that hon. Katuntu presented was not the position of Government. I just want to clear the air so that everyone understands that while there was effort to build consensus and harmony, that was not the position of Government and I am glad that he withdrew it. 

And further to that, the worries of hon. Nandala that the minister is going to work in isolation is not correct. The provisions in the Bill clearly indicate the relationship between the Authority and the Cabinet, and in addition, there is a directorate that is going to support the minister in carrying out this function. So, I want to assure colleagues that the provisions in the Bill are adequate to enable us manage this resource very well. 

Now, Mr Chairman, I want to move a motion that a question be put. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a motion that the question be put. Can I process it properly please - you are now ordering the Speaker? Let us have some order, please. What we are debating now is the issue on recommital. That is the motion that the honourable minister has proposed. 

But before that, hon. Abdu Katuntu had made an amendment which he conditioned on consensus - concensus being the basis of his amendment. Can I hear from the hon. Katuntu if he has any statement after hearing what the minister has said. Do you have any position on this? Hon. Abdu Katuntu, the minister has said that the position you presented was not the position of Government. In other words, she does not agree with the position you have presented. Do you have anything to say - because his motion was conditional on consensus? I thought there was only one hon. Katuntu in this House. 

MR KATUNTU: And by no imagination do I look like hon. Sebunya. Mr Chairman, I thank you very much. Ordinarily, I thought the Committee on Natural Resources would have time to go through what I had proposed together with the minister or even other Members, because at the end of the day we are going to vote individually. We are not going to vote as the Opposition or as Government. Because it is possible Government might have a position, but it could be defeated by even Members on the Government side. So, -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, I see you have a very big job to keep decorum in this House with the likes of my sister there.  (Laughter) 

So, my view and proposition is, let the Committee on Natural Resources go through these proposals -(Interjections)- well, those who think my proposition is illogical have the right to react the way they are doing, period. What can I do? But I am beseeching Government to listen to me and consider this proposal, given its history, and I will leave it at that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me take the Member from Mukono Municipality.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The issue I am seeking guidance on is that while you were seated in your Chair as the Speaker, a number of issues were raised. And I believe that the biggest crisis that can ever occur in this House is when the Speaker ceases to be taken by his word, and we do not want that to happen. We want to always be able to believe that if a Speaker makes a ruling - if our Speaker makes a promise - we shall, as a House, assist the Chair to keep that promise.  

Mr Chairman, when you were still in your Chair, as Speaker, issues were raised by hon. Alaso about the fact that this particular clause 9, if changed, will affect a number of clauses in the Bill. And you promised then that at this stage, we shall consider the issue of sending this matter to the committee for it to be harmonised. I am seeing a situation where the House is not assisting the Speaker to keep his promise and some Members are insisting that we should vote today when the Hansard has properly captured the Chair as having promised this House that there will be no voting today. 

The other issue I want to raise is the fact that at one time or another, this House has always resolved that we adjourn so that a compromise can be reached. (Interjections) What hon. Katuntu was raising here was very important; he was not raising his own issues. He was insisting that they sat with the minister and reached a compromise -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, honesty by the Members of this House -(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have deliberated for four hours. Hon. Katuntu withdrew his proposal. There is no position of hon. Katuntu anymore on the Floor of this House. Can we proceed with the two provisions on the Floor? Is the honourable member in order to derail us when there is a motion on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are all here and we have followed the proceedings. The hon. Katuntu said his motion was conditional on acceptance by the Government side. If the government does not accept it, then he withdraws his motion. Now, I asked the hon. Katuntu to state his position after the government has made this pronouncement that they do not support his amendment. I had asked him to state for me what his final position was on his amendment and he has not helped me. The question is, what is his final statement on this amendment?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As a person who floated the minority report for this Bill, I want to make a small proposal. 

Mr Chairman, the word Parliament is derived from the French word “parle” - to talk. Why are many people concerned about how best oil should be managed? It is because of the solution already proposed constitutionally under Article 237. Oil as a natural resource is supposed to be managed as a public trust for everybody. So, for people like hon. Katuntu to be concerned about best methodologies for management of oil is because of that concern, which is constitutional. 

So, John Ken-Lukyamuzi is saying, since we are finally going to come back here to pronounce ourselves on how best to move forward, why are you suffocating the several proposals which are coming up? Let us make use of them in a manner which is close to the phenomenon of parle - parliament – “talk on to discover solutions”. Thank you very much.

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, there was a time I made a statement by a famous philosopher; he said, “The reason why people do not comprehend issues, and do not articulate issues very well is because of their failure to listen carefully.” 

I heard you right after the government took a position to say, “There is no deal”; that “We are not bound by whatever agreement was taken”; “That was not the position of Cabinet; that was not the position of Government.” Hon. Katuntu made it very clear to this House that if the government disowns that position then there is no deal. You requested him to come here in front to state whether he has withdrawn it or not. I listened very carefully to what you said; and you said, “He just meandered around and he never stated it for the Hansard,  to state that, ‘Now, because the government position is that we remain with what the minister has proposed.’ he has not withdrawn it.”

The guidance I am seeking from you is, how can we proceed when he has not officially withdrawn it, and it is captured in the Hansard? I need your guidance, Mr Chairman.  

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek guidance from you and make a rejoinder to what hon. Ajedra has just said. I want to engage you underrule 53(1), which deals with withdrawal of motions. This particular rule states as follows: “A motion or an amendment to the motion may be withdrawn at the request of the mover, by leave of the House or committee before the question is put on the motion or the amendment.”

The honourable member has not sought leave of the House. He has only threatened to withdraw -(Laughter)- yes. He has only threatened. He has not sought leave of the House. So, I beg to seek your understanding and guidance on the way we should proceed because he only threatened and he has not withdrawn. Otherwise, if he is to withdraw then rule 53(1) comes into play. I beg your indulgence to explain this to us, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I know we may want to vote on this matter now, but I want to believe that this House is not short of men and women who can get together and reach a consensus on this matter. (Interjections) Members, I know the hurry, and you can choose to do it that way – I understand. But I also know that we may have the numbers in this House – and I know we have the numbers; very much so - but I believe that if you have listened carefully to the voices of members of the Inter-Religious Council from churches, mosques -(Interjections)- listen. Mr Chairman, I thought you had guided the Members earlier to listen to each other.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! Members.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Even the people of Bunyoro, where this oil we are talking about is found, have spoken. Even your own children, the students of this country have also spoken. We have listened to different individuals in this country. These are different fora. Now, do you really think –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Karuhanga, for giving way. Just to give you information regarding this particular clause 9. When you read today’s paper, you will see the Speaker of this Parliament receiving seven petitions yesterday, and in that article, it is quoted she promised the petitioners that they will be referred to the committee. So, that is the level of concern of the people of this country. (Bakabulindi rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is on procedure.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, therefore, wouldn’t it be –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, we are called honourable members because of what we are and the way we are conducting ourselves. I am rising on a point of order. It is clear that whenever there is an issue in the Bill and when the Bill is still in the committee representing this House, public opinion, for instance, from Christian groups are invited to go to the committee. The Member knows that. Is the honourable member in order, therefore, to start bringing issues of NGOs and Christian groups, which were supposed to meet the committee, at this particular stage when are already in the Committee of the Whole House? Is he in order to derail us when you had already ruled that we have got two options to vote on? Is the honourable member, Karuhanga, my friend, in order to deliberately derail us knowing very much that in your wisdom, you have already guided us that we have two stands on which we are supposed to vote on? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the procedure of this House regulates how Bills and other matters before the House are handled. When Bills are brought for first reading, they are referred to the committee. Once they are in the committee, the committee conducts what is called public hearings. That is when all the interested people, concerned people, professional people come and give input on the Bill; then the committee will report back at the vote on the motion on second reading of the Bill. Once that is done, we go to committee stage, where we are now. 

At committee stage, it is the responsibility of this House to deal with the Bill because the presumption is that you will have done your public hearing when the Bill was in the committee which is responsible for the Bill.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking your guidance. We are at committee stage -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Chairman, I know you have seen for yourself the level of arrogance and disregard for this House –(Interjections)- that as we are debating very serious matters, hon. Sam Kutesa is on phone as if he is in his bedroom. Is he, therefore, in order to disregard and abuse Parliament by transacting his private business? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The rules of this House do not even allow us to read newspapers. The rules of this House prohibit in very strict terms for a Member to receive phone calls in the Chamber when debate is going on. The Chair noted that the hon. Sam Kutesa was actually on phone. He is completely out of order. It is within his right to apologise to the House.

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, I rise to apologise to you and to the honourable members.
 
MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I was seeking your guidance. We seem to be repeating some issues. Hon. Katuntu moved his amendment - in whatever form you allowed it. We actually wanted to debate it on its merits and demerits, but debate on it was not allowed because he conditioned it to some consensus building, which I think could not be built and, therefore, he left it. But people rise on points of guidance and procedure and end up into substantive debate. We have a motion appealing for a question to be put. So, I am really at a loss, and I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I overruled that motion. Honourable member, you rose on a point of procedure and started debate. Yes, that is what happened. I cannot allow you to debate when you are rising on a point of procedure. He’s risen on a point of procedure now and if he debates, I will stop him.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You read to us the Hansard here. This Hansard was dated Tuesday, 4th this week. It was clearly noted - and in fact, I want to thank you for the time which you took reading this Hansard. And all of us understood it and we accepted that you come to the Chair and chair what the committee is going to report. In the Hansard, we had given the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, Mr Werikhe, the responsibility to come here and give us what they decided in the committee. Up to now, we have not received any report of that committee so that we can start from there. I do not see how we can go to other issues until we have got the report of that committee. And this report - you know section 193 - it should be signed by all Members and then we have it, discuss it and move ahead. But when you start talking about the minority report of hon. Katuntu and so forth, it does not help us here. 

So, Mr Chairman, I am still interested, basing from the Hansard which you read to us, to also have this report discussed and then we come to a harmonisation stage. This is a very important issue; the natural resource of oil. 

Mr Chairman, I duly thank you very much for listening because you can see how this House is very much motivated and the people outside are listening. The world is watching. So, Mr Chairman, please continue with the procedure; the Chairman of Natural Resources Committee brings us the report and we discuss it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me deal with the procedural point raised by the Member for Bushenyi Municipality. When I examined the records, when you are at committee stage, you do not refer to open-ended matters outside the House. What was referred to the committee earlier was open-ended. We are at committee stage; we need to deal with things we know. That is why, to correct the procedure in order for us to move properly is to ask the Member to state the amendment, which will be sent to the committee. That is the improvement I wanted to make so that the amendment is captured in the Hansard and we know what is being referred to the committee as Parliament. 

When the motion for that amendment was moved, hon. Katuntu made it conditional that he had moved it because as far as he was concerned, he was happy with the position passed by the House. But in the spirit of consensus, he moved ahead to accept the new formulation; but the new formulation he was proposing was conditional; that there was still consensus from the Government side. If there is no consensus from the Government side, his amendment is withdrawn.
 
I asked hon. Katuntu to come and state the final position on the matter and he made a request that he now wanted the matter to be referred to the committee. We will reach that stage.

But there are three positions, honourable members. I need a definitive withdrawal from the hon. Katuntu. Hon. Katuntu is a lawyer and he likes procedures. So, he should state this clearly for us, so that we know whether there is an amendment or there is no amendment. He is not here, hon. Katuntu?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Again I would like to commend you for your patience and consistency in your ruling so far. It is true hon. Katuntu made a conditional motion. - Listen! Amendments are introduced by motions. -The government categorically declined to concede to the amendment and you gave him the opportunity to categorically state whether he withdraws his motion. The answer he gave did not respond exactly to the question you put to him. 

In effect, that exposes his amendment to the only option left, namely, to vote on it. That is teh only option. There is no other way, because when proposals are made before this House, when proposals are made before the committee, they can either be withdrawn or disposed of by voting. 

So, hon. Katuntu is back to the House. Can he respond to your question, Mr Chairman, namely: If he withdraws his amendment or if he does not then, Mr Chairman, give us the opportunity to move the motion to put the question on his amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Please, I am the Leader of the Opposition. (Interjections) Mr Chairman, first of all, I want to put it on record that I have not received the letter the Prime Minister said he wrote to me. I have checked, till now. So, it is clear that the Prime Minister has not served me any letter till now.

Mr Chairman, I was also listening in when hon. Wadri got up to talk about how a motion is withdrawn. As you are aware, the law we want to make is a law about oil which every Ugandan is very interested in. It would be prudent that what hon. Katuntu put across should be really considered by the committee. The issue of the Prime Minister coming and saying that the government has withdrawn or does not agree he is not talking on behalf of all the MPs in this House. He is maybe talking on behalf of Cabinet, and if he is talking on behalf of Cabinet -(Interjections)- yes, he said “Cabinet” not all the MPs. All the MPs are not Cabinet!

So, what we are trying to say, Mr Chairman, is that the motion of hon. Katuntu still stands. For us we believe it can be considered and if possible be taken to the committee as he requested. I thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a procedural guidance. You rightly pointed out that hon. Katuntu put a condition to his amendment. I am seeking to know from the Chair whether the condition precedent is not satisfied, would you still need to take a vote on it? Wouldn’t it in fact be withdrawn if the condition that hon. Katuntu proposed and the government rejected, would we still task hon. Katuntu to formally withdraw a motion or proposal for amendment?
 
Mr Chairman, my procedural issue is that when it is a condition precedent - something you have to do in order to get the end result; when the first condition fails, the subsequent one would also fail.

I am, therefore, seeking your guidance, Mr Chairman, whether it would be procedurally right for us to task - in view of all that is obvious in this House that hon. Katuntu was at pain that he lost the condition - would we not proceed to another level? I am only seeking procedural guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me rule on the procedure please. The background to this is that, there were some issues raised before, and the last thing I want to do is to run away from that background, because it is important and it informs the spirit of what we are doing here. Why I keep repeating that we needed the text of what was proposed as an amendment before the House, is so that we have the text, and if it was going to be sent to somebody else, at least we have the text of what we are proposing. 

The hon. Katuntu had indicated earlier - even in the earlier sitting the Speaker said, “Honourable minister, please come and report on the consensus you have had with the honourable members.” This is on the record. That means there was an attempt made and the minister was party to it. That was then. So, what is happening today is, we are trying to put it formerly so that we have an amendment that is cleared and can be dealt with. If this House would say it wants to adopt it, there are three positions: The one presented by hon. Katuntu; the one in the Bill; and the one that this House had passed; those are the three positions in the Bill. It had initially been referred to the Committee on Natural Resources by the Speaker. 

So, the best way to handle this, in my opinion now, is for hon. Katuntu to confirm that this motion for amendment still stands then I can take a decision on the matter. But if it is withdrawn, then I will also take the next step. 

Please, let the honourable member guide us.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I would like to thank you specifically for your patience. A debate like this is certainly not easy to navigate through. Sometimes, adrenaline is so high that Members shout instead of discussing. 

I would like to put it on record that for the sake of this country, I am ready to do anything. Nobody in this country is bigger than it; I am ready to compromise anything for the sake of my country. I am ready to walk all the away such that we are in harmony for the sake of even the business in this House; I am ready to do that. I only hope I have partners the other side; and I pray I have partners the other side. 

This particular motion which I have moved, if it is given an opportunity, by colleagues, maybe in the committee - and I really want to thank hon. Werikhe; he is a Member of the ruling party, but he has done whatever is humanly possible to make this committee work reach where it has reached. I must thank you; he has been very accommodative; he has listened to all sides; and he has sat with us through late night meetings. Hon. Werikhe, you did a great job and you are obviously from Government side. He has done a great job to create consensus. 

Mr Speaker, like indeed, you did a great job throughout the last three to four weeks when we were considering this particular Bill. I want to plead to Members to give this motion a second thought. The Chairperson of the ruling party committee - I would not mind, I will appear before hon. Werikhe and try to convince Members on the Natural Resources Committee; they can come here –(Interjections)– Mr Chairperson that is my view. I do not want to be put in a straight jacket; as to whether I have withdrawn  the motion or not. That is not Abdul Katuntu; Abdul Katuntu is a man who wants to discuss and reach a consensus. Not like those who say, “You can talk until morning; we will not change”. That is not my kind of background. 

I am really thinking, Mr Speaker, that colleagues give this, maybe the last opportunity, and if it fails, so be it. Give it the last opportunity; let the committee sit, go through it - and the beauty about it is that there are many colleagues the other side who are willing to listen. It is not the entire Government side that has closed their ears; there are some Members the other side who are willing to listen. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, it is now the practice that people talk again and again. Now that you have given chance to the Shadow Attorney-General –(Interjections)– he is my senior, but not in age. I want to also re-state the position of Government. The only proof to show that this side is not in support of the other move is by taking a vote. Why are you not taking the vote? That will prove that these people are with us or not? But if you do not take a vote, how can we know whether this House or Government is speaking on behalf of the people or not?  We are now being disowned - the position of Cabinet –(Interjections)– let us take the vote; why are you refraining from that?

MR NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have heard the Shadow Attorney-General making certain statements here. He said, “I am ready to compromise; I am ready to do a, b, c and d.” Mr Chairman, I am worried. We may be creating a very dangerous precedent, where one Member of Parliament takes a stand and the rest of the House has to revolve around him.  

Mr Chairman, we have Rules of Procedure, and they were drafted in good faith. Even where consensus has failed, to me it sounds unreasonable that one person should hold the House for hours. Assuming –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the matters we are handling have indeed taken us this long and have taken a lot of patience. I have listened to the Attorney-General insinuating that the position by hon. Katuntu is a one-man’s position that is holding the entire Parliament, yet I am well associated with that position and I hope other Members are associated with the same –(Interjections)– and at this stage we are trying to find a way out. A direction was given to the Committee on Natural Resources and we are trying to come up with the best way forward. 

In view of the fact that this House has moved by consensus; and in view of the fact that in letting down of hon. Abdul’s proposal –(Interjections)- I had given notice to the Chairman for one more time that it would deliver this oil sector into the hands of persons. The frontbench of this Parliament, who are owners of oil companies and they are not declaring their interest on this matter as per our rules –(Interjections)– yes, and indeed they are stretching – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please, stay relevant on the debate. There is a matter we are dealing with; please do not bring in matters that are sessional and begin derailing the House. The stage we have reached is not a stage for that kind of talk.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I want to restate that my worry is heightened when a compromise is being rejected well aware that there is sufficient information in my hands that Members of the frontbench have interest in the oil companies that we are talking about –(Interjections)– it is a fact. And that is why they are not willing to compromise –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and dear colleagues, some of us are approaching the hey days of our lives. For somebody to stand on the Floor of this Parliament and say that the frontbench of the Government of Kaguta Museveni, have a personal interest in this matter –(Interjections)– without mentioning who these people are – Mr Chairman, some of us cannot withstand this. Is he in order that he should associate us with things we are not connected with, and without mentioning who those ministers are who have got personal interest in the oil business? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not want to take that direction. It can be the subject of a two-week debate again; and I am aware of the consequence of where this can take us. I am not prepared as Speaker to take the House along those lines; I am not and I will not. (Interjections) Please, I am the Speaker, and I have experience with such statements. They can cause us long hours of debate for no reason. So, honourable member, your point is made. Let us finalise. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate your concern not to open debate on that particular matter which has been stated by hon. Ssekikubo. But I think in the interest of the House, since you have ruled that way, I beg that either he withdraws that part of his statement or on your own discretion have it expunged from the Hansard. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I cannot use my discretion to expunge. The option which you have refused to state would be for the Member to substantiate. Is that what you want –(Interjections)– not now, please. It is a statement that has been made. Let us leave it at that. 

Honourable members, please sit; the Speaker is speaking. 

There are three positions and they are: The recommittal of the existing clause 9 as it is in the Bill. The other position is clause 9 as passed by this House; The third position is clause 9 as proposed in an amendment moved by hon. Abdul Katuntu. Those are the three positions –(Interjections)– you want to finish? Okay, please, finish.

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, even if there was a narrow window of referring the proposed amendment by hon. Katuntu to a committee, I believe that would be an exercise in futility. I say so because when you look at the two proposals, and you look at the related clauses, 11, 59 and 87 – if these two proposals were to be accepted, then they would be at variance with the other clauses in the Bill. And I think this is the point that the Vice President was making. It wouldn’t be merely a consequential amendment; they would substantially change the other clauses. 

Therefore, the best way for hon. Katuntu to move would have been, after we have dealt with clause 9, to seek a recommittal of the other clauses. The rules provide that in case there is a failure to consensus, the rules provide for voting. So, Mr Chairman, I believe we should vote on this issue and decide on it once and for all.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The point of procedure I want to raise is that a while ago, you guided the House by expressing your observations. And, the Attorney-General did not rise on a point of procedure; he did not rise on a point of order; neither did he come up to ask for clarification. 

Mr Chairman, is it procedurally okay for Members to continue to bar the chair from guiding this House and making observations so that we can ably know how to proceed as a House? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate how far we have come. My point of procedure is, one; in light of your guidance to the House; 

Two, in light of the fact that when we broke off in the previous sitting there was already a position or a suggestion; 

Three, in light of the fact that as we sit here, Members are narrowing to the position of reaching a consensus; 

Four, in light of the fact that even the government side does not want to agree on the proposed amendment, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this position is put before the Committee on Natural Resources and thereafter, whatever position takes the day. 

Mr Chairman, I plead with you and honourable colleagues that as legislators and as stakeholders and representatives of the people –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The point is made honourable member. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The procedure I am raising, Mr Chairman, is that I have not known of any precedent in this House that when you reach committee stage and there is a matter of contention, you resolve it by referring it to a committee. To me that procedure is unprecedented, and I seek your ruling on it. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. A motion has been put to resolve this matter. Mr Chairman, you are presiding over this House. The only way we can resolve this matter is through voting. So, I seek your guidance. Put the question and we vote on it, and then we move on; because it is the only way we can resolve this matter. There is no other alternative. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am standing on a point of procedure. I have two comments to make. The first one is that hon. Katuntu’s motion has put the House in a very difficult situation. Hon. Katuntu’s motion is seeking a soft landing for one reason that the issue of oil is such a hot issue in the country at the moment. I have been listening to the contributors; I think some people feel that as we are debating now to make the law for the proper management of oil, some people believe that almost 30 or 40 percent of the oil has already been taken. (Interjections) That is what they believe. I am making a statement; just listen to me.

So, as far as I am concerned, the onus is on the government to make sure that all avenues are explored; and to make sure that whatever law we put in place will be transparent enough to gain the confidence of the people. That is my concern. And that is why, Mr Chairman, I want to applaud you because you have given us opportunity to really plead with the other side because there are voters behind them who are very concerned. We have voters behind us who are very concerned. We are aware, as some people have stated, I don’t want to use the same language –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And the procedural point.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: The procedure I am seeking from you, Mr Chairman, is that we need to, first of all, sober up; and we need to search our souls. If you give us tonight, we need to read the book of Proverbs from chapter 1 to the last chapter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that where the procedure is contained? (Laughter)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Procedurally, we need to vote after we have searched our souls to make sure that the decision we make will be in the interest of the people of Uganda. This is the guidance I am seeking. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been listening, and you have properly guided this House. Unfortunately, I have been reading through the Hansard and I realised that this Parliament is the Ninth Parliament and it’s tenure spans from 2011 to 2016. . This is not the First Parliament of Uganda and it will not be the last Parliament of Uganda. 

When we came here and reported for the Ninth Parliament, I recall very well that the Bills which had not been completed by the Eighth Parliament had been saved for the Ninth Parliament to work on them. 

I have observed one thing. We are debating this Bill in a rush as if Uganda and all of us are dying tomorrow. The procedural point that I would like to raise, Mr Chairman, is whether it is a mistake for any Parliament, as long as it has not agreed that the Bill that is going to be passed is legitimate for the country; whether it is not in order for us to have that Bill passed; whether, if we don’t complete it in the five years, it cannot be saved for the next Parliament. 
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me listen to hon. Sabiiti and then we move forward. 

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable Katuntu and other Members came up with what he thought would be a compromise for everybody in this House. He laboured to put his message across. As he stated, we have two other positions as you stated; that of government - we know the functions of the minister; they are well spelt out in this Constitution. The functions we are trying to give the minister go beyond the functions that he or she is supposed to shoulder.  I heard the Attorney-General talk - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you debating now, honourable member?

MR SABIITI: I am trying to seek for your guidance on this. Please allow me. I have been quiet here. This concerns all of us. The Attorney-General is given specific functions in this Constitution. Allow me to read just part of them:  “Subject to certain specific functions in this Constitution -(Interjection)-  just part of it. It reads: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, no contract, no treaty, convention, no document by whatever name called to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General except in such cases and subject to such conditions that Parliament may by law prescribe.”

The Attorney-General has all the powers to advise a minister and the President as regards this oil. So, when the Executive insists on having a minister, who is again a minister –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Point of procedure, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the fact that hon. Jack Sabiiti has been quiet and so, he deserves to be listened to. Unfortunately, as you have guided the House, this is not time for debate. He stood on a point of procedure, but he is now debating. There are many colleagues here who may have also wanted to debate, but we decided that we don’t debate and just raise pints of procedure. In the circumstances, are we really proceeding in the right manner, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we have some order. Honourable members, I would like to remind you that we are not debating any matter. The honourable member rose to only seek guidance from the Speaker, but opted to debate. So, he loses the right to seek guidance from the Speaker. 

MR TODWONG: Thank you. Mr Chairman, throughout my life experiences I have never seen leaders gathered and failing to decide. We have sat here for the last four hours, actually five, and it is now coming to 8.00 p.m., rotating around the same issue and failing to make a decision.

Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your guidance in line with rule 84 (1), which I will read later under questions to be decided by majority.

But we need to know that we are a House of democrats and democracy dictates that the majority take the day though not necessarily disregarding the interests of the minority. The reason we are called a Parliament is because we have to debate and move others through convictions.

But for the last four or so hours we have been debating indefinitely. While some people have been swayed, others have dropped their side. But there are also those who are willing to vote and they are the majority.
Mr Chairman, rule 84(1) states: “Except as otherwise prescribed by the Constitution or any law consistent with the Constitution all questions proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting.” I now wonder why we are failing to take a decision on this matter, Mr Chairman. I propose that you put the question to vote.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we have come a long way. The Bill before us was extensively debated during the motion for its second reading. The Bill was committed to the Committee of the Whole House and amendments were made. Indeed, that committee completed its work. What we are dealing with now is the terminal end regarding one clause that was recommitted.

You said there are three positions, and I agree with you on that, Mr Chairman. But in these three positions, we really have two questions to determine. The first question is whether we should adopt the motion of the minister recommitting clause 9. The second question is whether the amendment moved by hon. Abdu Katuntu should be adopted or not. May I now move, Mr Chairman that –(Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS: Order, procedure.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I am moving a motion and I pray for your protection. I pray for your protection because I am moving a motion. May I now move that the question on the motion moved by the minister to recommit clause 9 and adopt it, be now put. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I am a Member of this Ninth Parliament –(Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS: We are also Members.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am entitled to a point of order. The honourable minister was moving that we proceed to vote on this matter in view of three lines. But rule 85(1) and (2) state: “A Member shall not, in or before the House or any committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he/she has direct pecuniary interest unless he/she has declared that  nature of interest to the House. 

A Member having any interests in any matter before the House shall declare the nature of his/her interest to the matter and shall not vote on any question related to that matter.”

Mr Chairman, I moved here that Members of the front bench have a pecuniary interest in this matter of oil and indeed, – (Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS: Order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: You have kept quiet about it and allowing them to vote on a matter where they have a pecuniary interest in? You have also allowed them to participate in the discussions? 

So, is the minister in order to move that a question be put knowing well that some Members of the front bench have pecuniary interest in this matter and you are keeping quiet about it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I need to rule on this order. So, please allow me to do that. The rule cited relates to very specific issues where you deal with matters whose subject is the decision of the committee or the House and where a Member is part of, but that Member has pecuniary interest, which they have to declare. 

However, I would like to point out that that rule does not apply to a Bill. This is because a Bill is usually passed by the entire Parliament after being debated. The number of Members required to pass a Bill is known to the House. So, that will not be a requirement that is necessary as we take a decision on a matter in a Bill. That a Member declares their interest in a Bill? I am not so sure whether anybody here has pecuniary interest in this Bill. The point here is that a Bill is a Bill. Can anybody have pecuniary interest in a Bill? Is it possible? No, it is not possible. So, the order is not sustained. 

Honourable members, I stated that there are three positions. There is a request from the honourable member who moved the third position of the amendment that this matter be referred to committee. We need that to be decided by the House. Should we refer these particular three amendments to the committee –(Interjections)- or is the House possessed with the sufficient time to deal with it? That is the issue we need to decide, because once we have decided on that, then it will go to the committee or wherever. Is that okay?

MR AKENA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking your guidance on the Hansard of 4th December, which you read to the House. According to the Hansard, that matter was already referred to the Committee on Natural Resources. So, I am seeking your guidance as to how it comes back to the Floor before the committee has sat to address that matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the issue is, at the time slotted for the committee to report, the committee did not report; it had no report. Should that stop the House from taking a decision? Because it is true it was referred to the committee - honourable members, please let us be in the same House.

It was referred to the committee, but at the time appointed for the committee to report, there was no report. So, what happens?

MRS JOY ONGOM: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for the way we are endeavouring to bring this to a harmonised position. At this moment, you have said we have three issues and we are trying to decide whether we are to take it to the committee or not.

If we are to check rule 127(4), it states, when a Bill has been recommitted in part or the whole, then the chairperson of a committee has got to consent or disagree. In this particular case, the chairperson of the committee – when the Speaker ruled that it has to be taken to a committee, the chairperson said he received a letter from the Cabinet just today. How dare they sit as a committee to report to this House? Is it not procedurally enough for us to gather these three positions and give them to the chairperson so that the Committee on Natural Resources considers them? Their position will be accepted wholly by this House. That is my submission, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The chairperson referred to in rule 127(4), is me, not the other chairperson.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I think we are now crystallising to the terminus of this debate. It is true that the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources received the government position on the Katuntu proposal today, but the Committee on Natural Resources has not had the time to sit. 

In light of the assignment that had earlier been forwarded to the committee to consider those proposals, I think it would only be fair that we give some timeframe to the committee to look at the three issues and get back to the House. This is because the committee has not yet sat and yet Parliament had already forwarded the matter to the committee. We expect to get a report from the committee, perhaps by next week.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we cannot start giving a timeframe to the committee when this House has not yet taken a decision on whether the matter should go to the committee or not. So, now, we expect to take a decision on whether the matter should go to the committee or not and we have to vote. The only way this House can take a decision is by voting.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank all honourable colleagues for their submissions. I have also been listening and this Bill has been before this House for some good time. We have caucused; we have gone to workshops; we have met in corridors; and we have talked about it several times.

Mr Chairman, I believe that whatever we have not discussed outside for all this time and before today, we shall not make any difference. For that matter, I pray that we vote and proceed with other things because there are many other issues outside there, which are waiting for us.

I can assure you Members that whether you do not want to vote now, we shall not change whatever we have decided. Even if we say we take it back to the committee, we shall not change anything. Let us not waste time. People are dying in hospitals and we need to discuss issues of health and education. Why should we waste all the time when we are already decided? Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, we are about to reach a decision on whether the issue at hand should be referred to the committee. I, therefore, suggest that you put the question and we decide on that.

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I would like to thank the honourable House for the interest they have shown in this debate. 

Mr Chairman, you have asked whether we should send those three positions to the committee or not. We should not forget that we have debated those positions since we started and you were in that Chair that time. There is nothing new, including the amendment being moved by hon. Katuntu. 

People have their views and positions. I would like to propose that taking these issues to the committee is not going to help this House. Since we have failed to generate consensus, it will not be generated even when you go to the committee. I, therefore, propose that we decide on which direction to take. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of order.  The honourable colleague holding the Floor is stating that - in her opinion of course - whatever undertaking the committee is referred to concerning this issue, it cannot help this House.

Mr Chairman, with regard to our method of work, the committee is put in place to act on behalf of this Parliament and, actually, it is the core business that propels the Parliament forward on various activities. Is the honourable member in order to disregard the use and importance of the committee that this Parliament has put in place? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the issue here is that the committee had finished its work on the Bill and there were some issues that were delicate, and were thus referred to the committee. Time and again we did that and then came and resolved them.

Honourable members, the final decision rests with the House. Anything that is done outside the House is presumably done on behalf of the House, and the House takes the final decision on any of those matters. 

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling. What you said is what I was going to conclude with. This is the time for Ugandans to know their leaders, and I really want you to let us show our country, on which sides we belong. 

I would like to propose that we have delayed this process long enough and we should not delay it anymore. Put the question so that those who are claiming that there are many people supporting their position can be seen. I am ready to vote. 

May I, therefore, move that a question be put? We can start with hon. Katuntu’s motion and settle that one. We can then go to the recommittal and settle that also so that we move forward. Otherwise, the way I see it, this stalemate will not end if we do not vote. Why are we running away from voting? Why are we scared?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is an issue that we need to resolve. Do we send it to committee or do we take the decision ourselves? –(Interjections) 

Honourable members, do we need to debate this particular issue; whether the decision should go to committee or not? Should we debate it? [HON. MEMBERS: “No - Yes.”] You want to debate it? [HON. MEMBERS: “No - Yes.”] 

Okay. The decision we need to take now is whether we send this matter to committee. Then why are we standing again? If that is the decision we want to take, that this matter goes to committee or not. So, how do we take the vote? By show of hands? Should we do roll-call and tally? 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I am at a loss and I need to be helped. This decision was already decided upon on Tuesday. (Interjections) Honourable colleagues, I wish you could listen to each other; that is why we are called “Honourable”. I see hon. Kabakumba making a lot of noise.

Mr Chairman, a decision was made on Tuesday and the matter was referred to the committee. Unfortunately, the Executive did not give the committee the information until today. Therefore, that position still stands because it was the Chair that ruled that day. For us to now go on something that the Speaker had already made a ruling on, I do not understand.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, can we decide on this? Honourable members, it is true that reference was made to the committee. That is true. When should the committee have reported? It was given a specific time to report, not so? The Speaker said -

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairperson, the guidance I am seeking is, are we trying to establish a practice that whenever an amendment is moved in the committee, you send it - Is that what you want? Then you do not know the purpose of those committees. The purpose of those committees was that when the Bill is introduced for the First Reading, you send it to the committee for the committee to help you get ideas about the Bill. This is so that when you come to debate, you have some material to help you debate. The general principle of this Bill was really debated. The committee handled it; we debated and there is nothing, which we do not know and which we think we are going to know from the committee. So, this is our committee.

In any case, this is a committee - originally when we started, there were people doubting whether a committee can report to a committee and they were from that side. You doubted that a committee of the House cannot report to this committee. Now you are the ones asking the same committee to go - double standards!

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that the question on the motion to refer the matter to the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources be put. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the beginning, you led us through the Hansard and in there, it was clearly indicated that the Speaker had made a ruling that this matter goes to the committee. I wish to engage you to look at our Rules of Procedure - rule 78(1). With your permission, Mr Chairman, I beg to read; it is talking about the decision of the Speaker or chairperson: (1) “The Speaker or the chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee.

(2) The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”

Mr Chairman, a decision had already been taken on this matter. (Interjections) Yes, the Hansard has just been read to us. The Chair read it when he was Speaker a while ago. This has already been done -(Interjections)- no, I think this time you are not correct -(Interjections)- that rule is very clear. Unless we apply that rule, there is no way. Can you, Mr Chairman, give us guidance on this rule, whether it does not apply? I seek your guidance, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is what the Speaker said: “Honourable members, I think we have settled the issue. Cabinet is going to look at these issues tomorrow and they will come back to us. Committee on Natural Resources please also sit, consider those proposals and give us a report - no, there is no other position. Okay. Let us go to the next item.”

But what was the Committee on National Resources going to discuss? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, as enshrined in the Hansard, the Committee on Natural Resources was supposed to receive positions from the stakeholders who happened to be the government side, and then the side of other colleagues. Now, there was no way the Committee on Natural Resources was going to come up with a report when there was no material to process the report.

I received the letter of the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister today, on behalf of the committee. That my position, and in any case, the position of Government was that they stand by what is enshrined in the Bill. So, really, the committee had nothing to process. If there were no materials for us to process as a committee, there could be no report. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, there is a motion on the Floor that the question be put. I want to refer the chair and the august House to our Rules of Procedure. Rule 72(1):”Motion for closure of debate: After a question has been  proposed in the House or in Committee and debated, a Member may move that ‘The question be now put...” like it has been done now, “....and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House...” -(Interjections)- “...or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question, “That the question be now put,” shall be put forthwith and decided without amendment or debate.”

In light of the fact that we have a motion now after a debate that has taken five hours, is it procedurally correct for us, Mr Chairperson, to continue meandering around, debating and debating the issue and ignoring the motion? And I want to add this. Mr Chairperson, I have the advantage which very few Members here have. I have been in the CA; in the Sixth Parliament; in the Seventh Parliament; and in the Eighth Parliament. I have never seen the House revolving around an issue -(Interjections)- and failing to take a decision like this -(Interjections)- I have never seen it.  [HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”] Is there something I do not understand now? I have been here, and I have been following, and unless there is something I do not understand, really, we should take a decision on the matter and have the debate closed. [HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”] In any event, the so-called “Katuntu motion”, in my view, cannot stand now. [HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”] 

The “Katuntu motion” was a conditional motion. I was here; I have the greatest respect for the hon. Katuntu. Mr Chairman, I have the greatest respect for you; I really admire your great patience and your quest to get consensus. But the hon. Katuntu in his motion said, he was raising his motion –[HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”]- And he was making it conditional on the government side accepting it. And the hierarchy of the government made so many assertions –(Interjections)- regarding what the hon. Katuntu said. The condition that the hon. Katuntu had asked for –[HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”]– was not accepted -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! Order! Honourable member for Terego.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am constrained to rise on a point of order against my long-time friend, hon. Rukutana. He did make mention of Rule 72, which in his citation and reading was a clear contravention of rule 78(2) over which I had sought guidance a while ago, because the matter which is before us was already substantively ruled upon by the Speaker. It is contained in the Hansard. It is there. The Hansard has been read; we have got copies of the Hansard. 

Therefore, for the honourable colleague to come and suggest that we go and we meander around and we go back to undo what the Speaker had already ruled upon, is he in order to offend rule 78(2) in his suggestion. Is he in order? Rule 78 has been offended, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in my opening communication I indicated to you that we had a discussion with the Speaker who had made the initial decision on this, which I have read from the Hansard, and I communicated to you what my brief was, for today’s sitting from the Speaker; that they had gone far and there was need to conclude this matter on the basis of what direction she gave me. 

It is true that these matters were referred to the committee. It is also true that the matter that was specifically referred to the committee was not clear. Was the committee going to wait for direction from the cabinet and take a decision on that or opinion of Cabinet or things like that? 

Today, what we decided to do was to correct the general procedures so that we move properly; so that we state the amendment on the record. Which amendment was supposed to be referred to the - I read the Hansard for those of you who were here. It does not capture what the hon. Katuntu read for us this afternoon. 

So, the issue is, we are referring this matter to a committee to achieve something. Yes? We are referring it to a committee to achieve something. What is that something? That something is that we come back to the House and tell us that this is the position. The question which we should be asking now is, are we able to take that decision without having to refer to the committee? What value do we add to these proposals which have been clearly outlined? They are three: The one proposed by hon. Katuntu which has been rejected by the government; the one we passed here as a House is the one which is being recommitted and the minister is bringing back the proposal in the old provision in the Bill. So, what are we achieving by sending this matter to the committee? This is why we needed to have this discussion so that we can take the decision. Okay? Can we take a decision on this matter, honourable members?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the rule hon. Kassiano Wadri has read is part of our Rules of Procedure. We know that we had the matter of a near riot in Parliament; it was referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The chairperson came back and said they had difficulties in proceeding and asked for more time. The matter was never recalled. 

When a matter is referred to a committee by the Speaker and the rules say as hon. Kassiano Wadri has read, that you can only reverse that decision by a motion for which we give a notice - because my own understanding is that something which has been referred to the committee does not have a value to add or a substantive effect to what we are debating. Parliament must receive a report. Actually, when you read the Hansard, even that particular proposal by hon. Katuntu and hon. Muloni, the ruling of the Speaker was that they circulate that to every Member of Parliament. Up to now, I have not received my copy –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not in the Hansard.

MR SSEMUJJU: But hon. Speaker -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not in the Hansard. The circulation is not in the Hansard. 

MR SSEMUJJU: On the day that proposal was brought here, hon. Abdu Katuntu read it. He even tabled it on the Table and that matter was referred to the committee. I do not know why you are now trying to find something else to refer to the committee when there is already one referred to the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I read what the hon. Katuntu said. It does not say this. I read it in the Hansard. It is here. Okay? I read it here. So, we need to take a decision on this matter and I am going to request that we take a decision. Yes, procedure?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have just heard from the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. In reference to what was guided on the Hansard that the committee receives a position of Government and from other dissenting views, we can say the Katuntu position or any other, and then report back. The chairperson has just told us that he received the report only today, and from our side, he has not also officially received it. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Chairman, that the position of the government, whether to refuse it or to accept it, goes to the committee when it is sitting –(Interjections)- then from there, they take that position and bring it to the House and we proceed? Wouldn’t that be the appropriate procedure, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the spirit under which this referral was made by the Speaker was that the honourable minister had reached some agreement with some Members. That was the spirit; that there was discussion between the minister and the other honourable members. That was the spirit which was referred to the committee. Not so? Do you want me to read for you the Hansard again?  [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] That is what was referred to the committee. That, “I understand the minister and the people have reached some agreements, and for purposes of proceeding properly, we need to have this harmonised. Can we go and have this thing done?” Now, it comes out that there was nothing like that; that was what the committee was supposed to look at. But now there is no basis for this. 

In other words, the minister does not have any other position to take to the committee. I am reading for you the spirit of what was referred to the committee. What was referred to the committee was not an open thing. It was based on the consensus; the words of the Speaker are here. That because of the – I wish I could find the actual – this was after there was even - the vote was called off after – but that is the situation which was referred to the committee. Okay? So, we are clear on this. Yes? 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The matter under contention at the moment is not about the worthiness of the motion, but it is about setting a precedent. We have a rule, rule 78(2), and it provides that an appeal on a matter which has already been decided upon by the Speaker is made by way of motion. So, what precedent are we setting as Parliament, that we can always come back here and revise decisions as taken by the Speaker of this House? Today, it might be good for the House; but what happens when this same precedent is cited the next day on another matter? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us do it this way -

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, today you have really surprised me. When hon. Katuntu brought his proposals to the House; we were all at that time led to think that there was consultation and there was movement towards consensus. Then the Leader of Government Business rose and said, “Yes, there may have been consultations, but Cabinet needs to look at it.” As he reported, Cabinet did not own that proposal. There was no consensus, therefore.  

Mr Chairman, why I am surprised is that we now needed to be very decisive on the outcomes of this, which have been brought before you, and which you are steering. Why aren’t you making the decisions you have always made on critical issues like this one? The consultation was rejected by the government leader in this House, and the letter was given to the Chairman of the committee, what more? Even if it was referred back to the committee, the results will be the same. 

Mr Chairman, the guidance I am seeking is, why aren’t you making a ruling on this given these very clear parameters.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if you have sat in this House from the beginning, then you know exactly why. You know exactly why I am not able to assert any strong position on this matter. Yes. If you followed from the beginning, there are some things in the previous proceedings that we need to deal with. There are things that happened in the sittings before, where I was not, that now I am trying to clean up. You see. It looks like it is going to be my role now to continue doing these things over and over again, but there were things that happened, that is why I am held down by this. Okay? 

So, please, bear with me, and let me remind you that I had a long trip. I came back about 3 o’clock last night and I started chairing this House, and I am not even showing any signs of fatigue because I want harmony so that we can move forward. So, please, let us stop putting the Speaker on the spot on this matter. It is not about the Speaker, it is about the House.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to supplement the understanding of the chairperson -(Interjections)- yes, I do not know why you are saying “no”. I am the one saying because the chairperson said that his understanding of the Speaker then referring the matter to the committee, was on the understanding that some consensus was generated. I wanted to add that the chairperson of the committee, who is here, and standing there, is the one who actually said, “But why did you leave me out and my committee in these negotiations?” 

He is here; and of course, it means that in that negotiation, there were parties to the negotiation; there was the Executive in the negotiation. Now that the Executive does not agree to that position, the chairperson of the committee is saying, is it worth following all the way through for my committee to proceed with this matter? That is the question. By the way, some of us did not actually want to go into the details of this matter because we could even go into the definitions of consensus and so forth. Certainly, once there is no consensus, rules have been quoted that the only way out is to put the matter to vote. Otherwise, we shall actually continue like this. 

I am sorry, Mr Chairperson, but we shall come back to this House and I do not know whether there will be a difference with or without the report of the committee if we do not actually follow the rules as they are.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, a number of people have mentioned their CVs in this House; how many rules they have made and how many years they have been here. Let me also add that I have been in this House for 23 years; continuously; without a single break and including being in the CA. Therefore, I have also watched the procedure of this House and for some time, I have also sat here and listened, and I appreciate, Mr Chairman, you comments that of course you were not here at that time. You have found where the business had reached and we are trying to formalise a number of issues. 

I do appreciate; but surely, Mr Chairman and honourable members, we know how we take business to committees. The first question we should ask ourselves is, what exactly was sent to the committee to discuss? We were here and we had started voting and hon. Katuntu and a few Members said. “No, they had been having some discussions with the ministry -(Interjections)- I beg that we listen to each other. That they had started some discussion with the ministry and they had some proposals of a consensus position, and as you heard, the Speaker called us back to hear this position.

Hon. Katuntu stood here and showed us the paper and said this is the position. We sat for two days in the ministry and harmonised with the minister and ministry officials. He even laid it on the Table and then he was challenged to read it, and he read it. He read it, and according to him, a common position of their discussion between his group and the minister and her staff had been reached. It was not business that was laid before the House so that it is eventually sent to the committee to discuss for the committee to report back. It was alleged to be a common position between the ministry and hon. Katuntu’s group. Now, it has become clear that, that was the very position -(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I always respect my brother hon. Nasasira. You cannot lie to this House that the committee was not given work when we were all here. A report of harmonisation was read by hon. Katuntu, and he even laid it on Table and the Speaker ordered the committee to go and verify and see how they can bring everything to this House. 

In view of that, I am getting surprised that you are respecting the views of that committee when it has not even convened a committee meeting which we should have here and then we proceed. It is not in order. (Laughter) Is he in order to lie to us that there was no business for the committee? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the point is this. The basis of the referral to the committee was that there was a consensus that the committee was going to investigate and report. That is the basis. Now, it turns out that there was no consensus. From what we are seeing now, it turns out that there was no consensus because even from the minister’s statement on that day, actually, there were indications that there was no consensus even on this. From the minister’s statement, it is clear that there was no consensus. So, we are just trying to find a way of moving forward, and I think that is what the honourable minister was suggesting. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. And I hope the former Speaker of Bushenyi District Council continues to respect me.

So, what was supposed to have been taken to the committee was this consensus document? It has become clear today, that actually, the so-called consensus document had no consensus. The government position clearly was that they do not support that so-called consensus. 

Hon. Katuntu might have been let down with his group, but that is the position. The chairman of the committee has stood here and said that we have nothing to discuss in our committee because in the first place that consensus document was not there at all. Now, to spend all our evening trying to take some business that is not there to the committee, because that proposal was to take the consensus document, which is no longer there. So, how can we talk about taking business to the committee that does not exist; unless we are going to continue wasting the taxpayer’s money, day after day? 

I know and I respect hon. Abdul Katuntu a lot, and I think he had taken a very clear position. He said he went with his group to discuss the matter. If the other people he was discussing with this document do not own it, he said, “There is no point for me to continue on this matter. I will go back to the position of what was passed in this House on clause 9”. And I thought to me, that is the Katuntu I know. Now, this business of saying, “Maybe they can look at my document again in the committee-” 

I want to appeal to the hon. Katuntu that I know. You should stick to the point that since it was not accepted, you made your point. There is no document to take to the committee for discussion; the chairman of the committee has said there was no business sent to them because the document was disowned. So, let us move on and look at those two areas; of what was recommitted and what was passed before, so that we can move forward –(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you, hon. John Nasasira, for giving way. What is not doubted is that there was a referral of these matters to the Committee on Natural Resources; there is no denial about that. 

Mr Chairman, I am rising to seek clarification from hon. Nasasira; through his long experience in Parliament; there is a particular way committees of Parliament report to Parliament; whether at committee Stage or during a sitting of the House. And that is guided under rules 192 that talks about how meetings of committees are conducted, thus: “A committee shall commence sitting as soon as possible after it has been appointed to consider a Bill or any other matter referred to it by the House.” And rule 193: “A report of a committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one third of all the Members of the committee and shall be laid on the Table.” 

Mr Chairman, if we allow this manner of reporting to the House, by Parliament asking the chairperson and the chairperson stands to give a casual response to this serious House –(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, I take exceptional note of this. We are going to set a bad precedent. I was ready and waiting for the committee to sit and present my position and views on the same. Now, for the chairman to have nothing is a matter we must sort out rather than sweeping it under the carpet. 

MR SSEKANDI: The chairman was not here when the decision we are referring to –(Interruptions)– he was not here when that issue we are talking about arose. But we have heard from his findings; he has studied the record and the circumstances and he has told you that referring the matter to the committee was prompted by the allegation that there was consensus. But it has transpired that there was no consensus –(Interjections)– the chairman has found out that there was no consensus and the reason for referring the matter to the committee no longer exist and, therefore, it is not warranted. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: In view of that, Mr Chairman, I would like Ugandans and Members to be able to understand and bear with you. Some Members of Parliament are coercing you to handle the House in a certain way yet there is a well laid down procedure. 

If anybody is to go by the Hansard – I request honourable Members of Parliament to be fair to the Speaker who is the chair now to give a way forward by following the Rules of Procedure. On that point, I propose that we have an opportunity where the deferring views on this matter are given an opportunity. It can be tomorrow morning or in the afternoon; and we can reconvene and have the matter resolved in the right procedure with due regard to the rules of this House. 

But now you want the chairman to arbitrarily go against the rules and the decision of this House; what precedent shall we be setting?

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have spent about six to seven hours in a deadlock. I keep asking myself; what are the individual and collective motives that we have. As legislators, we have failed to agree or make a law that Ugandans are waiting for. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to draw your attention to rule 123(8) of our Rules of Procedure. “Where two or more amendments are proposed on the same clause, the chairperson shall call upon the movers in the order in which these amendments relate to the text of the clause, and the amendment which in the opinion of the chairperson departs furthest from the text under discussion shall be debated and disposed of first”. 

The issue here is debate and disposal. Indeed we have debated and we await disposal. We are pleading with you, sir, to put the question and we dispose of this –(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, what we fail to agree upon after six hours, even if you give us a whole week, we shall never agree on. (Interjections) My plea is that you put the question and we move forward.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, I just want to conclude. Of course, hon. Ssekikubo, I am very familiar with our Rules of Procedure, and I know what business is referred to a committee. What I was saying is that there is actually no business to refer to a committee. The document that hon. Katuntu was showing was of an agreed position of the parties he was referring to –(Interjections)– it has been clear that what you consider as one of the parties, does not agree with that document –(Interruption)– I will give you just wait. 

There was no business at all to refer to the committee. The chairperson of the committee stood up and said there was no business in the committee so there is no report. The document he is referring to was alleged to be on consensus between hon. Katuntu’s group and the ministry. The ministry has said that is not part of their documents. So, what business are you referring to the committee? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. My brief information is that there is a precedent; when we were handling the budget process, there was some harmonisation required. I remember the Rt Hon Deputy Speaker, who is now the Chairman, was in the chair. You directed harmonisation between the Minister of Finance, the Budget Committee and the other sector committees. You gave very clear terms of reference. 

Now, when we come to this section, the harmonisation that the Speaker referred to the committee – if you look at its terms of reference, however general they are, they are totally different from the matter at hand. If we are to refer the amendments of hon. Katuntu as refined – whatever the word is - they will go there, not for harmonisation, but for consideration as formerly moved amendments. So, the terms of reference for this assignment will be totally different from the other business of harmonisation. So, you cannot claim that what we are handling now was not handled. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that right from the Hansard, it is clearly stated that the matter which was brought by hon. Katuntu for harmonisation purposes was disowned by the Third Deputy Prime Minister, because the minister had not yet consulted and presented it to the Cabinet. 

So, the Speaker directed that the Committee on Natural Resources waits for the position of Government and harmonises the position. So, it is very clear that the committee’s position was waiting for the harmonised position from the ministers or Cabinet and that position was presented today. So, it would be prudent to allow the committee to look at the merits and demerits of that position before we proceed. 

MR NASASIRA: Let me conclude. Mr Chairman, as you correctly said, what hon. Katuntu brought here today is different from that position. If he brought it as an amendment here – and I had raised it earlier and you were kind enough to let him continue with the amendment even if it had been formerly taken - then we should see it as an amendment and we normally deal with such amendments and pronounce ourselves at committee stage. 

So, if hon. Katuntu wants to present it as an amendment and yet it is no longer the agreed position that was actually never agreed upon, then we can deal with it as an amendment and finish with it, and we vote on it and move forward.  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been listening attentively to the manner of debate here. Under Rules of Procedure, rule 54, the manner of debate for motions and the time are given. Let me read it verbatim; “When a motion has been moved and seconded in the House...” as moved by the honourable Member from Kashari, “...the Speaker shall propose the question on the motion in the same terms as the motion and the debate may then take place upon that motion and may continue for a period not exceeding one hour.” 

The motion moved by the Member from Kashari was moved at 7.30 p.m.; it is now 9 o’clock. That means the period has exceeded one hour and a half. 

This is my humble request. I heard you say that today, there will not be voting on any matter in this House. If what I heard is correct, why do we stay here this long? You can adjourn the House and we vote another day. The record is clear. I rest my case. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In light of this darkness we are in, there is every reason – by the way, Mr Chairman, I have so much respect for you. I have no doubt you are not taking a decision because you are caught up by the law. His is a situation in which the committee was given a mandate to report to Parliament. Despite what Cabinet has decided, the committee of Parliament must make a report and the procedure is well laid down. 

So, in the interest of this House, Mr Chairman, why don’t we give a timeframe to the committee, even if it finds no substance in the recommendations, and it reports back to the House. I want to be on record as a Member of the Natural Resources Committee; we have sat on this Bill for almost eight months. There is no reason why we cannot sit for another two days. Why don’t we sit for our country and this House for another two days – even if it is 48 hours or 96 hours - to make a statement that is agreeable to everybody? I do not see why the hurry; we can do that, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us conclude this matter. I have been trying to find a way forward based on the proceedings of the House on Tuesday, 4 December 2012. 

The Speaker directed as follows: “Honourable members, I think we have settled the issue – Cabinet is going to look at the issues tomorrow and they will come back to us.”  That matter we have received. “Committee on Natural Resources, please also sit, consider these proposals and give us a report.” (Applause) And she adds, “There is no other position, okay. Let us go to the next item.” 

This is where my problem is; and this referral to the Committee on Natural Resources is because the chairman had insisted that this matter was negotiated without their participation. That is why it was also referred to this committee. 

Honourable members, we need to give it time and take this vote tomorrow morning. The committee members who are here, please sit from 9 o’clock tomorrow. It is a short matter that should not take long. Committee members you are all here;  sit from 9 o’clock tomorrow, Friday. It is important that we do that. This House will resume tomorrow at 11 o’clock. It is a short matter that we will be able to deal with. 

Honourable members, you need to bear with me in this situation. We need to finish tomorrow before 1 o’clock, as we have always agreed for every Friday. 

So, chairperson, these are directives that were given. Please abide with them and tomorrow 9 o’clock convene the meeting. Members of the committee, please be in that meeting; take the decisions and then we move from there. The House will convene at 11 o’clock tomorrow for one hour only. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your guidance. You are aware that tomorrow is Friday, and indeed, this is a very important matter. Given the fact that you have ordered that the Committee on Natural Resources sits at 9.00 a.m. up to 11.00 a.m., I believe that, based on the magnitude of the matter, we cannot sort out this issue in one hour, yet we have to go for prayers at exactly half past midday. I request that we give ourselves ample time; we come here on Tuesday and we finish the business. That would be the best.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no. Let’s finish with this matter tomorrow. Is that okay? Honourable members, let’s come back here tomorrow at 11 o’clock.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, we beg that we respect our day and we are given ample time because we want to debate. We cannot be here by midday because we will be going for prayers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this debate, as far as I am concerned, is finished. I am just satisfying a criteria that was imposed by the previous proceedings of the House. The committee will sit for a short time. By 11 o’clock we should sit here. If we go beyond 12.30 p.m., I will adjourn the House. Please let us meet tomorrow and clear this business. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resume and the report of the committee to be received thereto. I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.12
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 9 of the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and received the government’s report, but referred the amendments proposed by hon. Katuntu to the Committee on Natural Resources for reporting back tomorrow at 11.00 a.m. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.14
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (MRS IRENE MULONI): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
.
(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is the report. It has been adopted. As I directed, the Committee on Natural Resources should meet tomorrow at 9 o’clock. It is a simple amendment. All the debates have taken place on all those things. So, meet and deal with it within a short time. 

This House will resume tomorrow at 11 o’clock. House adjourned until tomorrow at 11 o’clock.

(The House rose at 9.14 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 7 December 2012 at 11.00 a.m.)
