
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 18 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I would like to announce that the House will rise tomorrow for the Christmas recess and return on 7 January to commence the Third Meeting.

Along the same lines, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required by the Public Finance Management Act to present the Budget Framework Paper by 31 December 2019. Since we are breaking off tomorrow, the minister should table the Budget Framework Paper either today or latest tomorrow before the House goes on recess.

I also propose that in view of the activities we have tomorrow afternoon, we convene from 10.00 a.m. until 2.00 p.m. and see what we can accomplish, so that the afternoon is left for the Members to organise for the end of year party. There will be a joint end of year party for staff and Members of Parliament. It will have a number of activities, which require several hours. I am, therefore, proposing that tomorrow we sit at 10.00a.m. and conclude at 2.00 O’clock.

Honourable members, I was in Busongora on Monday. I would like to remind the Government, especially the Minister of Public Service, about the payments for civil servants in hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. I know that we passed it here and talked about it several times but when I got there, I was told that the money is not being paid. Honourable members, Busongora is really far. If you go to the highlands, just getting to the top is a nightmare. I would like us to support our citizens there on the issue of hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay payments.

Secondly, I was invited to fundraise for a school but when I got there, I did not think that that was a school for which I should put in energy. There is no secondary school, yet our policy is that every subcounty should have a Government secondary school.  I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports to establish a seed school there. I think that is what they need. They are very far from anybody else. Therefore, while I am going to write to the President and the Minister of Education and Sports, I would like the members of the sectoral committee to know that.

I also found out that the tarmac road that is being built is 63 kilometres but the Government is going to do only 12 kilometres. I do not know who is going to do the other part. How can Government build a quarter or a half of a road? Is it Shs 15 billion? That is something I am also going to write to the President and the Ministry of Works and Transport about. 

However, I would like our committee to take interest in how that road was designed because building 12 out of 63 kilometres does not help the population. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure should follow it up to ensure the needful is done. The people need the road badly. There are no taxis, lorries or buses, yet these are Ugandans and they need our support. Therefore, I look forward to the support from the Members of Parliament on that issue.

Yesterday, we could not sit because we had gone to deal with a very serious issue concerning the economy of Busoga region. That is the issue of sugarcanes which, as you know, has no market internally and externally. While there, we had a meeting and agreed that Government will establish a factory run by indigenous people. In the same way they have supported the fruit factory in Soroti and tea factories in Igara and Kanungu -(Applause)- Government will also have to establish a factory for the indigenous people in Busoga region. Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) will have to facilitate it. I am sure that the President will write but I wanted them to know that that is how we are going to move. 

The smallholders will also be supported to establish the cottage industries because there is absolutely no market. The economy is not doing well. I would like to confirm that we did not discuss the Sugar Bill; only the management of sugarcane. (Laughter) Thank you

3.01
Mr kenneth lubogo (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to appreciate the communication you have made in regard to the sugar industry and the resolution, which was made to establish a factory run by the indigenous people in Busoga. I would like to appreciate your effort and that of everybody who has been involved in this.

Sometime back before Independence, a law was made to restrict indigenous people from running businesses and operating particular industries close to the city centres. Those were exclusive for the Indians and whites. The indigenous black Ugandans were sent far away. This was the tendency, which was coming in. We appreciate that the indigenous people are going to have a hand and they will get where to supply their produce. We cannot be locked out of our own land. I think this is a very big Christmas message for our people who are in sugarcane growing.

Secondly, on the issue of seed schools, which you commented about, I have observed that there are some manoeuvres within the ministry when it comes to the point of allocation of these schools. Sometimes considerations are not being made objectively to locate where schools are supposed to be. 

I would like to give an example of Kaliro District where I come from. The biggest subcounties in the district are two - Nawaikoke and Bumanya subcounties - with each of them having more than 60,000 people. Last year, both subcounties were divided into smaller subcounties. A seed school was allocated to Nawaikoke Subcounty, which became a constituency. Another seed school has been allocated to a parish in the same subcounty, leaving the other big subcounty without one. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Education and Sports to explain the basis of these allocations. I think it is not a question of equity; it is a different parameter at play.  Thank you.
 
The speaker: Honourable member, if we can establish the law, which was stopping the indigenous people from organising - We should repeal that law that you said allowed only white people to operate near the towns and us, the black ones, to go somewhere else. We should identify it and repeal it. Can you do some research for us and we work on its repeal?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think research can be done and a report presented although I believe it has already been repealed. However, it was something that came in a different package all together - locking out indigenous people to allow other communities operate these industries. I can give further information on it. Thank you.

MR KASUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from your communication. Have I heard you say that the Government is going to establish a sugar factory owned by indigenous people in Busoga only? What about Bunyoro? (Laughter) Was that decision reached because the meeting was held by the President in Busoga? Did that meeting involve other farmers, including the ones from Bunyoro and the entire country? How did the Government reach that decision? I beg for clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have been in this House and you have heard that the sugarcane farmers in Busoga cannot sell anywhere in the country and they cannot export; they are stuck with their products. Therefore, it was a question of resolving that issue but if you are interested, you should also let the President know. (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I still have very good memory of the sugar issues across the country because I was the chairperson of the committee on trade. I moved around the country with some Members and collected information. What we discovered is that the biggest challenge has been a fight between the out growers and the factories, which have had a monopoly for a very long period. The Government therefore took interest in regulating that sector to ensure that the out growers get a fair share of the income from sugarcane. 

There is a very big interest in this and from the statistics we found that it is dominated by Indians. There is only one factory owned by indigenous Ugandans. Therefore, sugar trade has been a monopoly of Indians in the country. It is the same like how tea used to be a monopoly of the whites during the colonial times.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about improving the capacity of Ugandans to manage their economy and to manage businesses. This is not only about sugar but it cuts across other sectors. When it comes to roads, for instance, why should we have Chinese dominate our roads market and take all the money back to China? Why can’t we build our own capacity? Why should we donate money to the Chinese? These are very fundamental issues.

Therefore, we need to have a policy that purposely supports our local indigenous people to establish factories. If Government can really put subsidies to this effect, I think we will not just be talking about factories in Busoga or Bunyoro; rather, it will be a Ugandan advantage where Ugandans can begin modernising their agriculture, adding value in the sector and getting value for their money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There were some matters of national importance. Let us have hon. Makmot.

3.09
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving under subrule (2) of rule 215 to give an update on the progress of the investigation into the conduct of hon. Francis Zaake, MP, Mityana Municipality, during and immediately after the meeting of the Committee on Education and Sports.

As you may recall, on 7 November 2019, the House tasked the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to investigate the conduct of hon. Francis Zaake, MP, Mityana Municipality -(Interjection) (Hon. Ssemujju rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are moving ahead of time. Wait, you will hear what he is going to say. Please take your seat; I allowed him to speak.

MR MAKMOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A meeting of the Committee of Education and Sports was held on 6 November 2019 and the committee was given two weeks to consider the matter. I rise to update the House on the progress of the proceedings of the committee on this matter. 

The committee was not able to start work immediately because of earlier commitments of key witnesses who were away from Parliament in the first two weeks after the referral. The committee commenced work on 2 December 2019 and has so far met all the witnesses. However, we have experienced further delays. The initial meeting with hon. Francis Zaake did not take place as scheduled on 4 December 2019 because the walk against corruption that day made it very difficult for many Members and staff to access Parliament on time. The meeting was rescheduled to 11 December 2019. 

Hon. Francis Zaake later wrote on 6 December 2019 to say he needed some information from the committee before he could attend the meeting. Information, together with the summons, was delivered to hon. Francis Zaake on 12 December 2019 through his personal assistant in Parliament. This followed a futile attempt to communicate to him that the information was ready for delivery on 9 December 2019.

Hon. Zaake responded to the summons and met the committee on 16 December 2019. However, he refused to testify claiming that he needed more time to study the evidence against him. The committee gave him time until today, Wednesday 18 December 2019 at 10 a.m., when the meeting with him took place.

The purpose of this, therefore, is to request that the committee be given more time to conclude the assignment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee is requesting for time to complete the report so that they can report in January. Is that okay? Okay, permission granted.

3.13
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Madam Speaker, on 3 October, the Minister of Local Government presented a motion for a resolution of Parliament on alteration of boundaries under Article 179(1) of the Constitution and declaration of cities under section 7(2)(a) of the Local Governments Act, Cap. 243.

Madam Speaker, in the motion, the minister stated that Kabale will have Kabale North and Kabale South divisions and that the details were to be determined after further consultation. The Deputy Speaker ruled that the motion should be complete with details before Parliament can take a vote on it. He further advised that the minister should take the matter through the consultation process.

Madam Speaker, lack of public participation and due process for the demarcation of Kabale City is a matter that is causing a lot of anxiety and tension in Kigezi region. Despite the directive by this House on due process and consultation, there are still underground movements, scheming machinations in altering boundaries and demarcating the city. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are: 

    1. Given that time is of the essence, the minister should transparently conduct public consultations with all stakeholders on the demarcation of Kabale City. 
    2. Any decision to annex, incorporate or omit any neighbouring areas from forming part of Kabale City should be in accordance with the law and the procedure for alteration of boundaries. 
    3. The views of the people should be sought and taken into consideration.
    4. The resolution from those districts should also be sought. 
    5. Irrelevant and illogical consideration such as sectarianism, political expediency, machinations, scheming and engineering for 2021 should be disregarded. 
    6. Geographical proximity and equity should be taken considering all those who are stakeholders in Kabale City. 

Madam Speaker, I humbly submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I note your concerns. Probably, I should inform you that by this morning, I had received six petitions; some from Rubanda District, Rukiga and Kabale itself. 

I am glad the Prime Minister is here and what I can confirm is that we shall ensure that as much consultation as possible is done before this matter is concluded. Thank you very much. 

3.16
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have an issue of national concern to raise. About six months ago, I raised an issue here concerning the fish maws in Uganda. This is good news or bad news to the people who are staying around the lake. From the time I raised the issue, nothing has been done about. 

However, the fish maws are continuously being sent outside the country and we have lost almost $ 150 million from the time I raised this issue up to now. When you ask me how I know this, I will tell you that I benchmarked this issue. The investors doing this are doing it without Government’s knowledge. They go and get tilapia fish, put it in their houses and the small fish are born. When they reach a certain size, they insert a chip in every small fish and return it to the lake. That small chip tells them the size of the fish, how it has grown, the months it has taken and its weight in terms of kilograms. All this is done while they are staying in their countries. 

Afterwards, they make phone calls to the fishmongers and hunters to go for them. When they go, they bring out almost 1,000 to 2,000. If one fish maw weighs around one kilogramme, they make products that can produce about $ 50,000. Imagine losing 1,000 tilapia fish in just –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude, hon. Masika. 

MR MASIKA: Madam Speaker, due to the fact that I researched this for the love of my country and people, my prayer is that Government stops those people from taking away fish maws. They should take them when the Government is counting them one by one so that we can also collect our tax. 

Otherwise, the money they bring us in terms of donations in form of an ambulance or something like that actually comes from us. We are supposed to be the ones donating money to them but now, we are donating gold to them and they give us back a small piece of it.  

Government should also critically stop – instead of us making an organisation or a department that looks after the fish – because fish can be extracted from our lakes for a long time. It is even much better than petroleum; so it is very important. Government should look at this very critically and then we harvest it by ourselves. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues raised by hon. Masika are extremely serious and require investigation. Can we ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and give us a brief on that issue; a comprehensive report, about the export of fish maws from Uganda as soon as we resume in the Third Meeting? Thank you. 

3.20
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very urgent and national importance. On 15 December, 2019, one clan led by a retired UPDF Major, George Otim, attacked a clan called Pale-Pale. They burnt 166 huts with all the harvest and looted cattle and goats. 

At the moment, there are some children who are unaccounted for. They also displaced 416 people. They are currently staying in Palokere Primary School in Atiak. They are in dire need of food items, blankets, tarpaulin and anything that can help them. 

My prayer is to the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) to urgently come to the rescue of these people because this is not a small number of people. Ever since this incident happened, there is no help coming, apart from the local collections. This is my humble prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Prime minister, you have noted the issues from Amuru. Please, go to their rescue. Christmas is coming and they may have nothing to sleep on.

3.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the concern of the honourable member has been noted. Office of the Prime Minister will take immediate steps to assess the situation and do the needful.

3.22
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the bridge between Kachumbala in Bukedea and Kakoro in Butebo District. 

Three weeks back, due to heavy rains, this bridge was washed away by the water and it has become very difficult in terms of communication between Kachumbala and Butebo. To make matters worse, Kachumbala has one of the biggest markets in eastern Uganda. You realise that every Tuesday and Thursday, our people from Butebo have to cross to the other side. It is very unfortunate that my people from Butebo cannot now access the Kachumbala Market due to the bridge that was washed away by the water. 

I, therefore –(Interruption) 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. You know today, I am seated where good luck falls. The information I am giving you is the market in Bukedea is not the biggest in Eastern Uganda, but the biggest in East and Central Africa. Therefore, we need that bridge worked on as a matter of urgency, Madam Speaker. 

MR JAMES BABA: If hon. Isiagi here is saying that because he has taken over Magyezi’s place, he will be appointed, he should forget. (Laughter)

MR ODUCHU: I thank my colleague from Kachumbala for the information. It is true we have one of the biggest markets in Bukedea, particularly in Kachumbala. 

It has become very difficult for my people to cross from Butebo to Kachumbala to access the market services. They have to access the market via Nakaloke in Mbale District. This is very expensive. 

Some three weeks back, we wrote to the Ministry of Works and Transport because the bridge, which was washed away is almost 10 metres and it is very difficult for us to handle. We wrote to the ministry to rescue the situation. 

MS ANNITA AMONG: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament for Bukedea. Leave alone the issue of the market, people tried to cross that bridge to come for market activities and some of them lost their lives on the bridge. It is, therefore, crucial as the honourable member said. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no doubt that the issue is important. I do not know whether at the time the Minister of Works and Transport told us that he is organising a comprehensive plan, the bridge between Kacumbala and Butebo had collapsed. If not, it is an urgent matter. Unfortunately, I do not see any of them here. 

Considering that we are going for a break, can the Minister of Works and Transport come tomorrow so that the people of Bukedea and Kacumbala have an answer before they go for Christmas? 

3.27
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas Karamoja and its neighbours had enjoyed peace and tranquillity for a period of over 15 years, soon after disarmament, cattle rustling, killings and thefts have resumed in the region. 

The division commander and the soldiers who are there are trying their level best to contain the situation. However, if the situation is not expeditiously handled, it might deteriorate further. 

I can give two examples of open cattle rustling and killing. As we are speaking right now, Moroto town is in confusion because the LC III Chairperson of Rup Sub-County was killed yesterday in the process of solving a cattle rustling conflict in which two communities were involved. As they were trying to solve the matter, the LCIII Chairperson was gunned down. 

I have asked the district commander to send details to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs so that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs may be able to provide Parliament with the details of the cattle rustling. (Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you allow the Member to raise his issue? This is not a debate. 

MR ACHIA: That is one killing. Now, about open cattle rustling, the Turkana have confirmed 308 cows, which came from Uganda to Kenya and they were ready to bring them back. The Minister for Karamoja Affairs and Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should intervene in this. 

My prayers are that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs prepares a statement, which will outline the details of the cattle raids which have taken place, the cattle that have been recovered, the people who have been killed and what course of action will be taken. 

As we are waiting for that, there is an urgent need to deploy into all the areas of Karamoja. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should do this expeditiously. 

Office of the Prime Minister has a programme for peace and we request them to support the people in the region so that together with some Members of Parliament, they can talk to the people. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know if that is what is called stock theft because that is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Or is it beyond stock theft and has gone into murder? 

MR OSEKU: Madam Speaker, on Friday, I was travelling to Kotido and between Napak and Kotido, I was shot at. They shot my car five times. (Interjections) My car is down there with bullet holes. The situation seems to be escalating. 

Previously, we knew about cattle thefts and raids but now the issue of road ambushes and shooting at cars on the roads seems to be resurfacing. 

I survived death on that road on Friday 13 December 2019 at about 9.40 p.m. and most interestingly, I was shot at from a distance of only about 500 metres from an army detachment in the area. It took a stretch of about one kilometre while the shooting was still going on. 

There is need to attend to this problem. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the Army Commander need to address this problem, together with Ministry of Internal Affairs. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS LILLY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that the honourable member of Bokora has brought is a very critical issue in Karamoja. It is not only within the Karimojong themselves, it is extending to the border – the Turkana and the South Sudanese. 


Therefore, what the Karamoja will need is a comprehensive report from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs  furthermore, to go down on the ground to deploy or investigate further because the guns are now there. 

The Member for Kibale, Pallisa was shot at, at a distance of only 500 metres from a military ditache. This means that the guns are now back in Karamoja. This House should help the Karimojong so that we see to it that we do not go back to where we came from. We need the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to go further to dig into this so that the Karimojong are rescued. 

The LC III Chairperson was shot at the detache, while the UPDF and LDUs were there and yet, we do not know who shot at the LCIII Chairperson. He was the elder brother of Hon. David Pulkol. It is in the media that they are saying that they are not going to bury him unless Government gives a statement. 

I, therefore, felt that I would bring this out so that the august House would know what is happening in Karamoja. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of internal Affairs, please, give us an assurance that the people in that area will have security over the Christmas holidays and beyond. We thank God that the Member that was shot at survived.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, it is true that in the recent times, the level of insecurity in that area of our country – bordering Karamoja, parts of South Sudan and Kenya – has deteriorated because of incursions from across the borders as well as criminal acts from within. The nature of these crimes is that they are committed by highly sophisticated people using military guns. 

Due to the incursions from across, we have had an inter-forces deployment approach. In the immediate term, the number of forces – the police and the supporting forces – which has been deployed to contain the situation has been increased. However, the long-term solution will go beyond deployment to include engagement with the governments of South Sudan and Kenya.
I can assure the House that the measures, which are being taken are definitely containing the immediate criminal activities.

On the killing of the LC III chairperson yesterday, this man was shot by an LDU personnel. The suspect has been arrested and it is being handled as a criminal matter. Owing to the reaction of the population following the killing, the forces moved in and the situation has been contained as of now. That is what I can say as of now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we also ask the Minster of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come tomorrow and give assurance about the future in regard to the safety of the travelers.

MR OBIGA: That is okay. We will combine and we will be able to give that assurance.

3.37
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising concerns the lack of payment of ex-gratia for LC III councillors in Maracha District. In the Financial Year 2018/2019, the councillors failed to get the ex-gratia paid because the minister deposited only about a third of the money, which was required for paying them. We have made this matter known to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have written to them and I have also made several visits to the ministry to make follow ups but nothing has been done. 

We are already six months into this financial year. The councillors feel that this matter is not being given the due attention it deserves. Therefore, I request that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to consider this as a serious matter and urgently pays the councillors their ex-gratia. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come tomorrow and explain to the country when the ex-gratia payment to the councillors will be made. Apparently, it is not only Maracha councilors; there are other councillors in the country who are also affected.

3.39
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some time back, H.E, the President offered land to host the regional offices for Afreximbank. In October, adverts were made for those who were willing to sell their land in Kampala. Four companies applied and these were Pine Investments, SGL, Imperial Royale and another company.

I am raising this issue because some officials are now under pressure that this contract be given to a certain company. The company that is being fronted is selling the land at $4 million per acre. Among the other companies that bid, one is selling land at $2.7 million. The bank wanted land in upscale areas such as Nakasero, Kololo and Lugogo. 

There is pressure that the tender be given to Pine Investment and yet, there is alleged conflict of interest. It is alleged that Pine Investments belongs to the Attorney-General. Despite the fact that the other company was selling land at $2.7 million, they want the offer to be given to Pine Investments. Currently, Afreximbank is renting Rwenzori Courts, which belongs to the Attorney-General. 

We are likely to lose taxpayers money. It is alleged that the land, which they are putting pressure for Government to buy was part of Nakasero Primary School land, which was taken under unclear circumstances and they are now selling it back to Government at $4 million. I request you to direct the Prime Minister to intervene in this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Prime Minister is also here. That is a very serious allegation – if it is true – that the land, which is being sold at an exorbitant price is actually Government land and it possibly involves a member of your Cabinet.

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this allegation from our colleague needs to be investigated and the Government is going to investigate it. The Government will give a preliminary report on this matter after Christmas. Of course, we take the allegations very seriously, especially on the ownership of the land and possible anomalies in the process of the acquisition of the land.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can you undertake that the Government will not be forced to buy that land before you come back to this House on that issue?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker. The Government will do everything possible within the law – (Laughter) - to make sure that no further damage is made over this matter.

3.44
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, the urgent matter for which I rise is very pathetic. Yesterday, at about 11 a.m., four UPDF soldiers, armed and in uniform, passed through Acanokun Village in Otangocinge Parish, Abeja sub-county in Amolatar District, en route to one of the landing sites called Gee. 
As fate may have it, one of the soldiers remained behind and came across a 16 year old girl. He grabbed her and gave her three conditions: one was for the girl to consent to rape. The second condition was that he would grab the girl and take her for group raping. The third condition was that he would shoot her. The girl was forced on the ground and the gun was laid across her neck. Unfortunately, this girl was raped. The matter was reported to CPS Amolatar, case reference number SB26/17/12/2019. 

Allow me to thank the RDC of Amolatar for arraigning these soldiers for a parade and – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to complete. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: The culprit was identified, Madam Speaker. I thought that the UPDF was founded on the principle of discipline. I am wondering how they will ensure peace and security if some characters in the UPDF are the ones at the forefront of abusing peace and security. I am wondering how Government will ensure sanity is actualised in areas where the UPDF Fisheries Protection Force are working to avoid abuse of community rights. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, issues of the misconduct of the UPDF in various areas in Uganda have been raised on this Floor many times. However, it seems that it is a matter that is not taken seriously and yet, it persists. Mr Prime Minister, what do we do? We have been on this Floor many times on the conduct of the UPDF beating and drowning fishermen, selling boat engines and fish. Can we ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come here tomorrow and address us on this issue?

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I remember that the Woman Representative of Pakwach District raised this matter but later, in Panyimur, vehicles were confiscated. Recently, a lorry full of fish was seized. The owners of the fish followed this lorry up to Lira where the fish was offloaded and sold. The money was given to a one, Niwagaba. He is the one commanding the landing sites in Panyimur. This man has been charging Shs 6 million and 200 litres of fuel per vehicle to release them.

This matter is very serious; it is no longer about protecting the water resources but looting from the people who are doing business in fish. That is the information I thought I should give because the matter in Panyimur is serious. My people who are affected in Arua actually want to take action against Government if this matter is not handled justly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, how else do we describe state-inspired violence? This is now official but nobody cares. No disciplinary action or sanctions are taken. Anyway, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should come here tomorrow –

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. Allow me to put the name of the girl on record. She is called Naome Ekit, daughter of Calvin Ogwang, a Lay leader and Catechist. 

3.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I have received technical assistance from Eng. Waluswaka. I thank you. This is the positive support that we always require instead of some negative forces trying to –(Laughter) The point I would like to make is that this august House is not helpless about some of the issues that have been raised by colleagues regarding the lakes.

First of all, in general, the UPDF soldiers on the lakes have done very good work to ensure that the fish industry in our country recovers. The beneficiaries are definitely Ugandans and some foreigners. His Excellency the President has given instructions on this matter to ensure that soldiers strictly focus and remain on their mandate and two, that acts of indiscipline or misbehaviour are punished. 

Therefore, there is no special treatment or neglect about discipline. Discipline by the UPDF, whether on the lakes or elsewhere, is standard. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, I am sorry but I do not accept what you are saying. For over two years, I have been talking to the President about the indiscipline of the UPDF and giving him names in writing. Recently, the ones who have been drowning people in Namayingo were promoted. Capt. Sebukeera is now a Major. We have complained about Niwagaba but he is a king in this country. How can that be? Nakasongola, Buvuma and Busoga regions are crying about the same man. What do you want us to do?

3.53
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My constituency has a lake surrounding it. The indiscipline and extortion that the soldiers are using is shameful. There are vehicles we have pleaded for, for the last two years. The soldiers ask for between Shs 12 million to Shs 16 million to get back vehicles, which were caught carrying fish. These soldiers are beating people and enriching themselves by extorting money directly from poor Ugandans. 

As Parliament, we need to stand on our feet and take a decision so that we conclude this matter once and for all. (Applause) 

There is no way Ugandans can continue suffering in the hands of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). When you call Mr Nuwagaba, he says, “Tell the members of Parliament to report me where they can.” “Who are the MPs? Who is the Speaker of Parliament?” That is what Mr Nuwagaba asks.

We have complained several times but nothing is done to this Mr Nuwagaba.

Mr waira: Madam Speaker, like hon. Silwany has said, when they get a motorcycle, they charge Shs 1.2 million for you to get it back. They still have so many motorcycles of my voters.

I think we need to come up with a serious resolution right now. They get vehicles all the way from Mayuge to Nakasongola. Let us go and get those vehicles and give them back to our voters.  Thank you.

Mr silwany: Lastly, these people have no criteria for assessing which is the young fish. When they find you with small fish, they say you have caught the “daughter.” When it is very big fish, they say you are now taking the grandfather of the fish. When it is the middle sized fish, you are taking the good mature one. What is the criterion? It is just extortion by this group of people.

3.56
Mr Jackson mbaju (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): On the same matter, I called the same officer, a one Nuwagaba when torture was too much along Lake George and Lake Edward. I tried to educate him on how a disciplined soldier behaves.

In his response, he mentioned two of my constituents whose shooting he was about to order. He mentioned Katongole and another gentleman called Mambo, both from Kahendero. 

I have listened carefully to the Prime Minister. He has told us that the UPDF have been instructed to commit to their mandate. Is it within their mandate to order shooting of citizens of Uganda on the lake simply because they have fished immature fish? Could we get clarification from the Prime Minister what the mandate of the UPDF on the lake is?

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, your answer does not merit attention. You have been here and you read the newspapers; we have spoken on this Floor many times. What do you want the people of Uganda to do in respect to the misconduct of the UPDF?

How many soldiers have you disciplined out of their misconduct on the water? Bring the list of those you have disciplined for killing people on the lake by drowning and burning boats.

3.58
Mr abdulatif sebaggala (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, this issue is of critical importance. We are talking about an industry that employs many Ugandans. 

What beats my understanding is that whenever they are talking about what the UPDF has done, they praise them that they have done great work and now we have a lot of fish. 

Madam Speaker, you have played your role. You have always been there for our brothers and sisters in the fishing industry. Parliament has made a lot of recommendations. Given the fact that the Prime Minister is living on another island where these sufferings are not of the Government’s great concern – you have written and talked to the President; he is the Commander in Chief but nothing has been done.

Last week, we saw a very bad scenario when hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine was almost directing Gen. Angina as though he were a kid. That is the arrogance of the army. Both of them are generals.

Madam Speaker, it is now terrible; from fish mongers to the generals themselves.

4.00
Mr jOnathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections)

The speaker: Order, order. 

Mr jonathan odur: I think that it is very unfortunate that the Prime Minister can come and make a statement well aware that on several occasions, the Commander in Chief, who is the President, has written. 

One of the letters dated 19 November 2019 was copied to the Prime Minister by the President. I would like to pick a paragraph of it.

The letter has the heading; “Report into the FPU Operations at Kyebisire Landing Site on Lake Kyoga”.
The president wrote:
“I do not agree that Lt Nshekanabo should be punished for over-reacting and beating the arrested wanainchi.” It is here. He added; “Fourthly, Lt Nshekanabo should be counselled never to beat anybody again.”

The letter was written to the Prime Minister and you have a copy. I would like to officially lay a copy of this letter for the reference of the House. I beg to lay.

The spirit of the letter is that everything that the UPDF soldiers are doing is in order. They cannot be touched; so, they can do it with impunity. I think the Prime Minister should humble himself here and admit that whatever he has been telling us about disciplining UPDF soldiers is not true. You do not have the capacity to do that and you have not been doing it.

The example cited by hon. Okello, Member of Parliament for Kioga County, needed direct attention. If girls are being raped and we cannot do anything about it, it is unfortunate –(Interruption)

Mr oguzu: The information I would like to give this House is that it is not the first time the UPDF has been implicated in things like this. In Central Africa, we had a report by the Human Rights Watch that the UPDF has prioritised sexual assault of girls of those countries. The same thing happened in Somalia. We had a report that the UPDF is assaulting the Somali girls.

The trajectory that we have a professional army must begin to be questioned. This House must intervene to check the behavior of the UPDF to explore if we have sexual harassment policies within the UPDF so that we can recommend solutions that reflect well on this country.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What should we do about all this? We have talked and talked.

Mr ongiertho: Madam Speaker, I do not know the procedure that can be followed for all members of Parliament who come from areas surrounding lakes or rivers. There is the possibility of us withdrawing from this House until this is resolved for us. We are useless here. (Applause)

If we can bring all these matters and nothing is done, what is our use here? We cannot protect our people. We are useless to our people and because of that I seek your indulgence on this about the possibility of Members from these surrounding areas to withdrawal from this Parliament - (Member timed out.)

4.04
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I can tell the frustration of the honourable members especially those who come from the water bodies and their people are affected.

Madam Speaker, I know that Parliament has various committees and these committees are tasked, when there are matters of this nature, to go and investigate deeply and bring a comprehensive report - (Interjection) - unless you are saying that there is no committee that has gone to investigate this matter.

However, as far as I am concerned, either we constitute a select committee or we have the Committee on Agriculture take responsibility and investigate this matter such that we have a scientific solution to this problem. Otherwise, we cannot emotionally discuss this matter without the scientific part of collecting information.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the Committee on Agriculture undertook a very extensive investigation into this issue, they came and reported. The Committee on Defence has also done the same thing and there is nothing to investigate. The stories are the same, the conduct is the same, and the lack of action is the same - no sanctions.

4.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the unique reasons for which the Ugandan Parliament is known is the fact that even in a multiparty dispensation, we have the UPDF in this House. 

There are 10 Members of the UPDF here and the rationale by the appointing authority is that their presence here is to bridge the gap between the civilian authority and the military authority, which unfortunately is not happening now.

My humble proposal is that we show our disregard for the actions of the UPDF by taking a stand that the 10 UPDF officers who are Members of this House be suspended because their institution no longer respects Parliament -(Laughter)- so that we send a clear signal to the appointing authority that the UPDF as an institution has failed to work with the institution of Parliament. That would be the only way we can register our displeasure to the appointing authority. I so submit.

4.07
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This same issue has been on the Floor of Parliament Floor for over 20 times. At one time, you even suspended the House. As Members from the fishing community, we have met the President twice over the same issue. We also met you, Madam Speaker, when you summoned a meeting in your office with the Marine Commandant and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

During the State of the Nation Address, the President made it very clear that he has information that the UPDF is misbehaving in one way or the other but said, what do you expect them to do? This is not their mandate, it is not their profession.

Madam Speaker, I wonder; what is the role of this Parliament? There is a report of the Committee on Agriculture with clear recommendations and evidence but we continue to talk about the same issue. Now, I have heard, “Let Parliament stand on its feet”, where is our ‘feet’ if we cannot stand up on this small issue? What is happening is common knowledge that you pay Shs 300,000 for every engine; if they are 10, you pay Shs 3 million - it is like a business.

Where do we report? We have gone to the President, come to Parliament, gone to the Speaker, where else do we report? That is now our issue.

THE SPEAKER: Can you make proposals? Let us hear from the man of the islands.

4.09
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I wanted to address my issues to the Prime Minister of Uganda. Last week, one Member of Parliament told me that I should go slow because he met a certain Major who told him that I am always reporting them to Parliament and that they are going to do all possible ways in the waters to make sure that I do not return in the Parliament. I told him, I am working for my people.

The issue is, even as we talk, hon. Migadde has asked, “What is the role of this Parliament?” I know from here, people are going to be tortured more. Last year in Jinja, two people were on a boat and when these people followed them, one fell in the water and the one who remained on the boat has t been seen to date. 

When we talk, people say fish has increased - should fish increase while Ugandans die? Why should we make Ugandans die because of fish? We have talked and talked and talked.

As a Member from the fishing community, there is no need for us to continue being in the House when our people are being tortured while we continue sitting here. We should suspend and go out of this Parliament. We should not continue here - these days they abuse you in the waters – “Your Kadaga is stupid and nothing”; why should we stay here in the Parliament when we are being abused?

4.12
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, today is the day that the voters who are listening and watching us are looking at the powers of this Parliament. Due to the activities and actions of the UPDF marine on the waters, the poverty levels of my people of Busia Municipality have increased and also in the whole of Bukedea and Uganda.

As I talk, the Prime Minister of Uganda is listening and watching; the party I belong to has lost a lot of support because of the actions of these people on the waters.

The torture and extortion of money from our people is high. I, therefore, propose that we should suspend with immediate effect so that these people know that we love our people more than the fish they are talking about. 

In addition, because they have gone there to work –(Member timed out.)

4.13
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have patiently listened to my colleagues and while I listened, I also watched the Prime Minister’s demeanour and realised that he is also helpless. 

Now that the Prime Minister cannot do much - we have got reports and made recommendations and we have been ignored - I stand to support the proposal by my colleague that we suspend the House until somebody “up there” realises that there is a Parliament, which needs to be respected. 

I submit, Madam Speaker. 

4.14
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! 

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I raised this issue sometime last week. The members of Parliament, who come from districts or regions where there are fishing communities, are not against the Government policy on mature fish. However, we are against the treatment of our people. 

We have the Operation Wealth Creation in place. If there is a policy on fishing but without the mechanisms being in place, how come farmers are given appropriate seeds but fishermen are not given appropriate fishing gear?

Before the Government can think of beating our people, raping our girls and confiscating or looting what the traders buy with borrowed money, they should give alternatives to our people to survive in this country. 

My proposals are that: 
1. We, the members of Parliament from the fishing communities, go together with Government officials to our people to explain; and 

2. In the budget, we should appropriate very well for fishing gear; the right sizes of fish nets and boats. 

Let the Government give a starting point for our people. I thank you. 

4.16
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Instilling discipline in the UPDF officers does not require punishing the entire UPDF. There are people that we already know and the names are common because we are already talking about them. 

There is this notorious man who has been punishing people and taking money from them – the one who just raped a lady from Amolator. 

There are also those that have just been investigated by the different committees of Parliament. Why don’t we compile this list and task a minister and Government to punish them and report to Parliament on how they have been punished? This is because it is also not right for me to say that the entire UPDF is bad. There are individuals in the UPDF that must be punished. Thank you. 

4.17
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the concern and frustration of my colleagues, with respect to what is happening. I have also listened carefully to the concerns that these issues have been raised over and again and have not been dealt with. 

I would like to agree with my colleague that there are rules with respect to suspension of Members. I think the due process would demand that before these Members are suspended, they are given a chance to be heard.

Therefore, my proposal is that if there is need to suspend, probably, it is important to bring these representatives or the people concerned before the committee, before this decision is taken. The suspects should be brought before the committee and if Members are to be suspended, they need to be given a fair hearing. That can be done within the committee. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is clear that this House is dissatisfied with the violation of human rights meted on the people of Uganda by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces personnel. This House is dissatisfied by the lack of action by the Government, despite resolutions, reports and meetings. 

On that note, I suspend this House and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is required to be here tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. We shall not do any other business, until he has given an explanation about what is happening. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. If the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs does not come, no work will be done. 

(The House rose at exactly 4.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 December 2019 at 10.00 a.m.) 

