

Wednesday, 19 December 2018

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We apologise for the late start; we were engaged in the Commission over a number of issues but hope we shall be able to catch up quickly.

Secondly, you are invited to Christmas Carols in the Conference Hall this evening at 6.00 p.m. but of course we may still be here. I am just informing you. There were a few issues of national concern and I invite hon. Kabafunzaki.

3.14
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Madam Speaker, I hereby present a matter of national importance on misuse of Government funds by Rukiga District administration in the financial year 2017/18.

Madam Speaker, in line with the parliamentary mandate to scrutinise Government policy administration through ensuring transparency and accountability in the application of public funds and monitoring the implementation of Government programmes and projects, I bring to your attention major gaps in public funds application in the newly created district of Rukiga which doubles as my constituency.

Honourable members, the observations I am going to point out are as a result of my investigations as a Member of Parliament. Allow me to summarise them for purposes of time.

    1. Staff recruitment and staff management. The district accountant was recruited without following Public Service procedure but rather because he is a relative or daughter of the former Chief Administrative Officer (CAO).
    2. The acting chief of finance is not a qualified accountant - central to the qualification requirements - but he frustrated the recruitment process and ensured that no candidate was shortlisted for this position.
    3. Lastly, funds were received from Government but there is no activity plans or reports on how they were utilised.

Madam Speaker, when you go ahead to monitor, there is hardly any visible project performed by the administration last financial year. For example, in the department of production and marketing, Shs 438 million was spent -

THE SPEAKER: You had only two minutes, what are your prayers?

MR KABAFUNZAKI: Madam Speaker, it is on this basis that I appeal to your honourable office to order an investigation into the expenditure of the district and my details are contained in the report of Local Government Quarterly Performance Vote 620: Rukiga District and my own report. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether that issue was in the last financial year or whether it has already been audited by the Auditor-General; since I do not want us to move ahead of the Auditor-General, I direct that he investigates that issue and gives us a report. The Auditor-General, I do not think we should - thank you. Therefore, the Auditor-General will carry out an investigation and give us an update.

3.17
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding Bwizibwera-Nsiika-Bihanga-Katerera Road. This is the only road that we have in Buhweju as a connecting road.

This road was opened in 2011 and since then the ministry never went back to see what happened. That road was not done well because it has no culverts; it was done the way it was done and since then it is like that.

Madam Speaker, that road is impassable right now. We have been trying to reach the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) people but nothing has been done. That is the road His Excellency has been promising to tarmac; the only connecting road of Buhweju District.

My prayer is that the ministry should take interest to go back and see that road because the people of Buhweju are crying over that road; they cannot do anything this being the only road they can use. I also urge the ministry to take on the presidential pledge of tarmacking the road. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the works minister is directed to come back to this House and brief us on the plans for rehabilitation of Bwizibwera-Nsiika-Bihanga-Katerera Road and also update us on the presidential pledge to tarmac that same road. Today is Wednesday; they may have to come back to us when we return after Christmas.

3.19
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. My constituency is made up of islands and one island called Lolwe, which is a sub-county, has almost 10 primary schools.

From 2012 to-date, these boys and girls completing primary seven do not attend secondary school. They either go fishing or get married at an early stage. It is my request that I have written letters to the ministry concerned to save the people of Lolwe to avail them a secondary school. The parents are there and they are saying their children are getting married; they cannot travel in water for four hours to the main land to go and get secondary school education.

It is, therefore, my prayer that the Government through your office immediately avails the people of Lolwe a secondary school. My prayer is also that education minister also publishes all sub-counties without secondary schools so that we know when they are going to trace them out and give them schools. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we discussed the difficulties of the island constituencies and we had asked that when the Budget Committee is reporting, it should put them separate so that we pay particular attention to them. However, I would like to ask the education ministry to come and tell us what they are going to do in Lolwe where there is no secondary school. Come back to us after the Christmas recess. 
Thank you. 

Hon. Chekamondo, it is the same issue which hon. Kahunde wants to raise - regarding the accident in Kapchorwa. You can raise it first.

3.22
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding the fatal accident that took place yesterday evening in Kapchorwa District around the Sipi Falls.

Madam Speaker, 20 people were confirmed dead on the spot and several others are severely injured. The victims were staff members of a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) called the Cooperative League of United States of America, commonly called CLUSA, an organisation based in Kiryandongo District.

The victims were using the bus belonging to Kiryandongo Technical Institute and therefore were not students of the institute. They had gone for their end of year retreat.

I pray that Government investigates the cause of the accident and undertakes to meet all the burial expenses and take up the medical expenses of the injured people.

I also pray that Government undertakes to replace the only bus belonging to Kiryandongo Technical Institute. Besides, during festive seasons, the roads are busy; so I pray that Government steps up operation on major roads during this season in a bid to reduce the road accidents.

May the Almighty –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it happened in Kapchorwa; so hon. Chekamondo, please, use a minute to say something. 
 
3.24
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the matter of national importance, there was a terrible accident last evening in Towei Hill and that area has been accident-prone. There are two areas: Towei and the one towards Bulambuli. 

It is terrible that 20 people have been confirmed dead and three of them are people from Kapchorwa District. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the people of Kapchorwa and Sebei Sub-region who responded fast to help our people. People came with vehicles and ambulances to take the victims to hospital. Some were taken to Mbale Referral Hospital and others to Kapchorwa.

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time we have had an accident there. There was a time when we lost so many Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officers –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, we would like to ask the Ministry of Works to examine the situation of the black spot, because the honourable member is saying she sees one on that road, and advise on how she is going to mitigate the issue of accidents there.

The second issue is to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to carry out investigations into the cause of the accident. However, I have some difficulty in directing the compensation because that would offend Article 93. Let us deal with those we are able to do here. 

Maybe the Government can say something about the funeral expenses - I do not know where the bodies are. As we are contemplating, can we observe a moment of silence in respect of these 20 Ugandans who died?

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

3.26
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance.

On 16 December 2018, the Burundi Government blocked over 309 Ugandan Scouts from attending this year’s African Zonal Scout Competition that kicked off on Sunday at Gitega Province in Burundi. The competitions were supposed to attract participants from Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, the host.

The scouts’ delegation included students from both primary and secondary schools from the various regions of Uganda. Uganda was the chair of this year’s zonal competitions and was supposed to provide judges, the band and the guest of honour.

Mr Stephen Bitwire, the National Deputy Commissioner, when contacted, said that he engaged all authorities, including Uganda’s Mission in Burundi but in vain. This act did not only humiliate our scouts but also our country at large.

My prayer is that the Minister of East African Community Affairs should brief Parliament on the current relationship between Burundi and Uganda, especially regarding the scouts who were barred from entering Burundi.

THE SPEAKER: I see the minister here but I do not know whether he is in position to respond now or he can undertake to brief the House.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, we appreciate the concern from the honourable member concerning the interception of the Ugandan scouts to Burundi. 

The matter came up yesterday to our office and we also referred it to the Council of Ministers in Arusha. The team to do the investigations has already been set up. I can only commit that we shall come here with a full report, which will have at least the areas of all members of the Summit who will have taken concern. We can brief this Parliament on issues that will also pertain on the status of the East African Community – (Interruption)

MR SEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the issue that was raised by hon. Muyanja Mbabaali - and with your guidance, the response from the minister - can only be an answer on the relations. That is not a matter that can be answered by the ministers of the Summit that he is talking about.

Is the minister in order to avoid answering the question on the current relations? These are inter-state relations between Uganda and Burundi. It does not have to wait for the Council to sit to give us the status.

THE SPEAKER: In the Community we are part of the structure and part of which is the Council of Ministers. That is why he is referring to it. So he is in order. When is the Council meeting?

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, Uganda is the Chair of the Council. The issue at hand involves bi-lateral relations, where Uganda cannot investigate a colleague when we are also the aggrieved. That is why we have appointed another partner state to handle this matter and we come back so that we are neutral.

3.31
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

On 15 December 2018, fire gutted the lorry park of Kitgum Municipality, where commodities of 86 business people got burnt in the lorries to ashes. When they quantified, they said they lost Shs 88,000,400 worth of property. The lorry, UAU 206Y, was recently bought at 85 million.

Madam Speaker, the same malicious act took place on 7 December 2016, where a lorry, UAM 378F, also got burnt and businessmen and women of Owino market in Kitgum lost over Shs 65 million plus the lorry. The challenge now is that these business people had borrowed money from banks and the banks are insisting that they want –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Prayers?

MS LAMWAKA: My prayer is that the Ministry of Trade and Industry should bail out these business people since they have lost all these and they cannot come back to the market.

I also request the Police to thoroughly investigate why this fire is burning every now and then but the culprits not brought to book.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Lamwaka. We direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate that incident. However, on a bigger note, what is the Government policy on safety of markets, because there are so many reports of markets getting burnt?

3.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, we have discovered that the major cause of the loss of property in case there is fire is congestion. Therefore, Government has a policy of constructing markets with space.

We also have a policy of putting fire extinguishers in these markets - not only markets but also buildings. We have done so at regional level; in Lira, Hoima - those big markets. So far, that is what Government is doing.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, don’t you think it would be good to bring that policy here so that we can discuss it? And maybe enrich it?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Most obliged. I will instruct the minister concerned to come and tell us what Government has done so far which can be improved by this august House.

THE SPEAKER: The issue of insurance as well.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give this House is that we have national guidelines on occupational safety for work places and these guidelines are detailed. However, workplaces never follow them.

One of the guidelines, for instance, is that every workplace must have fire sensors so that if there is any outbreak anywhere it can be detected; there is an alarm and then the prevention measures are done.

However, most workplaces, Madam Speaker, do not follow these guidelines. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has these guidelines but they are never followed. The implementation is a problem.

THE SPEAKER: Shouldn’t the Government first go and close them so that people comply?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of fire across the country is a very serious one. We can talk about an endless list of fires. We can talk about the Kibwetere fire, Kasubi Tombs, etcetera.

When the Government Chief Whip was talking of congestion as a cause, what came to my mind was Kasubi - where you can never think of any congestion in the tombs. (Interjection) She is talking of discovering the cause as congestion.

Madam Speaker, what we need are reports. We should not just make statements because it is time our people stopped dying.

My procedural point therefore is whether –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you gave me an opportunity to say something and I am a very serious person. I did not stand to say something to pass time as insinuated by hon. Kasibante of Rubaga Division.

Is he in order to impute improper motive in my submission that I wasted this Parliament’s time? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister was acting as a senior concerned person, providing a solution. Therefore, he is out of order.

3.40
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On the 12th of this month, an unknown gunman attacked a family at Okuti Village, Aloi Sub-county in Alebtong District.

The father and the children were having their supper and the gunman killed the father, a pregnant wife and a young child who was three years old. We buried four people in that family.

Madam Speaker, we have discovered that the person who did this was a UPDF soldier who came all the way from Moroto and did all this in Alebtong.

Madam Speaker, the late couple is survived by four children; the eldest is about 14 years and the youngest about seven years. These children are left helpless. Madam Speaker, my prayer is that:

    1. It was a gun from the Government of Uganda, which killed this family, and those children are now left helpless. My prayer is that Government should take –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to investigate the killing in Okuti Sub-county and give us an update after the Christmas recess. Oh! The Minister of Internal Affairs is here and he is ready. Okay. 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the incident happened in Alebtong, as the honourable member has described. I am aware of it and as we speak now, police is investigating the matter. In due course, I will share with you the results of that investigation and the actions taken thereafter.

3.42
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On Friday 14 December, 2018, a primary five pupil of Odujo Primary School, called Nancy Drikaru, succumbed to a snake bite as they went to fetch water at around 3.00 a.m.

The water crisis in Okollo Sub-county, which is one of the sub-counties in Upper Madi, is overwhelming in that women now have to leave their bed at 2.00 a.m. in search of water. When the President visited Upper Madi on two occasions; in 2016 and Tuesday 20 June 2017, the issue was presented before him. He therefore directed the Ministry of Water and Environment to provide piped water, as efforts to drill boreholes in this belt of Upper Madi had failed.

Since then, the ministry has not taken any action. I therefore beg to lay on Table the presidential directive to provide water to the people of Madi-Okollo. This letter was dated 13 July 2017, for which the ministry has never acted – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please just make your prayers. 

MR ETUKA: Madam Speaker, I pray that the Ministry of Water and Environment takes this matter seriously and helps the people of Madi-Okollo County. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I beg to lay this document.

THE SPEAKER: I saw the minister here. I do not know whether he has any update on why the presidential pledge has not been fulfilled in Madi-Okollo. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Madam Speaker, I cannot give an answer at the moment but I need to go and see whether Madi is one of the areas that are being covered by a loan, which is before this Parliament. Therefore, allow me to come back after Christmas and then I will present to you a written report on the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give us a report after the Christmas recess. Honourable members, yesterday, we had directed the Prime Minister to come and give us information about the situation of hon. Robert Sentamu Kyagulanyi and his music concerts. However, he has written to me to say that he has delegated the Minister of Internal Affairs to make that statement on his behalf. Therefore, we shall accordingly amend the Order Paper to make room for that statement. (Hon. Nzoghu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule do you rise? 

MR NZOGHU: I rise under Rule 42(3) and Rule 42(6) of our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, last month - while you were chairing this House - I raised a matter regarding the scholarships in the Albertine Region districts, where Kasese District was excluded, yet it is also in the Albertine Region. Hon. David Bahati committed himself that he would come to this Parliament and give the response to that effect because my prayer was that Kasese should be included on the list. 

Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is that hon. Bahati has taken more than two weeks to respond to the question, and yet our rules compel him not to take more than two weeks. 

Secondly, our rules are also clear that on Wednesdays and Thursdays, we can raise such matters. Therefore, I would like to evoke the rules that hon. Bahati comes to commit himself that Kasese be included on the list of scholarships. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would just like to check whether the two weeks’ rule has been breached but in the meantime – I think it was the Minister of Education and Sports that was supposed to produce that list. Isn’t it? Let me check whether the two weeks’ rule has been breached. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this came out of the loan that was approved here. When I stood up to promise that I would come back with an answer, you actually said that the Clerk can check in the records and see whether Kasese was part of that loan that was approved. I think the Clerk can provide that information.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall deal with it after we get the answer from the Hansard.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Bahati is setting for himself a question because the issue was that Kasese District squarely lies in the Albertine Region and this loan was for the Albertine Region districts. Therefore, why was Kasese excluded? That was the question. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I remember asking you that; “Were you asking as matter of right or you wanted to be included?” I asked the Clerk to check for the districts that were included in that loan so that we know whether to include or to leave you out. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I did also respond when you asked me that. I did put it to you that the people of Kasese and I are seeking your indulgence, as the Speaker of this Parliament, to do us a service. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we have checked the Hansard and Kasese was not part of the loan. I think what we should be doing is to ask the Government to support Kasese by creating a facility for you. 

MR NZOGHU: I am very honoured and I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS ON PRESIDENTIAL FAST-TRACK INITIATIVE TO END HIV/AIDS AS A PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT BY 2030

3.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED DISEASES (Ms Judith Alyek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by laying on the Table the minutes of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases.

THE SPEAKER: Could you just give the highlights? Do not read all the details. I think it’s on the iPads. 

MS ALYEK: It is okay; I will summarise. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS on the presidential fast-track initiative on ending HIV/AIDS as a public health threat in Uganda by 2030.

Madam Speaker, Rule 181 (1)(b) states that, “The Committee on HIV/AIDS shall scrutinise the HIV/AIDS policies, monitor and evaluate strategies and activities of Government, local government and other bodies aimed at HIV/AIDS prevention, care, treatment and psycho-social support of infected and affected persons.” Rule 181(2) states that, “The committee shall report to this House at least twice a year.” 

I accordingly wish to present to this House this report of the Committee on HIV/AIDS on the presidential fast-track initiative on ending HIV/AIDS in Uganda by 2030. 

The purpose of this report, first of all, is to update this House on the progress of the implementation of the initiative and ask Members to augment the efforts of His Excellency, the President, in the fight against HIV/AIDS and further take a political lead in the HIV/AIDS response in their respective constituencies.

The presidential fast-track initiative on ending HIV/AIDS as a public health threat in Uganda by 2030 was launched on the 06 June 2017 at Imperial Royale Hotel Kampala by His Excellency, the President.

The initiative is as a result of the President’s concern on the following: Uganda as a country had backtracked on the gains registered in the 1990s towards ending HIV/AIDS and the fear that Uganda, may not meet the 2030 global target of ending HIV/AIDS as a public health threat without appropriate interventions and doing things differently. 

The resounding gains that saw a reduction in HIV/AIDS prevalence from 18 per cent in 1990s to 6.4 per cent in 2005 were getting compromised already. The momentum had been lost along the way and there was unacceptable upward movement of HIV rates in some parts of the country. 

Therefore, the tremendous gains in the 1990s were at a time of limited options and technologies for HIV/AIDS prevention, no treatment for HIV and no prevention of mother-to-child transmission. The momentum seems to have gotten lost along the way at a time where there exist technological options to even do better. 

The available prevention and treatment options had not been adequately taken advantage of to stop and seriously, on the part of the stakeholders including the general population, HIV/AIDS should be a public health threat. 

The specific areas that need to be addressed are, first of all, the unacceptable high infections of 227 persons per day in Uganda and especially among the adolescents and girls within the reproductive age group. A big number of men who are unaware of their HIV status have remained a conduit for HIV spread.

A disproportionately high number of HIV/AIDS related deaths among men due to their poor health-seeking behaviour and a high unacceptable number of children getting infected through mother-to-child transmission, numbering 3,000 children per annum, a number which is still far from the target of zero.

There is also reduced sensitisation of the communities on HIV/AIDS by leaders, the responsible government institutions and practitioners in the HIV/AIDS response. Therefore, we have this focus on the initiatives.

The initiative now seeks to have a reversal of the current unacceptable trend by revitalising HIV prevention so as to close the tap of new infections, particularly among girls and young women. It focuses on effective interventions to address the existing gaps in the management and control of HIV/AIDS. 

The initiative is a five-point plan, namely:

    1. Engaging men in HIV testing and enrollment on ART and closing the tap on new infections, particularly among adolescent girls and young women.
    2. Accelerating implementation of test and treat and attainment of the 90-90-90 by 2020 target particularly among the young women. Madam Speaker, the 90-90-90 here means 90 per cent of our population that is infected with HIV should know that they are infected; the next 90 is that of all people tested positive, 90 per cent should be put on ARVs; and the next 90 is that 90 per cent of our population should have their viral loads suppressed having taken ARVs. 
    3. The third action point plan is consolidating progress towards elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
    4. Ensuring financial sustainability for HIV/AIDS response. 
    5. And then ensuring institutional effectiveness for a well-coordinated multi-sectoral response.

The strategies to achieve the five-point plan objectives:

    1. Supervision and follow up of HIV response by His Excellency, the President. To this end a desk has been established by the President to receive regular updates on the interventions and also increase resourcing, especially from the domestic resources to ensure financial sustainability and predictability and also to revive and reinvigorate messaging to influence positive behavioral change. That was a key component in reversing the impact of HIV in the late 1990s.

    2. The acceleration of the implementation of identified interventions and all leaders picking a leaf from the President’s book and being champions of HIV prevention in their respective areas of representation. 

Madam Speaker, we expect the following outcomes: 

    1. We should have 90 per cent of the population being aware of their status by especially bringing on board men who currently are lagging behind and becoming the main transmitters of HIV.
    2. Enrolling at least 90 per cent of persons estimated to be positive on care and treatment. 
    3. In addition, to have the viral load suppression to 90 per cent after being enrolled on HIV AIDS treatment.
    4. To reverse the infections, especially, among the young girls and adolescents and women in the reproductive age group and reverse the unacceptable numbers of exposed children being born to HIV positive mothers from 3,000 to zero.
    5. And then having internal financial sustainability through reliance on locally-generated resources for HIV/AIDS response other than relying on donors.

The initiative, as I said, was rolled out in all the eight regions of the country. Northern Uganda was launched in Kole District, Mid-western Uganda launched in Hoima – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Members can read that for themselves. Go to the areas where you need our help.

MS ALYEK: Let me go straight to the general challenges. However, before I go there, I would like to talk about leadership. We call upon the leaders to take a stand on HIV by, first of all, providing clear and accurate information on how to prevent HIV; and to help in mobilising communities especially men, to adopt risk-reduction strategies such as being faithful, abstinence and then condom-use to prevent HIV. 

The other one is also to encourage people to go for testing. 

Motivate young people to stay in schools and engage in productive activities.

Mobilise communities against negative social and cultural practices such as early marriage and gender-based violence that expose people to the risk of getting infected.

Madam Speaker, in the challenges, we have:

1. 	Limited human resource and means of transport to conduct outreaches to reach the target population. The structure does not provide for the position of counsellors, much as the services of a counsellor at the health facility are critical in HIV care, testing and treatment. 

2. 	Some leaders lack up-to-date information on the HIV response which compromises the kind of messages delivered to the population. Some information seems not to be generally accepted by all. For example, there is a debate as to whether safe male medical circumcision should be communicated and encouraged as an HIV prevention strategy, as it is believed to offer between 50 and 60 per cent protection.

I would like to summarise and be as brief as possible. 

Other challenges include:

    1. At the start of Test and Treat Policy, a number of facilities experienced stock-outs of ARVs and related supplies, which still exist in our communities today. 
    2. A number of sub-counties in the country have no health centre IIIs. This makes distance a significant barrier to accessing health or HIV/AIDS services.
    3.  Insufficient means of transport has hampered districts to conduct outreaches in a bid to reach to the most vulnerable populations. 
    4. In some instances, the traditional healers and some pastors that claim to cure HIV/AIDS have interrupted adherence to HIV/AIDS treatment. We have lost so many people to that effect.

We have the following recommendations for the challenges mentioned above:

    a) The establishment of health centre IIIs - in all the sub-counties where they do not exist - should be expedited and we need more funding to be provided to facilitate outreaches. 

    b) We also need measures to be put in place to regulate the practices of the traditional healers, pastors and traditional birth attendants that are hindering the progress towards ending HIV/AIDS in this country.

    c) Ensure financial sustainability for the HIV/AIDs response: There is still heavy reliance on donor funding for the HIV/AIDS response. As a solution, focus is to be placed on financial sustainability by establishing a reliable stream of domestic funding. This is to be actualised through the operationalisation of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund by Government, mobilising private sector contributions, plugging the financial leakages and prioritising interventions.

The districts have integrated HIV/AIDS activities in their district annual and development plans. Additionally, it is a requirement that 0.1 per cent of the budgets of local governments are dedicated to HIV/AIDS response.

The HIV/AIDS Trust Fund, as provided for in Section 27 of the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2014, has already been committed by His Excellency, the President. Unfortunately, the fund has not yet been operationalised.

There are also some two other key challenges:

    1. ART clinics still report loss of patients along the treatment cascade, which affects adherence and the resultant required viral suppression.

    2. Poor adherence among the adolescents, who are one of the target groups under the initiative, undermines the HIV/AIDS fight. The sub-optimal suppression in this particular age group threatens the achievement of the 90-90-90 target that we have earlier on talked about.

General recommendations

Arising from the challenges and in the spirit of actualising the objective of the initiative, the committee recommends the following:

1. 	Members of Parliament and other political leaders, mobilise the population towards this initiative in their respective constituencies. 
2. 	Districts are required to launch district chapters for the initiative and have it on the top of the district agenda. 
3. 	Government actualises and provides adequate funds to the HIV/AIDs Trust Fund to facilitate the procurement of HIV/AIDS commodities including ARVs and test kits. 
4. 	Due recognition be given to the need for counsellors and the critical role they play in HIV/AIDS prevention, testing and treatment in the health facilities. This should be provided for in the structures of the health facilities offering ART. 
5. 	The uniqueness of border populations be integrated in the HIV/AIDS care and treatment and be planned for taking into account their unique situations. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, this is an opportune time to rally behind the efforts of the initiative by the President in the global move to achieve the set targets and the eventual elimination of HIV/AIDS as a public health threat by 2030. With the concerted efforts, an HIV/AIDS free world is possible. 

It is important that leaders at different levels, including Members of Parliament, offer the required leadership towards this very noble course.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and your colleagues.

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, before I sit down, allow me to inform the House that upon completing the launch of the initiative at the district level – which will start early next year - Members are expected to take a political lead in launching the initiative in their respective districts. 

Furthermore, Members of Parliament are key in influencing public knowledge and opinion in communities and are well-placed to provide leadership to strengthen social and moral values; a key component in causing behavioural change in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

To do this, Members require up-to-date information to guide the delivery of the right messages that will enlist the required response. It is against this background that the Committee on HIV/AIDS has come up with parliamentary HIV/AIDS communication toolkits to help Members of Parliament in delivering the right HIV/AIDS messages to the population. 

The toolkit provides updates on new developments in the HIV/AIDS response, focus at the realisation of the global goal to end HIV/AIDS by 2030 and it is also in line with the presidential fast-track initiative to end HIV/AIDS as a public health threat by 2030. We have already requested the office of the Clerk of Parliament, to have the toolkit printed and distributed to all Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Parliamentary HIV/AIDS Communication Toolkit which will be used by all Members of Parliament. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. 

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Secondly, I wish to extend my thanks to your office for facilitating the committee to participate and mobilise the population in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

Madam Speaker, our role was accordingly recognised and the committee received an award in the recognition of the outstanding contribution in the HIV/AIDS response, presented by the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. The award was presented to us on 1 December 2018, during the World AIDS Day commemoration in Manafwa District.

Madam Speaker, we are grateful for your support and this is the award. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the committee, for your work. On behalf of the House, we congratulate and commend you for the work done. I do not know whether you are going to issue a programme for the launch so that when Members go they can plan for next year. 

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, I do not yet have the programme but we are working it out with the Uganda AIDS Commission and we shall make Members aware. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of Members but I just have two comments. I would like to know from the Government why it has been unwilling to implement the HIV Trust Fund since 2014. We want an explanation. Secondly, honourable chairperson, you talked about the border community but I wonder why you did not talk about the fishing community because of their high level of mobility. Let us have a few comments from Members.

4.13
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that you mentioned the fishing community in your remarks. I appreciate the report by the committee. I had a chance to interact with the committee and I thought that some of these issues would be captured.

Madam Speaker, the HIV prevalence rate for the country, I think, is 6.4 per cent and for Buvuma it is 12.4 per cent. Therefore, when we are talking about the target for 2030, we should be putting special emphasis on these very risky areas. This is because we are all converging in the same country. We cannot say that, “That is HIV for the islanders and this is the HIV for those on the mainland.” 

We would like to see clear measures; how do we intend to bring this down or hit the target when these people cannot access health facilities - even to test whether they are positive or negative? If those who test positive cannot even access ARVs, how do we intend to achieve this target? 

Secondly, when you look at it, the islands are like camps and there is a chance that the HIV prevalence in the camps is higher, even on the mainland. Therefore, the same applies to them – (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. I would like to talk for people with disabilities who have a double stigma when it comes to HIV/AIDS and disability. Sometimes we tend to forget these people who do not even get the messages because we shall launch this programme but it does not reach those people. Therefore, I would like to know how the programme is going to look at people who are marginalised because they already have the stigma because of disability and now HIV has come in.

Furthermore, I wish we could target those young people who get HIV because of being born with it. What special programme do we have for them? These young people are grown and are now adolescents and need to get partners. How do we prepare them? 

I would also like to add my voice on asking Government to provide money for the HIV Trust Fund. I was a member of the Committee on HIV/AIDS in the Ninth Parliament and this was a welcome idea. HIV has been left to donors and I think we need to address it and urgently. Thank you.

4.17
MR ALEX MUNGOMA (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of men refusing to go and test for HIV is a very big issue, which we have talked about for a very long time. I feel and suggest that the Ministry of Health should come out with serious guidelines compelling men to go and test for HIV. Why should we continue talking about something day in and day out while nothing is being done?

Secondly, in areas where there is circumcision, such as Bugisu Sub-region, there must be serious sensitisation, especially during the circumcision period. I am very sure that taking the day to Manafwa District signifies something – that the HIV prevalence in Bugisu Sub-region is higher compared to other places. Therefore, I appeal to the Government to take into consideration –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. You have just made a very serious allegation which should be based on empirical or scientific research. This is because even in the report, much as they are castigating men for not testing or being uncooperative, it is not being backed by any tabulated results of survey that was done. Therefore, could you please substantiate on the allegations you are making that HIV rates are much higher in Bugisu because of circumcision? (Laughter) 

MR MUNGOMA: Thank you, my sister. I think you are in a better position to answer the honourable member. (Laughter)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not be surprised to hear that there is a high HIV/AIDS prevalence in Bugisu. This is because we started a campaign as a country of safe male circumcision and it has –(Interjection)- Yes. This campaign has gone to the people wrongly. They think that the fact that you are circumcised means you are completely safe yet it is only 60 per cent safe, which does not help. 

Therefore, we must change the campaign to “the circumcision is only helping you to keep clean and not to prevent HIV”. If we continue with this, we are going to have more HIV infections.

MR MUNGOMA: Thank you very much, my sister – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Macho.
 
4.21
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I thank the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases for a very good report and appreciate their efforts for fighting HIV/AIDS that has led them to win an award. (Interjection) May I be protected because hon. Nambeshe is interrupting while I am submitting?

THE SPEAKER: Can you please face this side?

MR MACHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Member of Parliament from Busia Municipality on the border, I would like to recommend we should add a clause for mandatory testing of all trailer drivers who come into the country.  

Madam Speaker, I have observed that whenever most of these drivers enter Uganda, they take more than three, four to five days in Busia and what makes them stay on the border is mainly to enjoy the Ugandan women yet most of them leave our people infected with HIV/AIDS.

Madam Speaker, when we enter borders of other countries, there is mandatory test of yellow fever and so, I think there should be a mandatory test of HIV/AIDS for all those trailer drivers so that our people can remain safe.

In addition to the above, Government has left the issue of HIV/AIDS to the private sector. I am happy about the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund and I think this money should be given to non-governmental organisations that are doing a very good job to reduce –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for a good report, which has given us a thorough situational analysis of the challenges and highlighting realistic recommendations in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

Madam Speaker, under 3.2, it is mentioned that we have realised reduction of mother-to-child transmission from 10,000 to 3,100 in the year 2015. I think we need to give credit where it is due and recognise the tremendous efforts put by our First Lady, Mrs Museveni Janet Kataha, under the Organisation of African First Ladies; she has really done a lot in realising this reduction.

Madam Speaker, we also thank His Excellency, the President for the initiative. However, like my colleagues have said, Government should take the lead so that this fund gets money.

It is also been mentioned that some leaders lack information. Madam Speaker, we managed to make great strides against HIV/AIDS because of the information that moved around; everyone heard those drums every evening and they were scared. Now, we hear that young girls are more scared of getting pregnant than contracting –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. One of the areas I felt should have been captured is the issue of refugee-hosting communities because those areas are prone to HIV infections. 

Some time back, statistics were carried in Ramogi Health Centre III - that is in the heart of Bidi Bidi. Before the coming of the refugees, HIV/AIDS infection rates were very low but after the settlement of the refugees, it is more than double. This means that the settlement of the refugees somehow sparks HIV infections.

Secondly, I would like to address myself to the issue raised by hon. Lucy Akello on circumcision. In my opinion, the idea of saying “60 per cent chance” should be left out. To me it appears to be misleading. Otherwise, someone may say “I have my 60 per cent, let me try” and yet at the end, he gets a problem. I therefore, think that the 60 per cent should be considered as a misleading statement.

Finally, some time back, there used to be reproductive health education in schools, which was – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, we have the World Health Organisation (WHO) that has taken the statistics of HIV for the whole world and they have advised that men should be circumcised; it is not only in Uganda but all over the world.

They have actually proved that people who have been circumcised have got less chances of contracting HIV. Therefore, you cannot dismiss the WHO statistics which hon. Lucy Akello talked about that those are the figures of people who have not contracted HIV.

Madam Speaker, even one of my colleagues stood up and said “Oh, Bagisu.”  According to the statistics, the people -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Is the honourable member in order, to say that statistics should not be used or the 60 per cent, which was coded by hon. Lucy should not be used, when the WHO has given that 60 per cent of men have not contracted HIV? Is he in order, therefore, to say we should not take the statistics?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Onzima is interested in a good message; he is not encouraging people to take the chance of 60 per cent. That is the case he is making. Do not encourage them about the 60 per cent because it either works or not. So, hon. Onzima is in order.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have rightly observed, I said it was my opinion. 

I was saying some time back, there used to be reproductive health education that contained a serious element of sensitising our youth in schools about HIV. It appears that this initiative has reduced. Therefore, I would like to encourage the Ministry of Health to come up with a programme of reproductive health education so that the issues of HIV can be seriously taken in schools.

4.29
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to extent my sincere thanks to the committee for the good report about one of the biggest challenges we have in the health sector, which is HIV/AIDS.

Madam Speaker, if the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund were put into practice, it would have solved most of the challenges we are currently facing. A case in point is that for us in Kagadi District - tomorrow we shall be belatedly marking the World AIDS Day. Otherwise, if it was not the Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI), we would not have known whether there would be any record about Kagadi District.

When you look at the challenges the committee has highlighted, especially on human resource, inadequacy of health centres and poorly equipped health centres - and yet you are talking about the presidential initiative - to me, the initiative must be moved away from the paper work into the practicalities. Otherwise, the challenge we have in Uganda is operationalisation. Yes, we have plans but operationalising a particular initiative becomes a very big problem.

The other issue is about irregularities in providing Antiretroviral Therapy (ART). We have got people in many health centres and hospitals who are supposed to receive antiretroviral therapy –(Member timed out.)

4.31
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the very good report they have presented. 

I thank Government for the initiative that they have taken to try to eliminate HIV. As we move forward, this strategy should reflect on the successes of the 1990s which were based on very effective, emotional audio and visual communication. However, we must appreciate that there is a change in generations. What the children in the 1990s saw is not what the current adolescents are seeing. There were serious emotions that came with AIDS in terms of body deformities, black spots and the others, which are currently not seen because of what we have been able to do in terms of providing ARVs, among other solutions. Therefore, there must be a serious focus on the adolescents using messages through drama as used to be done in schools some time back.

Another important issue that we need to appreciate is that a strategy which is universal but does not map out the riskiest areas may not achieve much. There is serious urban-rural or peri-urban migration these days. Sex workers are moving away from the cities to follow huge Government projects like construction projects, fishing or landing sites, etcetera. Here they are saying that there are no facilities in such places. We need to seriously focus on those areas where sex workers are moving to, which do not have the facilities to deal with the problem. 

Another approach can be to revamp the effort of religious leaders. There is family breakdown and moral decadence, which is not being addressed. Young people behave as they choose and everybody looks at Government as if the entire responsibility is solely on Government. We need team effort to deal with this problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.33
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for a very good report. 

The committee has put emphasis on district chapters. This is very important, but these have been in existence for some time now. Every district in Uganda has a district HIV/AIDS committee and they have existed since I think 2000 or 2001. However, the biggest challenge that the district HIV/AIDS committees have had is lack of funding. 

In the period between 2001 and 2007, these committees were very effective as a result of the Community HIV/AIDS Initiative popularly known as CHAI. For those of you who were based in the districts, you will remember the CHAI initiative. That was one of the initiatives that did a wonderful job to actually sensitise people. They would present drama in churches, community and village meetings and they did role play. They actually brought the message closer to the last person at the village level. 

We need to go back to the Community HIV/AIDS Initiative. If we revive it and involve the communities and Community Based Organisations (CBOs) to craft and disseminate HIV/AIDS messages through drama, I think the messages would sink deeper. As someone who has been a practitioner in local governments, I know that this is one of the best initiatives we have had in the local governments. Therefore, I beg that we look at –(Interruption)  

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, in the past when we were still in secondary school, there was a team from Ministry of Health that would move from school to school, sensitising pupils and students about the dangers of HIV.  However, those things no longer happen. We need to revise this and start sensitising our pupils right from primary school level. Thank you.

MR ARINDA: Thank you very much, hon. Olanya, for that information. It is very pertinent and falls within what I was submitting –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to make an announcement before hon. Mbwatekamwa comes up. The Minister of State for Northern Uganda invites the following for a meeting at the Office of the President Conference Hall on Friday, 21 December at 8.30 a.m.: MPs from West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Bukedi and Elgon. This is to brief you on Government programmes coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister in your regions. So, please attend. 

4.37
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the good report that they have presented. 

Much as we are telling people to test and even blaming men for not participating in HIV testing and counselling, most of the people who are infected with HIV are actually suffering with it. At the moment in Uganda, if you fail with the first line of treatment and you are put on the second line, there is no third line. For one to access third line treatment, they have to go to private health facilities and yet it costs more than Shs 700,000 per dose. 

It is a pity that while we are discussing this, there is no minister here – (Interjections) – I meant the ones in charge of this docket. Yes, there are ministers present but none of them is in charge of this docket. 

On top of that, there has been a crisis with the supply of cotrimoxazole, which is also called Septrin. For the past one year, there has been no Septrin in the country. Ministry of Health even sent a circular to all health workers not to order for cotrimoxazole; so it is almost rotting at National Medical Stores (NMS). I went there with –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude that issue. Order please! Let hon. Mbwatekamwa conclude that issue in one minute.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, there are boxes of cotrimoxazole at NMS stores but Government wrote a circular to stop people from taking cotrimoxazole. The importance of cotrimoxazole is to treat opportunistic infections like herpes zoster, also known as kisipi. Therefore, this means that our people are suffering.

Madam Speaker, the messages we are sending out to people are outdated and stigmatise them. Imagine you go to a school and find a poster reading, “AIDS kills”, but a child who was born with HIV might be in that same school and at the same time we are telling them that as long as they keep on drugs, they are not going to die. So, which information are we giving to these young people?

Madam Speaker, I conclude by requesting that the minister comes here and explains why Government is about to burn the Septrin in National Medical Stores and why it is not being distributed.

4.41
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for presenting a good report. 

As we talk about mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, I have a concern; we need to reach zero transmission on that. However, we do not have supervisors in health facilities to deliberately oversee what happens at the time of childbirth. Therefore, I thought that as Parliament, we should budget for that specifically, so that when mothers are giving birth, at least somebody who is qualified does the supervision of that delivery.

Secondly, there is a problem with the Village Health Teams (VHTs); we have neglected them. These are people who are based in the villages, but we are concentrating on the urban areas. How about those in the villages? We should empower the VHTs so that they follow up the cases down there in the villages and help prevent HIV infection.

Lastly, these days when somebody passes on, often they say the person has died of cancer. Whenever a death results from HIV/AIDS, nobody will talk about it. Therefore, people are no longer scared of HIV/AIDS; they now only think about cancer. What is the relation between the two? We should be able to know. They now tell people it is cancer; has HIV/AIDS disappeared? Does it kill or has it stopped killing? That is why it is working on people seriously –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, colleague. I would like to give you some information. I do not know whether Government is running away from responsibility because people are even paying to use the cancer machine in Mulago Hospital. The Government Chief Whip is here; are you running away from responsibility? That is why even if somebody dies of AIDS, they say they have died of cancer. That is the information I want to give.

MR AOGON: Thank you for the information. Indeed, that is the problem and we need a solution - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like the Minister of Health to come and explain to us this issue raised by hon. Mbwatekamwa - the Septrin. It is an extremely serious issue. We want the Minister of Health.

4.43
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Specifically, I would like to address myself to three points. One is the situation or status analysis. Honourable chairperson, it would have done us well if your report helped us understand the progress that we have been able to make as a country - where were yesterday, where we are today and where we are going tomorrow.

Two, it would have been good to cluster. When you talk about contributions, causes or factors that are fanning the HIV burden in our country, I would also be interested in knowing how much each factor contributes. In HIV research, probably that would be referred to as characterisation of factors. If it is peer pressure, how much does that contribute towards the epidemic or burden?

Lastly, you talked about 2030. However, in your submission, Chairperson, I did not get a reflection or contribution or commitment to the effect that you will be able to undertake intermediary research that would help us take stock of how much progress we have made, whether we are still on course, and what it is that we need to undertake to achieve the 2030 target or vision.

Madam Speaker, I would encourage the committee to take advantage of the existing research, both at the School of Public Health –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the good work done. I also thank the Government for this very important initiative. 

In order to achieve what the committee chairperson laid out, we need to emphasise the need for health centres III in all subcounties as stipulated in the Government guidelines. As we talk, there are some areas which are very far and people walk very long distances to access ARVs. In Amuru District, for example, you can find a father or mother walking more than 70 kilometres to pick ARVs and they walk back. The supply of drugs is also not enough. Many people from my constituency pick their ARVs from Gulu Regional Referral Hospital now and the distance is quite alarming. Therefore, let the Government place emphasis on this and make sure the drugs are in stock in all the health centres within the subcounties.

Secondly, I appreciate the committee for pointing out something about traditional beliefs. We have witchdoctors and pastors who claim that they can only pray and HIV patients get cured. These people are misleading our community –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, there is evidence in the Bible that Jesus healed the sick. It also says in the Bible that they that believe shall do even greater exploits than Jesus did. I preach the Gospel and I have had the opportunity to see testimonies of people getting healed.

We must differentiate this, however. There are situations where people do not exercise faith and they just imagine. Even when you are healed, you are supposed to go and test and come back with a testimony. That is when you can believe and give a testimony. It is not to say that prayer cannot heal - I will stand for that. The authority we have as Christians - 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS OSEGGE: It is not right. Is the honourable member in order to compare witchdoctors, who are used by the devil, to pastors who preach the word of God? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, can you substantiate whether you said pastors are like witchdoctors?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stated clearly that we have people who claim that they are pastors. In my district, Amuru, there is a pastor who went to Okunggedi Parish and stopped all those who are HIV positive from going to pick ARVs. He told them that he has the Holy Spirit, so he would pray and they get cured. There are quack pastors. If she is a clean pastor, I am very happy but there are those who are fake.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us concentrate on the subject. Let us not go into other issues. 

4.51
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the good report they presented and congratulate them for what they have attained. 

I would like to seek some clarification. Uganda has been applauded for being a model nation in the fight against HIV/AIDS in the entire African continent as well as the entire world. I would have wanted the committee to comment on the mechanisms that we are using - ABC, as well as prevention of mother-to-child transmission. What is your evaluation of the success of this model, which has been adopted and applauded by the entire world? I did not see this come out in your report. 

Are we still using this strategy successfully or we can no longer confidently say that the model is working anymore? As you have said, it looks like the rate of HIV infection seems to be escalating; is the model still relevant or it isn’t anymore?

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee for reporting on sensitisation. There are a lot of myths going round. Circumcision is one of those that has already been stated, but there is this myth –(Member timed out.)

4.53
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda is known for her fight against HIV/AIDS and we now manufacture HIV medicines in Luzira. However, if you go round the whole country, there are no HIV drugs in many hospitals even though we produce the medicines in Uganda and sell to many African countries. The Ministry of Health should increase its HIV/AIDS budget in order to supply HIV drugs to hospitals.

I was speaking about the World Health Organisation here. When you are a Member of Parliament, you are supposed to be an all-round person; you must know what is happening in the world.  As members of the United Nations (UN), we have got to know what the UN organs do. The World Health Organisation came out and started testing and they asked men in Kenya, South Africa and Uganda to be circumcised. They have encouraged the whole world to have men circumcised because if a man is circumcised, it reduces his chances of contracting HIV. This is a fact and I would encourage my colleagues in this House who have not done so to do it. 

The Ministry of Health has been going around encouraging men in different areas of Kampala to get circumcised and they have been circumcised. Those who have not done it, please go ahead and get circumcised as this will help to reduce HIV –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the very good report they presented, although I have some reservations in regard to the recommendations that were made.

I did not see any recognition of VHTs anywhere in the report and their role in this endeavour to prevent HIV/AIDS infection by 2030. They are the first or basic unit that should be concerned with preventing the spread of this disease. They have that mantle to prevent HIV/AIDS infection in the various villages in our country.

First of all, they should be empowered with all the relevant technicalities - the information they need to pass on to our population in the villages – as a way of preventing the spread of this disease. One of the causes of the spread of HIV/AIDS is drug abuse and alcoholism. These are problems, which come from the villages. If these people can counsel our youth and other affected people, it could help us get rid of this disease quickly.

Another point is that –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (IND, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will proceed from the point at which my colleague, hon. Allan Ssewanyana, stopped on - drug abuse and use or sharing of injections. There is a trend of using heroine by sharing injections, of course after intoxication. This is dangerous to our society, but we shall address that at a future stage when we talk about drug control in our country.

It is also imperative to note an oversight in your report, Chairperson. Uganda has benefited a lot from our development partners; for example, the United States of America and others have given us funds every other day. Recently, we were given US$ 430 million in form of aid for the 2030 campaign to eradicate HIV/AIDS.

Thirdly, it should also be mandatory for all medical practitioners to be tested for HIV. Recently, there was a case of a medical practitioner in Germany who was infecting other people with HIV. That can happen where there is a deliberate move; as you go into a hospital, someone injects you with HIV. 

There was also a recent case of a one Hamza; a video has been circulating from one of the television stations. This is also a deliberate case of infection of HIV from one person to another. The young gentleman gives a testimony of how a racket of young people put him into contact with one of those – (Member timed out.)

4.59
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they presented. 

My attention is drawn to page 20, paragraph 3 of the report, which indicates clearly that there is limited funding to functionalise the HIV/AIDS structures at the lower local governments and activities thereon. They also say that the money that is purported to be allocated is never released and it is just on paper. Unfortunately, the committee did not go ahead to make recommendations and this is where I come in. I suggest that when it comes to budgeting, we appropriate enough money for this. At least, we have the mandate to do so. Two, we should make sure that this money is released. Three, let us make sure that this money is ring-fenced and not subject to unnecessary cuts. If that is taken care of, I would be very happy.

Secondly, we should go back to our basics. Before this entire hullabaloo, when we first took this up strongly, we had very limited resources but we were making very big achievements. What is happening now, even when we have NGOs in their hundreds, lots of money from World Bank and from everywhere? What is happening? This could mean that the money is not being put to the right use. 

This is where you and I, as Members of Parliament, should come in very strongly. We should get this money, put it in one basket, ring fence it and put it to the right use. Let us go back to the basics. Let us take the curriculum on HIV/AIDS directly to nursery, primary, secondary school, so that even at nursery level - (Member timed out.)

5.01
MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is so unfortunate that we may not realise the 90-90-90 target, and one of the reasons is because some people are not playing their role; they are neglecting their responsibilities.

I would like to thank the committee for the research they carried out in Kabarole, which set up a strategy of involving men in going for antenatal visits. I wish this could be enforced in the entire country. This is because men tend to neglect women when they are going for antenatal visits. They assume that they never acted, so women go alone for these visits and that means it is difficult to find out the status of their men.

Therefore, my prayer would be that if we could enforce the strategy of having every woman who goes for antenatal visits be escorted by her husband or the man who impregnated her, we would be able to know their status and get the right statistics. This would help us reach our 90-90-90 target.

Madam Speaker, another thing is that we do not have a law to deal with people who know that they are already infected but still want to deliberately infect others. I wish this could be approved. If somebody infects another person and he or she is aware of his or her positive status and it is proved, there should be a punishment given to that person - (Member timed out.)

5.03
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In villages today, AIDS is treated as witchcraft, so people end up going to shrines and churches yet those people have no ability to refer people to hospital. They instead retain the person either in the church or in the shrine and they die from there. Therefore, we should come up with stringent laws. If a church is misleading people, it should be closed. These churches, which have just come up recently, have turned out to be menace. How can a person say that they can pray to treat a sick child with malaria? That is very wrong.

Madam Speaker, we should really interest ourselves in home-based counselling and testing. This is where a group of trained people move from home to home and talk to the people and encourage them to go for testing. That can help our community to get rid of HIV/AIDS –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometimes people go to worship centres and they do not actually believe in what they worship. However, people believe Jesus healed and He said, “those who believe in me will do what I do but even greater than this will they do”.

The truth is that there may be fake pastors, and they are there anyway. Because this is the world, they must be there because it was already prophesied. However, for you to generalize and say that these pastors are fake and pretenders is not right. It not proper to state that what people believe in is wrong. What you can say is that there should be checks to discover whether the people who are being healed exist or not. Many are there and they exist. Therefore, it is true that there are people who are prayed for and they get healed-

THE SPEAKER: But now you are contributing.

MR LUBOGO: Is it in order for him to claim that every other pastor out there is pretentious and does not therefore pray for people to be healed?

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear the word “every” in what he said. So, he is in order. Please conclude.

MR OROT: Madam Speaker, I want to observe that the time Jesus healed people, the world was not complicated like today. Today the world is getting so complicated each and every day. I want to say that it is true -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, despite the fact that I was giving only two minutes to each Member, we have spent one and half hours on this report. I, therefore, want to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: This does not absolve the Minster of Health from coming to talk to us about the point raised by hon. Mbwatekamwa on the issue of Septrin. Also, the finance ministry should tell us why, since 2014, they are unwilling to implement the HIV Trust Fund. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018”

5.08
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2018”. This motion is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads thus: 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS clause 4 (b) of Article 94 and rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empower a Member of Parliament to move a private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Administration of Parliament Act, Cap. 257, creates a number of offices within Parliament, both in its leadership and in the administration of the affairs of political parties represented in Parliament;

NOTIING THAT the Administration of Parliament Act reserves certain offices within the Parliament of Uganda to be filled by the party in Government and the party in opposition to Government with the greatest numerical strength among the Opposition political parties in Uganda;

CONCERNED THAT the manner of determining the leadership political parties in Parliament places a lot of powers in the hands of the political parties, thereby affecting the exercise of Member’s consent and freedom in choosing their representatives and leaders in Parliament; 

FURTHER CONCERNED that in determining the occupancy of offices in the political administration of Parliament, the views and aspirations of Independent Members of Parliament are not considered and are instead subjugated by political parties represented in Parliament; 

COGNISANT of the need to ensure transparency in determining Members’ representatives and leaders in Parliament as well as the need to prevent the subjugation of other political parties by the party in government and the party in opposition to the Government, there is need to put in place transparent mechanisms for the determination of Members’ representatives in Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
 
This House grants me leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2018”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”  I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by Members on both sides of the House. What is the justification? 

MR BARYAYANGA: The object of the Bill is to amend the Administration of Parliament Act to increase the membership of the Parliamentary Commission and to provide for the manner – 

THE SPEAKER: No, do not go into the merits of the Bill. Just give your justification. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, whereas all this is happening in Parliament, Members of Parliament are concerned that they do not choose their leaders - the commissioners. Independents also see themselves as second-hand Members of Parliament because they do not have streamlined leadership in the House. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

5.13
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. We have established a precedent that the role of Parliament is making law and that a private Member can only bring a private Member’s Bill by seeking leave of this House. 

The reason I rise to second the motion is to request Parliament to permit us bring this Bill for consideration on merit. Prima facie, there is a Government side in this Parliament, there is the Opposition in form of parties and there are Independents, who should be provided for. That is the only way we can promote a democratic dispensation in this House and in this country. (Applause)  

We, therefore, seek leave of this House to introduce this Bill to be scrutinised by the relevant committee of Parliament, brought back and be examined on its merits. It is a matter that touches the Constitution, specifically Article 79 on making laws in our various formations and compositions. I, therefore, close my seconding remarks by requesting this House to permit us go through the procedure and process this Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue is really important. When the law was made in 1999, there were no parties in this House and there were no Independents. What was described in the law was the Government and the Opposition sides. However, since then, the Independents have come and they are many. It is very difficult for the Speaker to manage or to ignore them because those Members are here. 

Members, let us allow that they bring the matter, we debate it on merit and take a decision. I, therefore, put the question that this House do approve the request by the Members. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural matter to raise. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what you are addressing because we have not called any item. Next item.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO DE-GAZETTE AND GAZETTE FORESTS

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule do you rise, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I rise under rule 77 of our Rules of Procedure. It says that a Member can rise on a point of procedure, so I arise concerning the issue that is about to be presented –

THE SPEAKER: You cannot prevent a Member from speaking. Let him first present and then you can raise your issue. You cannot stop a Member from speaking in this House. Please, take your seat. Let him present and then you will come in. He has not said anything. What are you objecting to, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

5.17
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this motion was moved on 28 April 2016 and it was saved. A copy of the motion is hereby attached.

Madam Speaker, I would like to move an addendum to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to de-gazette and gazette Central Forest Reserves (CFRs). It reads as follows: 
“De-gazette Buvuma Islands Central Forest Reserve, Block 20, Plot 3 and Block 22, Plot 2 situated in Buvuma District; Opit Central Forest Reserve, 900 hectares out of 3,548 hectares situated in Omoro District; and gazette Singo Ranch No. 16, approximately 2,443 hectares be part of the ranch measuring eight square miles.

Be it further resolved that – 

1. 	Where Government of Uganda has provided replacement land in accordance with the law, the controlling authority of the de-gazetted forest shall be the Uganda Land Commission. 

2. 	Where the district has provided replacement land in accordance with the law, the controlling authority for the de-gazetted forest shall be the district land board where the de-gazetted forest falls. 

3. 	Government ensures that titles that were issued fraudulently by the districts of Wakiso and Mukono in Namanve and Namyoya central forest reserves be cancelled immediately.”

Madam Speaker, while we were discussing this amendment, we agreed that there was a petition; therefore, I beg to withdraw Namyoya Central Forest Reserve, measuring 1,555 hectares situated in Goma Division, Mukono Municipality. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Anything to do with forests and trees is governed under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003. The only person who can bring a motion on de-gazetting or gazetting forests is the minister in charge of forests. (Applause) Even if you are changing the land use, the ministry in charge of lands and urban development is supposed to help you do that. I have seen Members of Parliament interested in de-gazetting and gazetting forests. The Government is the one which carries out all the plans concerning forests in this country.

I would like to refer to two Hansards and I am going to quote hon. Cecilia Ogwal. The first is the Hansard of 28 April 2016. At that time, hon. Mawanda was suffering after having lost an election. (Laughter) A motion was brought here by hon. Eddie Kwizera, the then Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, and it was seconded by hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi, the then Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources. It was a motion for a resolution of Parliament to de-gazette and gazette forests. In the wisdom of this House, we said “no”; we rejected this motion. 

Two, there was a letter read to Parliament, written by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, saying that she had travelled and she had an interest in the de-gazetting and gazetting of forests. This was on 10 May 2016. She came here and she was supported by the hon. Kakooza, who is now sick. At that time, she said she was very interested in participating in that debate and she had asked for it to be suspended. 

During the debate, hon. Katuntu stated that 83 per cent of the Members of Parliament were soon going to leave Parliament and new Members were coming in, so he wondered why the de-gazetting was being done at that time. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal also asked for an inventory of central and local government forests, which they had asked for on 24 April 2016. Hon. Kakooza then got up and said that unless there was an inventory of both central and local government forests, they could not proceed. The minister then, hon. Flavia Nabugere, got up and said that the matter was before Cabinet. 

Shortly after the new Parliament had been sworn in, my brother from Kapchorwa was confronted with the same information. He said that he had information that the matter was before Cabinet. Madam Speaker, today hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi is not a member of Cabinet - (Interjections) - Not yet, and he is from Bugisu. (Laughter) 

The whole world is talking about climate change. I would like to quote only four cities. In Washington, the forest is in the middle of the city. It is the same in New York, Berlin, Beijing, and even in Kampala we have Kampala Golf Course down here. 

According to Article 93 of our Constitution, a charge on the Consolidated Fund can only be brought by the Executive. Is it procedurally right for hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi, who is just a private Member of Parliament and not a member of the Cabinet, whom we recently saved on Bulambuli land - (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you withdraw that.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I withdraw and I request it to be expunged. I apologize. (Laughter) 

Is it procedurally right for us, as a Parliament, to do this and yet we should ask the minister in charge of forests to come here with a National Environment Management Authority report first of all? Under the law, it is stipulated that there should be an environmental impact assessment done first. Two, the local communities should agree on whether the forest should be moved to their place or should be removed. That is in the law -

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: She would like to give me information. Let me get it.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give you information that they are proposing to move the forest from Gulu Municipality to Nwoya District, but the district council is not aware.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You can see, Madam Speaker. We have names of people who have already been given land in forests; I have the lists here. We already have four forests and one of them – (Interjections) – Okay, let me leave that out.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the many Members of Parliament who are pushing for this have already got land in those areas and they want to come here and pass this – (Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you for giving me way. I remember even before becoming a Member of Parliament, I brought a petition here from Mukono concerning Namyoya Forest. I am happy he removed Namyoya.

In 2001, Namanve was de-gazetted and made an industrial park. It was only recently that I informed the minister concerned, hon. Anite, that most of the land has been taken by individuals instead of being given to investors. They we are selling it for millions of dollars, forcing many investors to go to the swamps.

THE SPEAKER: Members, this is not a general debate about forests or land. It is about particular de-gazettement. That is what you should address.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to conclude by asking if it is procedurally right for us to continue with this motion, which is supposed to be brought to Parliament by the Executive.

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point. Let us move on. Honourable members, this matter has been around with us for a long time. It has been on the Order Paper in all the sessions. We need to get it out of the way. Can the Minister of Water and Environment give us a way forward? In the Ninth Parliament, this matter was left to your ministry. Honourable members, the last instruction was from the Ninth Parliament. 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter of gazetting and de-gazetting of forests is a very sensitive one. It is extremely sensitive because we have lost a great chunk of our forests; we are now at nine per cent. However, I am glad to say that our development partners have been helping us to reforest part of these forests.

Madam Speaker, since the matter was brought here in 2016, there have been many changes. I would like to read them for you, if you can allow me. There is evidence to the effect that a majority of the people advocating for de-gazetting are doing so for personal interest –(Applause)– and not in public interest, yet forest reserves – (Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has made a strong statement here that the majority of the people who are agitating for de-gazetting are doing so for personal interest. 

Yesterday, we passed a loan request here for funds to develop Namanve Forest. Part of this de-gazettement is supposed to be in Namanve Forest. Members, if you are to travel to Namanve, compartments 4, 7 and 11, where Roofings is currently situated, is not de-gazetted but the factories are there. We are only trying to formalise this. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to say what he has just said?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the minister should substantiate because he is the one who made the statement.

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, I did not want to mention this but when I became a minister, several Members of Parliament told me that I was sitting on a gold mine and that I should support de-gazettement. Therefore, I would like to tell you –(Interjections)– I am prepared to stand by my words that many of the people who are asking for de-gazetting have personal interests. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 provides for the conservation, sustainable management and development of forests for the benefit of all Ugandans. Declaration of forest reserves for purposes of protection –(Interruption)

MR NGABIRANO: Madam Speaker, in 2002 I was the Secretary for Works in Mbarara District Local Government. The Chairman LCV of Mbarara, the Mayor of Mbarara Municipality and the Town Clerk were invited for a meeting in the forestry department at Nakawa with the National Forestry Authority (NFA). The Chairman LCV delegated me to attend that meeting. 

The meeting had been called by the Office of the President and the forestry department. The subject of that meeting was that in this country, there were many forest reserves which had been gazetted but because of development, they had ceased to be forests. One such case was in Mbarara and that is why we were invited for that meeting. 

All of us know the area in Mbarara between the barracks and the town; the whole of that upper area is a forest reserve called Rwemitongole II. I know the area around Ruti in Mbarara is a gazetted forest but has no single tree. There were similar cases in all the municipalities. Therefore, Government had called that meeting –

THE SPEAKER: Members, Order! Please, listen to one another.

MR NGABIRANO: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a point of order based on that information, so that we strike a balance. 

I appreciate this issue and I am also a forester. I am a tree planter and everybody knows me. In my constituency, nobody can beat me in having community forest cover. However, I would like us to strike a balance between the ideas being presented by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the minister and what is at stake. 

In that same meeting, it was observed that there are some forests, which are irretrievable; for example, in the case of Mbarara District and other towns. We were, therefore, given orders, as members of the local governments, to do what is necessary to de-gazette those areas and gazette others before it is too late. In Mbarara, we bought alternative land. Environmental impact assessments were done. We complied with everything that was required by the ministry, and NFA also came on board. However, to date, no solution has been given. 

Therefore, my point is that since 2002, the minister should have completed this process, which was started by the ministry itself. I do not agree with de-gazetting of forests that are existing. However, there are many forests in this country which are not there; they are now towns and trading centres and there is no forestry activity. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to fail to comply with his own resolution since 2002? You called us in 2001; are you in order to come here and keep prolonging this process which you started on your own?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we study this motion, forest by forest, so that we can see the ones that are no longer there and then we come back. 

5.38
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before, we adjourn to study the motion, I would like to give guidance. 

This motion, on the face of it, seeks to cause Parliament to pass a resolution to have some forest reserves de-gazetted and to create or gazette other forest reserves. It seeks to have these actions to be done by Parliament – (Interjection) - Yes! 

Looking at the law – the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 – the power to declare forest reserves or to amend the declaration is vested in the minister. I would not have been concerned if the resolution was seeking to urge the minster to do that – (Applause) - but the resolution seeks to implore Parliament to do what the minister is mandated to do under the law. 

In my view, the motion as it is, and on the face of it, is incompetent because legally, Parliament does not have the power to do what the motion is asking it to do. Therefore, I do not see the necessity of going to study this motion when clearly, and on the face of it, it offends the law. That is my advice.

5.41
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Davison, Kampala) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for his submission. Further to that, in support of what the Attorney-General said, section 6 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 makes it a command by the law and it states as herein: 

“(1) The Minister may, on the advice of the board —
(a) after consultation with the local council and the local community in whose area the proposed forest reserve is to be located; and 
(b) with the approval…” 

The interpretation of this is that the approval of Parliament is secondary to the proposal made by the minister. Therefore, in our view, as Parliament, - knowing that we work in public interest and we are the temple of legislative justice - what we should do is to urge the minster to perform his duty in consultation with the local people. Public involvement is important in order to move public interests in this matter of climate change and national security. 

We know that this impacts a lot on the economy and we also agree that a lot can be done in these areas. However, we need the inclusion of the local community and we need it to be driven by the Executive. We can then perform our role of approval after effective supervision of the areas that have been earmarked for de-gazettement. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I rise in view of rule 84, in particular Appendix F, paragraph (5) which is about public trust. It states thus: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a manner which will maintain and strengthen the public’s trust and confidence in the integrity of Parliament and never undertake any action which may bring the House or its Members generally, into disrepute.”

Madam Speaker, when hon. Nandala-Mafabi was submitting, he referred to a list of Members of Parliament believed to be having interests in these forests yet I am also seated in this House. It is becoming a practice and the public may end up losing trust in us. I would like to seek your indulgence and find out whether it is not procedurally right for you to grant permission to hon. Nandala-Mafabi to read the list so that some of us who have families are exonerated from such type of conduct. I say this because we are going to move in town and they are going to refer to us as Members of Parliament. If I am construed to be one of the Members of Parliament who engage in such, it will impact on my family. Thank you.

5.45
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Attorney-General for the wise legal counsel he has given us. Nevertheless, I have the following to say: 

In 2007, when hon. Jessica Eriyo was the minister of state in charge of environment, Arua Municipality sent in a request to de-gazette Barifa Forest. For your information, although Arua was one of the first 24 municipalities in the whole of Uganda, it is the smallest municipality in terms of size. This is because most of the surrounding area has been eaten up by Barifa Forest, which has been a problem to us. 

You can even ascertain and get this information from the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is well briefed because of the security concerns we have had in the municipality since the beginning of this month. Every other day, people are being raped, killed and guns are being recovered. Even as of last night, a gun was recovered from some of the thugs in the same forest. The forest we are talking about is not like these ones we are seeing around Kampala here; it is a thick small forest. 

Arua Municipality, in its request, complied with all the processes. Alternative land was acquired in Vurra, which was fully planted and forest cover has developed. Not only that, an environmental impact assessment report was even tabled in this House and we were told we would be considered for de-gazettement. 

Madam Speaker, taking the advice of the Attorney-General into consideration, I would request that instead of this omnibus motion, let each of these requests be looked at and decided on their individual merit. Arua has been dealing with this for so long and I remember two weeks back, the Mayor of Arua Municipality, His Lordship Issa Kato, was in Kampala on the same matter. The council is concerned year in, year out and we do not know what else to do. 

We already have alternative land and the forest has been developed. Everything is in place and all these reports are available. Can you please, at an appropriate time, respond to the request from Arua Municipality, which has nothing to do with any bias? In any case, at that time I was not the Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality; I was representing Terego. This is a genuine request that has been made and the people of Arua Municipality would be the happiest if you could give them this Christmas gift for 2018. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I had already made a proposal that we should look at all these individually, to see their merits and demerits and also to see whether they have fulfilled the conditions. The omnibus motion could be a problem. 

Honourable minister, as the Government, you have caused this problem. You have failed to do your work over the years. How can a request from 2002 be sitting without action? We want you to do your work and come here and present these requests, one by one. I am giving you up to the end of January 2019. We have waited long enough to put this matter out of the way. At the end of January, you must come with a proposal. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I do not know whether you have those lists.

5.49
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I have been consulting and I want to do the following. I have the names but on advice from some of my colleagues, I am going to mention the areas. I can tell you that people have even used companies to put in these –

The following are the areas in my hands: Kimaka Forest. In Kimaka Forest, which is in Jinja, one Abubakar Kirunda, the Assistant Town Clerk, who was shifted to the Central Government, created the following –(Interjections)- do not go to the list for the Members of Parliament, let me give you the list of the forests with the names and what is happening.

Mr Kirunda created plots in Kimaka without physical planning – I am doing this because of hon. Mwiru. Madam Speaker, these were the plots, which were created. Plot 13F Kimaka Close, Plot 9A Kimaka Close, Plot 9E, Plot 9F, Plot 13D, Plot 9G, Plot 11G, Plot 9D, Plot 13E, Plot 13C, Plot 11B and Plot 9C. The names are there and I will share it with you. I am going to preserve something because I would not want to doom people.

In Mbale, a few minutes, I was called –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, you made a very distinct order to have the names. I have very high respect for hon. Nandala-Mafabi being an easterner and I have hope in him. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to know from you whether we are proceeding well. The law being quoted, the National Forest Tree Planting Act, the rules cited and the reasons being given are that –(interjections)- of course, there was no specific section quoted except hon. Nsereko quoted section 6, which was on declaration of reserves but nobody quoted sections 11, 10, and 17, which impose a duty on the minister.   

This matter does not involve only the minister. Actually, the minister is the end user. District councils and Government have been involved. In this case, the concern of the House would have been what happens in each forest reserve. Were the procedures followed?

Madam Speaker, my brother, the Secretary-General of the leading Opposition Party in the House, even with the few numbers –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Oboth is my friend but an Independent Member of Parliament, which is provided in the law and so, he has no political party he subscribes to.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR NZOGHU: The point of order I am raising is whether hon. Oboth is in order to venture into something where he does not belong. Actually, he does not belong to any political party. Therefore, does he have the capacity to assess which political party has more weight and numbers and yet, he is an Independent Member? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information about numerical strength in this House is available and we have distributed it to all the Members. So, he is quite in order.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. Indeed hon. Nzoghu is my good friend.

The procedural point I was raising is that we had moved and you had guided very well. In fact, you made a directive to the minister that by end of January, he should come back and report on this matter. Maybe, the minister did not have the institutional memory.

Madam Speaker, I was privileged to be on the Committee on Natural Resources in the Ninth Parliament. I know we met with all Government members, including the minister then. Therefore, for us to have counter accusations by listing Members and yet, the names of Members are not being listed, I think we are putting this House –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, all along, I thought learnt people know the law. A few minutes ago, the Deputy Attorney-General, who has failed to become a full Attorney-General –(Laughter)– came here and advised –

THE SPEAKER: Please, stop insulting colleagues in this House. Honourable members, I gave my directive. Minister, we are directing you to do your work under section 11 of the National Forest and Tree Planting Act. Report at the end of January. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014, 2014/2015, 2015/2016 AND 2016/2017; UGANDA’S MISSIONS ABROAD

5.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, given that the report is bulky, I will request that you allow me to present a summary to the House and lay copies of the report on the Table.

Before I start, may I give a copy. I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the Auditor-General on Missions, right from the Financial Years 2013/2014, 2014/2015, 2015/2016 and 2016/2017. I beg to lay.

With your permission, I will go ahead and present a summary. The Public Accounts Committee considered the Auditor-General’s reports for the Financial Years 2013/2014, 2014/2015, 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 on Uganda's Missions Abroad, as mandated by Rule 171 (6) of the Rules of Procedure and Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Article 163(4) of the Constitution mandates the Auditor-General to submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her for the financial year immediately preceding. Article 163(5) mandates Parliament to debate, consider and take appropriate action on the report within six months after its submission.

Madam Speaker, I will skip the methodology. The following missions were visited by the committee; the Mission of Ottawa, Washington DC, Uganda Permanent Mission in the United States, New York; Nairobi, the Uganda Consulate in Mombasa, Missions in Dar-es-Salaam, Khartoum, Juba, Rome, Geneva, Paris, Moscow, Berlin, London, Brussels, Canberra, the Uganda Consulate in Sydney, Missions in Abu Dhabi, New Delhi, Tokyo, Beijing, Guangzhou, Abuja, Ankara, Kigali, Bujumbura, Pretoria, Kinshasa, Addis Ababa, Tehran, Riyadh and Kuala  Lumpur.

General observations and recommendations

    1. We noted that there was poor facilitation of Missions. It was noted that the Government of Uganda perpetrates inefficiency and poor service delivery by not facilitating the Missions adequately, denying them both critical human and financial resources. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends that Government learns to prioritise correctly and avoid spreading thin its resources. In other words, it should bite what it can chew. Government of Uganda should take lessons from Mauritius where over a five-year period, the Government of the Republic of Mauritius concentrated on different sectors, emphasising a few each year until now where results are evident.

    2. The Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) utilisation at source

	The committee noted that some of the accounting officers in Missions utilise NTR collections at source without clearance from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) and they say it is a fall-back position. Usually, at the beginning of the financial year, there is a delay to release funds for the Missions by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee strongly advised against this as it results into misappropriation of funds.

	The committee found that a similar situation had caused gross mismanagement of more than Shs 300 million at the Mission in Beijing and learnt that this had been addressed through e-payment or Point of Sale (POS) machines, which ensured instant remittance of the funds into an NTR account.

	The committee recommends that e-payment systems and POS machines be adopted as a standard NTR collection mechanism, to curb the misappropriation resulting from cash collections.

    3. On conflict resolution in Missions, the committee found that there were several feuds among different foreign service officers at different levels in the Foreign Service. There was evidence exhibited through outbursts in meetings, reports of sabotage and intrigue and divisions resulting in cliques. The committee noted that political appointees were often accused of arrogance, conspiracy, plotting and in some cases incompetence. A case in point is the Head of Chancery in Tokyo, Japan who refuses to work with His Excellency the Ambassador.

	The committee recommends that the Minister of Foreign Affairs puts in place in-built conflict resolution mechanisms in every Mission to monitor, identify, report and resolve conflicts.

    4. On the procedure for recall of officers, the committee noted that while there were clearly stipulated procedures for recall of officers by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Veteran Affairs and Finance, Planning and Economic Development, these procedures were sometimes not followed. This arose from the favouritism observed in recalls and postings, with some officers insisting on staying in Missions even after they had been recalled, with the excuse that they were appealing their recalls and others being recalled before their tenure expired. This often resulted in audit queries.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, working with the Ministries of Public Service, Finance and Defence, streamline the posting and recall procedures to avoid audit queries and conflicts.

    5. On selective funding for commercial diplomacy, the committee noted that only 12 Missions had received funds in Financial Year 2016/2017 for commercial diplomacy to increase revenue inflows from exports, inward investment and tourism; while the rest had not received these funds. The committee further noted that the allocation provided for financial diplomacy was limited and insufficient to cover the activities planned by the Mission.

	The committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development increases the allocation for commercial diplomacy and further ensures that every Mission receives funds for the purpose in the Financial Year 2017/2018.

    6. Mission Charters

	The committee noted that Mission Charters across the board were unrealistic, did not match the budget provisions for the Missions, were a significant departure from the human resource capacity of the Missions and served to demoralise staff, rather than act as a work plan for the Missions.
	
	The committee further noted that the staffing levels in Missions exceeded the categorisations of Missions specified in the law. The committee recommends that the process of compiling Mission Charters should be more consultative to generate realistic and achievable Charters that are aligned to budgets, structures and national planning documents.

    7. The weakness of internal controls

	The committee generally noted the ineptness of existing internal controls such as the weak procurement procedures, non-adherence to matters of social security, irregular human resource and performance management systems, to mention but a few.

    8. Lapses in procurement management

	In almost all Missions visited, the procurement function is weak. There is a notable ignorance of procurement laws and regulations. The absence of separation of functions in the procurement process exposes the Missions to abuse. There is need for capacity building in areas of procurement management.

    9. Inconsistencies in financial statements

	The committee noted glaring gaps, omissions and inconsistencies in financial statements in some Missions. This is an indicator of either deliberate falsification or capacity gaps among the responsible staff. Whereas the introduction of the navision software is aimed at bridging this gap, there is need to build the capacity of the staff in this regard since the risk of inputting wrong data into the system will remain. 

10.	Political appointees

	The committee noted with serious concern that most diplomats or ambassadors are politically appointed without requisite experience in diplomacy and this has suffocated career development of career diplomats. 

11.	Irregular appointments 

	The committee noted that there were some notable cases of recruiting or appointing very close relatives for the same position and in the same mission. A case in point was witnessed in South Africa where a wife replaced a husband as an Accounting Officer. This may expose the management of funds to abuse.

12.	Unfunded Mandate and Staff Work Overloads
	
	During the visits, the committee found out that the current staffing level in all Missions was inadequate, given the areas of accreditation. The Addis Ababa Embassy is both a bi-lateral and multilateral station accredited to Ethiopia and Djibouti as well as African Union (AU), United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). The Mission is, therefore, involved in handling numerous high level and technical delegations per month, daily committee meetings, and frequent official visits especially by the Head of State, which calls for extra logistical support. The respective budgets for extra activities and responsibilities like IGAD and the AU Peace and Security Council have not been funded for the Financial Years 2013/2014 and 2015/2016. 

The above implies that staff are constantly bogged down with extra work, leading to work overload. Under the circumstances, there is a risk of staff demotivation and inefficiencies due to work overload.

The committee also established that the Pretoria and DR Congo Missions were mandated to cover about six countries and specifically, target to promote trade, lobby for inward transfer worth of investments and facilitate attraction of tourists annually. These targets are relatively on the higher side given that there are handful of the home based staff in each Mission and contract staff that are expected to deliver these results, given the current human and financial constraints at the Mission in comparison to the six operational countries of accreditation and the high targets set in the Charter.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should expeditiously initiate the classification of the Missions to a larger status during the on-going structural review and adequate staff posted accordingly.

We also recommend that Ministry of Foreign Affairs should get a central comprehensive health insurance policy for all diplomatic staff, which would be more prudent and cheaper. We found out that in the missions, each staff has to look for their own insurance and so, there was a discrepancy and the Auditor-General raised queries on it.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should respond to the requests of Missions Abroad in time to avoid them taking drastic decisions. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never respond to letters from Missions and so, they end up taking decisions on their own most times outside the law.

Paying local staff in the local currency of that country would be the most prudent and a cost-effective way. The Procurement and Disposal D should handle all issues of procurement at the Missions and should recommend the mode of procurement. The Uganda Mission in Cuba should be re-opened given that historically, Cuba has stood by Uganda in difficult times. Over 2000 doctors have been trained by Cuba, scholarships have been given and Cuba supports NGOs to support Uganda. 

Budget for Development Projects; 

The committee observed that the Government concurrently engages in numerous development projects in Uganda Missions Abroad and yet, the resource envelope is limited. As a result, there is gross under budgeting for the individual development projects making implementation very difficult and many projects are left incomplete.

The committee recommends that available funds should be targeted to handle one project at a time instead of spreading money without effectiveness. If need be, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should start front-loading releases.

On deployment of junior officers as Accounting Officers, the committee observed that in a number of instances, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has deployed junior officers to the position of the Accounting Officer. This creates the challenges associated with lack of experience in matters of accountability hence the risk of loss of funds and also conflicts.

Highlights on the Mission in Ottawa

This is in the main report on page 8 to 10. There was the issue of delayed construction of the Chancery. The Chancery is a two-storeyed building with a basement located at 231 Cobourg Street Sandy Hill, Ottawa, Ontario. It was acquired in 1987 and was being occupied until July 2013, when it was vacated due to extensive cracking and basement damage. 

Since 2012, various consultants have undertaken reviews and inspections on the property. In 2013, a consultant carried out various surveys, which recommended the following;

    1. Remedial work to be undertaken within one year on installations and systems that were potentially unsafe, otherwise, significant escalation of costs would result if delayed. 

    2. Trees located within 8 metres of the building be removed since they demand too much water leading to shrinkage of foundation. 

By July 2015, all the above recommendations had not been undertaken despite the fact that the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development had cumulatively released an amount of Shs 2,762,000,000 approximately $ 1 million for that purpose. The trees were neither removed nor were the renovations undertaken within the recommended one year. Besides, the delay in renovations causes further deterioration as earlier predicted by the consultants. After two years without the renovations, the property has now been recommended for demolition by a Board of Survey team from Uganda comprising Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development officials. Management is advised to always undertake agreed construction works in a timely manner.

The Accounting Officer informed the committee that the Chancery wrote to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the matter but by the time ministry officials came, the state of the Chancery was very poor thus they recommended that the process of destroying it and reconstructing it commences. 

The designs were started and recommendations were made to the officials of the City of Ottawa who decided that considering that the property is in Heritage Zone, it cannot be put down prior to studies and consultations. The studies have been done now and have to be submitted to the City of Ottawa.

A date of submission was given, which was 19 April 2017. The City of Ottawa will then decide the way forward. The community was also consulted and mixed responses were given. The Chancery also submitted a report on the proposed change of status and the report from the Heritage Zone will be ready in two or three months. 

The committee was further informed that in 2012, after consultations, it was discovered that the building was built on clay soil and it was sinking unevenly, thus renovation was not an option. The building was condemned by Kampala authorities but that was not sufficient thus the Canadian processes had to be undertaken. 

From 2012, the process of procuring the consultants commenced. Submissions were done in October 2016 including a request for rezoning and a request for variance in structure given that the condemned building was two storeys. The new building will be three storeys and the request for approval for the Heritage Zone was submitted.

The committee observations; 

    1. The period taken to get to the level of approvals from 20l2 to date has been lengthy. 
    2. The committee noted that progress was hampered by back and forth consultations between Kampala and Ottawa. 
    3. The plans for the building are ready but have not been submitted till now, yet, the approvals were made. 
    4. We also observed that despite the poor soils in the location, the deterioration of the building can be partially attributed to negligence of the Mission and failure to carry out routine maintenance. 

The committee, therefore, recommends   that the Mission should carry out routine maintenance of its properties in order to safe guard them from quick depreciation.

Madam Speaker, at the Ugandan Mission in Paris in the Financial Year 2014/2015, there were issues on use of NTR at source. Out of the NTR collections of € 73,834, a sum of € 31,000 was utilised at source without necessary approval contrary to Treasury Accounting Instructions Section 94, which prohibits collectors of revenue from utilising cash collected for any purpose whatsoever unless otherwise authorised in writing by the Accountant General. Unauthorised expenditure results into extra budgetary funding.

The Accounting Officer responded that the embassy borrowed NTR to meet the financial demands of the embassy but paid it back when they received the release. The money was borrowed to pay for the utility and other charges. The loss of € 18,000 was due to lack of a financial management system at the embassy where money was received in cash at the Mission without any procedure to ensure that all the revenue collected is banked on the NTR account. The Head of Mission wrote to the Minister of Foreign Affairs informing him of the political decision she had taken to utilise NTR at source. 

The Accountant, Mr Alex Bamya who was a local staff had all the authority to make the transactions and could sign the cheques alone. 

The Head of Mission could also sign the cheque and transacts alone. The committee observed that;

    1. The Public Finance Management Act obliges all accounting officers to remit all NTR to the Consolidated Fund.
    2.  The embassy at that time had no Financial Attaché.
    3.  The loss of € 18,000 was due to lack of the system to receive money through the banking system.
    4.  The Head of Mission has overall powers to manage the account.
    5. The regulations require the Accounting Officer, Financial Attaché and any other person the Accounting Officer deems necessary to be signatories to the bank accounts.
    6. The Accounting Officer was not introduced to the bank until June 2015 having been appointed in September 2014.
    7. The authority to use NTR at source is granted by the Accountant General and not the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
    8. The amount received from Government of Uganda was enough to purchase the two vehicles and there was no need to borrow.
    9. Shs 270 million was sent equivalent to € 90,233, which was the vehicles cost; € 23,000 for the utility van and € 63,000 for the car. This money was enough for the purchase of the vehicles and so, there was no need to borrow as purported by the Accounting Officer. 
    10. The bank statements and the cheque foils were destroyed including all the evidence.

The committee recommends that:

    1. The Auditor-General investigates the matter further and reports to Parliament. 
    2. Mr Alex Bamya should refund € 18, 000 to Government. 

NTR for the Financial Year 20l3/20l4 on Uganda Missions in Paris:

It was noted that the Embassy collected a total of Shs 269,280,450 in form of NTR during the financial year. However, audit of the same revealed that contrary to the Government Standing Policy that requires all NTR to be remitted to the Consolidated Fund account, there were no transfers made. 

Although in some cases the Embassy management wrote requesting to use the funds, citing pressures of inadequate releases and effects of loss on poundage, there were no responses from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to that effect. The Accounting Officer responded that there was no evidence to show that the money was remitted to Bank of Uganda and no receipts were provided.

The committee observed that;

    1. There is no evidence that the money was remitted.
    2. There is no evidence that the Mission got permission to utilise NTR at source.
    3. The Embassy never asked for a supplementary to cover up the budget shortfall.
    4. No accountability documents were provided as the files cannot be traced. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the former Accounting Officer, Ms Juliet Nakawuma should be held responsible for the loss of Shs 269,280,45O and should refund the money to Government.

Irregular payments out of the revenue account and unaccounted for € 4,000

A sum of € 28,661.20 was transferred from the Mission Expenditure Account to the Mission Revenue Account to cater for staff salaries, rent and other recurrent expenditure. 

It was further observed that the Embassy went ahead and over spent the funds transferred by € 4,000. At the time of inspection, these funds could not be accounted for.

It was also observed that a sum of € 756.20 was mistakenly transferred to revenue account from expenditure account.

The Accounting Officer responded that the bank effected the transfer of € 756.20 to the Mission account. The former accountant used the money to pay part of his shipment. € 4,000 was from the NTR Account, € 4,0O0 was from recurrent account and € 5,234 was from the recurrent account. The former accountant, Mr Alex Bamya, still had full authority to make transactions as a single signatory.

The committee observed that;

    1. The bank has no principal signatory
    2. The Head of Mission is not supposed to be a signatory to the accounts of the Mission
    3. The signatories are three where any two can make a financial transaction.
    4. The former accountant was recalled in May and stayed as a signatory until 2015.
    5. Mr Alex Bamya was a local staff and was not entitled to shipment allowance, which he paid himself.
    6. Officers below the level of ambassador are entitled to $13,000 while the Ambassador is entitled to $17,000. A local staff is not entitled to shipment allowance.
    7. Mr Alex Bamya was later recruited by the Public Service of Uganda and is currently posted at the Uganda Mission in Beijing despite the financial losses he caused in Paris while employed there as a local staff.

The committee recommendations that;

    1. Mr Alex Bamya refunds the €13,234 to the Consolidated Fund within in 90 days from the day of adopting this report. 
    2. Mr Alex Bamya be relieved of his duties for abuse of office and disregard of the Public Finance Management Act and the attendant financial and accountability regulations.

Unaccounted for funds on expenditure account 
Three payment vouches relating to payments from the expenditure account to a tune of € 57,245.29 were neither signed nor approved by the Accounting Officer as required by the instructions. The vouchers were raised and passed by the accountant. Besides, there were no supporting documents as evidence of accountability for these funds. The Auditor- General could not, therefore, confirm whether these funds were put to their intended purpose. Government risks losing funds in the event that the guidelines are ignored.

The Accounting Officer responded that the cheques in question were signed for by the Head of Mission and Mr Alex Bamya paying Ms Juliet Nakawuma and Mr Alex Bamya. Copies of the cheques were provided. The former Accounting Officer, Ms Juliet Nakawuma explained that € 2,968 was Foreign Service Allowance.

Payment of € 8,894.68 was for medical insurance and evidence was provided and cleared by the committee.

The committee observed;

    1. This was an advance and, therefore, it could not be captured by the auditor if it was salary. 
    2. Evidence was provided of the recipients of the missing funds as Juliet and Alex from the bank. This payment was irregular and should be recovered.
    3. There were no supporting documents to the payments. Juliet Nakawuma should provide a bank statement of the period in question as evidence that she never received this money.

The committee recommends that Mr Alex Bamya and Ms Juliet Nakawuma refund the money within 90 days from the date of adoption of this report. Mr Alex Bamya should refund € 39,134.15 and Ms Juliet Nakawuma € 9,216.46.

Closure Procedure

Barclays Bank PLC ended business relationship with the Embassy of Uganda in Paris and closed Revenue Account number 73012570801 held by them.

In their communication to the Embassy dated 2nd December 2014, it was clear that all services related to the account should be terminated after a period of 6O days from the date of communication, that is 2 February 2015, upon which the Bank would be instructed where to transfer the remaining credit balance. 

A review of the closure procedures of this account revealed the following:

    1.  A quick review of expenditure out of the account for the period 2013/2014 and 20l4/2015 revealed that seven cash withdrawals termed as either “cash in transit” or “Uganda Embassy Paris-Expenditure” and two deposits that appeared unusual in the cashbook. There was no proper explanation provided at the time of audit.
    2. The Accounting Officer explained that the postings made in the system by the former accountant were to debit the Mission expenditure account and credit cash in transit account in the system. This implied that he was transferring money collected from visa collections to the expenditure account in the system for reasons unknown to the Accounting Officer. 
    3. Access to the bank statements for that particular period to verify if these transactions were effected in the bank was not possible. The Embassy wrote to the bank to avail them with the records related to these particular transactions but nothing was provided.

A sum of € 40,072 was indicated as “transfer to Embassy Paris” on 1 April 2015 according to the cash book. This transfer was confirmed as having been effected on the newly opened revenue account. However, the auditor was not provided with the reconciliation to confirm that indeed this was the only amount due.

A sum of € 17,999 was indicated as a “transfer to Treasury on 2 April 2015 as per the Embassy cash book. The receipt to confirm that indeed the Treasury received the funds was not provided to the auditor at the time of inspection. The Auditor-General could not confirm that the funds were indeed transfered the Consolidated Fund.

Lastly, a deposit of € 405 was made on 5 April 2015 several days after the Ambassador had instructed that cash balances be transferred to a newly opened revenue bank account and also three days after the cash balances had been transferred to the Treasury. The status of the deposit could not be confirmed at the time of audit because the reconciliations were lacking.

The Accounting Officer informed the committee that this information was concealed from her and she had no idea what happened. A11 the documents relating to this transaction are not available; they were allegedly destroyed by the then Accounting Officer.

The committee observed that this was fraudulent on the part of the Accountant and led to a financial loss of € 58,476.

The committee recommends that Mr Alex Bamya refunds € 58,476 to the Consolidated Fund within 30 days from the adoption of this report. Mr Alex Bamya be relieved of his duties as Accounting Officer and be investigated with a view of preferring corruption charges against him.

Diversion of funds meant for renovations

Shs 445,356,089 was released to the Embassy for renovation of the official residence of the Mission in Denmark. At the time of audit inspections, the renovation works were sti11 on-going. However, analysis of the payments on this item - Account 231001- Non Residential Buildings, revealed that a total of Shs 432,572,920 was spent on the item of which only Shs 361,828,075 could be attributed to the renovation works. 

The Auditor-General noted that the balance of Shs 70,750,845 was diverted to cater for other unrelated activities. The diversions of the funds meant for renovation of the official residence may lead to accumulation of arrears. The diversion distorts the budget implementation and leads to misreporting of balances in the financial statements.

The Accounting Officer informed the meeting that the money was diverted to purchase furniture for Mr Alex Mukubwa who had been posted from Kampala.

The committee observed that funds were meant for renovation of the official residence. This was diversion of funds meant for renovation of official residence without permission from the PSST.

Where a staff is transferred, it is the parent ministry to facilitate the transfer of the staff. The officer should have been paid disturbance allowance to allow him to settle in Denmark.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should have planned for the deployment of the officer and transfer to Denmark. The Accounting Officer should have written to the Permanent Secretary requesting for funds to settle in the new officer.

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officer be held responsible for the loss of Shs 70,750,845 and the same be recovered from her within 60 days of adoption of this report.

Uganda Mission in Berlin

Non-Tax Revenue collections and transfers to the Consolidated Fund

The Accounting Officer informed the meeting that there was a time lag between when the money was collected at the Embassy and when it was banked. He said that a total of Shs 328,907,731 was not yet transferred. A total of £44,352.48 from the previous year was also not accounted for.

The committee observed that the difference between £430,318 minus £295,255.61 is 134,723. Some of the NTR has been used at source and not accounted for. There is no evidence of the £44,352 being sent to the Consolidated Fund - Mrs Judith Asimwe was Accounting Officer.

There is no evidence of the Mission transferring £134,723. Agencies are not allowed to use NTR at source except with the express permission of the PSST. Madam Speaker, the sum of £114,733 should be accounted for or refunded.

The committee recommends that the then Accounting Officer Mrs Judith Asiimwe refunds € 293,808 to the Consolidated Fund within 50 days of this report.

Uganda Mission in Beijing

Loss of stickers

According to Section 34 (3) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, “an Accounting Officer shall maintain a register of losses incurred and the register shall indicate the nature of the loss and action taken against the person responsible for incurring the loss.” 

During the year under review, 250 ordinary entry visa stickers in serial numbers EV0078251-EV0078500 valued at $25,000 went missing from the Embassy and have not yet been recovered. The Auditor-General noted that there was no register maintained for the issue of stickers and the stickers had been stored in drawers instead of a more secure place such as a safe. There was a risk that the entry visas may be issued out irregularly to un-authorised persons.

The committee was informed that the two officials implicated in the theft - Mr Alex Bamya (Finance Attaché) and Mr Joseph Isingoma, the Accounting Officer, had been recalled following the discovery of the missing visa stickers.

The committee was informed that the Mission has since instituted some measures to safeguard the visa process. They have purchased safes to secure visa stickers and they encourage applicants to apply online. In addition, the Mission has installed a CCTV system.

The committee warned the Mission of the insecurity implications associated with losing visa stickers in this era of terrorism.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the visa theft should be investigated further by the IGG and where culpable, Mr Alex Bamya and Mr Joseph Isingoma should make good of the loss.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee notes that the Uganda Missions Abroad have an important role to play to increase opportunities for Uganda, in terms of enhancing economic growth through increasing investments, trade, tourism, peace building, security, human rights and cultural issues. 

The Missions are also a crucial link between Uganda and its people living in the diaspora and their contribution to the growth of the country’s economy. It cannot be over stated. 

The Missions, however, need to improve financial management and compliance with the regulations and Financial Standing Orders. This is with special reference to matters of procurement and disposal of Mission assets. 

There are weakness of internal controls lapses in procurement management, NTR utilisation at source, virement and inconsistency in financial statements. Team work should be exhibited through all the ranks and filed at the Missions. The Mission heads should endeavour to achieve this through regular meetings and involvement of staff members in the budgeting process. 

In the same vein, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ought to step up its procedures for appointment of Mission staff, retention and transfer of staff, conflict resolution among Mission staff, supervision of Missions and facilitation of those Missions. 

The ministry should review all the Mission Charters and ensure that they are realistic and in tandem with the objectives of setting up those Missions. The work plans should also be in tandem with the intention of the Mission Charter.
Madam Speaker, we would also like to say that the ministry should desist from making political appointments to Missions but rather encourage career diplomacy, stop forthwith irregular appointments and deployment of junior staff as accounting officers. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that the House adopts the report of the Public Accounts Committee as presented. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Public Accounts Committee for handling several reports; report of the Auditor General Financial Year 2013/2014, report of the Auditor-General Financial Year 2014/2015, report of the Auditor-General Financial Year 2015/2016 and the report of the Auditor-General Financial Year 2016/2017.

Honourable members, we can have a few comments but we shall use two minutes because of the items on the Order Paper. 

6.42
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee but on the recommendation that people should not be appointed based on political - some of us are politicians but we are technical persons as well. Like the honourable chairperson herself, when she leaves this office, the President might deem it necessary for her to be an ambassador probably in Netherlands.

Therefore, I would like to request the House – this issue of saying political – we have politicians who are senior cadres. Hon. Ongiertho here is a senior person and he was working in Plan International. Hence, on individual basis, they should not say that they should not appoint politicians to Missions. 

Madam Speaker, you are a politician but you are also a senior lawyer and so, they should not say political heads should not be appointed. I would like to request the House that we leave this out. 

Secondly, we are talking about people refunding money in billions. Put yourself in those shoes, after four or five years, probably, when you are dead and you are told to refund the money. I would like to request that we look at this instead of coming up with such things so that we scrutinise some people. 

That is my submission. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.44
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to restrict my submission to the budget for the development projects of our Missions and embassies. I would like to add on the list our Embassy in Burundi, which received support through appropriation by this Parliament and they are constructing our new embassy. They are so much appreciative to Parliament of Uganda for supporting the initiative of building a home in Bujumbura. 

Madam Speaker, we have strategic Missions and embassies but where they are housed in the respective countries leaves a lot to be desired. We are saying the first impression has a lasting legacy and in modern diplomacy, we are saying diplomats are no longer going for wine toasting but are going for commercial and economic diplomacy. 

This Parliament must support the recommendation of the committee that in each and every financial year, we should identify some of our strategic Missions that are in dilapidated houses. Thereafter, we construct them one by one so that our image outside Uganda starts from where our Mission or Embassy is housed. 

I would like to strongly support this and I hope in the new financial year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the entire Government will be in a position to state which Missions and embassies will be receiving budgetary allocation for construction of our new embassies and Missions outside the country.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of appointment of politicians, I would like to state that not all politicians who have gone through this House are doing badly in their respective Missions. For example, the former Minister of Defence, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, is in China and he is doing well; the former Minister of State for Northern Uganda and my former Woman Member of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Otengo, is in our Mission in Ethiopia Addis Ababa; one of the most strategic in the entire continent of Africa and she is doing well. We should probably handle them on a case by case basis, depending on how they are performing. 

However, we should balance the appointment with career diplomats such that the Foreign Service is not seen to be flooded majorly by political appointees. In fact, there are even those who are performing better than career diplomats and we must state that. 

Therefore, I would like to say that much as we are discouraging political appointments, let us handle them on a case by case basis. God forbid - you do not know - maybe after leaving this House and Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga is the President, she may appoint Obua as an ambassador in London. I can assure you that I would perform. You have seen it. 
In my opinion, we should handle it on a case by case basis, looking at the performance of the career diplomats vis-a-vis political heads or politicians who have been appointed to head our Missions and Embassies abroad. I beg to submit.

6.48
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate the committee upon a thorough report. I would like to add my voice to the committee's findings that our staff abroad be paid a salary that is equivalent to the standards of living in those countries. Many of our foreign staff officers are not able to take their children with them and keep them in those schools. That is a disservice to them.

On the issue of political appointees, I think that is relative as hon. Obua has said. Perhaps, it should be with due consideration of the experience of the political appointees. It is true that many of the missions have very inexperienced either children of political cadres or politicians who are not harnessing the real potentials of what the embassies and the ambassadors ought to do. 

Besides it has killed the morale of the career professionals. I know of some career professionals who have been in acting positions for over 10 years. Somebody has been in acting position and the Mission is doing very well and then all of a sudden, they bring a political appointee. That is a disservice.  

I beg to submit. Thank you Madam Speaker.

6.50
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very well researched report. I would like to beg my colleagues to support the recommendations of the committee beginning with appointment of career diplomats. I support the recommendation that career diplomats must take precedence over political appointees. 

The reasons are very simple; career diplomats are trained in that field. Secondly, it demotivates them when they are not promoted to achieve their full potential. So, I support the committee position and I beg the House to give their support.
I am sorry to disappoint my neighbour who is aspiring to be an ambassador someday on the basis of having served in this House. (Laughter)

Secondly, I also support the recommendation that the development budget of our Embassies and Missions Abroad should be increased. We have travelled to some of these Missions. You should see where our ambassadors stay. It is really miserable. So, I would recommend that the development budget be increased. I beg to submit.

6.52
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to say that those accounting officers who have messed up some of these Missions are like kings – they do not even talk with the ambassadors. We have seen Missions where they do everything. I think this should be handled if they are capable of what they have done. 

Secondly, we have talked about these Missions. We have talked and sang. I do not know what is happening. Just at the neighbourhood in Nairobi, the other day. we were there. Madam Speaker, we are ashaming Nairobi City. All the other buildings are clean and it is only the Ugandan Embassy, which looks so ragged. I took photos of it. I felt like crying. I went there twice with my committee and we saw it and wondered whether that is where we are living.

We went to the office. The chairs are of 1900. They are very old and torn and that is the waiting room. Then I asked myself, as a Ugandan, if you go to such an embassy, what about the visitors who come? And moreover, we are told that is a commercial diplomacy mission. However, at the end of the day, we do not have any plan to see how these people can help us. The staff are crying.

The funding is limited. In Nairobi, there were over 50 girls that were trafficked. They were packed in a small room because they did not know where to take the girls. They were all taken to the Mission but they did not have accommodation for them. They did not have money to feed them and the staff were just collecting money. So, any money to support the Missions to welcome visitors, go in and talk about diplomacy – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Baba Diri comes, I want to speak about the issue raised by hon. Asamo. About the Nairobi Mission, it is a pity that the Prime Minister is not here because I understand the building was condemned many years ago but under Kenyan law, there are seven tenants who are protected by law and they cannot be evicted.

So, what is all this in the East African Cooperation when we are being held at ransom by citizens of Kenya and our Government is looking on. They sent money there, it has to come back. How can that be? I do not know. 

Hon. Bahati, what can we do? You sent money there. The building must be broken down but the Kenyan law says you cannot evict. What sort of relationship do we have? Unfortunately, the Prime Minister is not here. It is something we need to handle.

6.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. If you read this report carefully, one year after another, they are the same issues raised by the auditor. One is the dilapidated structures. Number two is the misuse of funds or minimum support to the embassies and three, the untrained cadres in the embassies.

We are aware that Uganda is a beautiful country and people say very good things about Uganda. When we read the report, our embassies must reflect our real image abroad. It is very shaming to see that our embassies are very dilapidated; they are ugly. 

We give them very little money. Now, we talk of funds being used from source. If they have collected money and money is not sent from here, what can they do? I think they will be tempted to use the money at hand. It is us who have made them to use the money from source. If we gave them adequate money, they would not use that money at all. They would wait for the money from Uganda.

Then, the issue of untrained staff like the incompetent accountants would not arise. How can you take an incompetent accountant abroad when you have very many competent ones here to give a wrong image and make wrong reports? We should stop nepotism. We should stop corruption so that we send the right people to do the right job. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.57
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to first of all thank the committee for a well-researched report. I would like to support the recommendations but I will zero myself to one of appointment of career diplomats.

Diplomacy is about international relations and diplomacy is a discipline, which is learnt. Uganda is being taken to be an area, which uses Missions as a dumping ground for politicians who fail to come back to Parliament. Whereas, I agree with my honourable colleague that there are some who are doing well, on the whole, we have had issues with people who are politically appointed. When you talk about poor performance of this, Madam Speaker, in human resource management, motivation comes in many ways. One of them is promotion.

When you go to an organisation and you look forward to the next level in the hierarchy, you work better. When you have political appointees instead of diplomats who are career diplomats, the people lose morale. You clock 60 years and you are still at a low level. You have no aspirations to get to the next level, where you are called an ambassador or where you become a diplomat, to represent your country. 

When we talk about poor performance, of late, the staff in the Missions because there is nothing else to hope for, when you are posted, you go and “make money” but no longer serving your country because they have nothing else to look up to, in form of promotion. (Member timed out.) 

      
6.59
MR OTIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee. On the issue of underfunding of our Missions Abroad, when it comes to development funding, our Missions are doing very badly. I have seen in the report where the committee established that our Mission in Nairobi was dragged to court because of the dilapidated condition of Uganda House. This is an embarrassment to our country.

Madam Speaker, when you look at our Mission in Kuala-Lumpur, which handles about seven other countries including the economies of Indonesia, Singapore and even Thailand - Currently, the policy is that all Missions must relocate from Kuala-Lumpur to Putrajaya, which is a kind of State where all Missions are located. All Missions have been allocated plots there and it is only Uganda, which has failed to pay for its plot. Now, this is -(Mr Kasibante rose_)

THE SPEAKER: On which rule do you stand?

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a very sensitive issue touching foreign affairs. When you look at the frontbench, there is no Leader of Government Business. The Minister for Foreign Affairs is not there. There is no Government Chief Whip. There is almost no one connected to what we are discussing from the side of Government. Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think we have a representative. Please, Attorney-General.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the House that I am assigned to represent the Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed.

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to do something to avoid embarrassing situations that our Missions are being exposed to. For instance, we need to allocate money urgently so that we pay for these plots in Putrajaya to avoid being sent out of the country. 

I would like to find out the fate of our property in Kenya. There is a change in the land tenure system, which does not allow foreigners including foreign governments to own land. 

We have property in Mombasa and Nairobi. I would like to know what the fate of our property is, in case our lease expires. The policy is that our lease cannot be renewed. Therefore, what is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs doing to save our property? Some of them have about two year lease to expire -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give us the plot number so that we task the minister to come and give us an update quickly.

MR OTIENO: Madam Speaker, I do not have that but we have a number of properties in Mombasa. There are quite a number of them under –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, in light of that revelation from our colleague, isn’t it procedurally correct that the Attorney-General who is assigned should answer that question? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: In my view, the question is still vague as far as the particulars of the property have not been given. Please, conclude.

MR OTIENO: Madam Speaker, if you go to Mombasa, we have – I do not have the specifics but I can provide them later. For example, in Mombasa, I have the plots: We have property under Uganda Property Holdings Limited. There are over eight properties in Mombasa alone.

We have Uganda House in Nairobi. We have a number of properties in Kenya that will be affected.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point raised by hon. Otieno is extremely important. We need an explanation from the Minister of Foreign Affairs on the status of all our properties in Kenya. We want to have an update as soon as we return from the recess so that know what to do.

7.05
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to seek guidance from you and the Executive Arm of Government. The Committee on Public Accounts comes in on behalf of Parliament after the Auditor-General has presented a report to Parliament. The committee, like any other accountability committee, investigates and presents a report with recommendations. 

In many cases, money is lost, financial regulations are flouted and we make recommendations. The guidance I would like to seek from you is, what happens to these recommendations? 

In the Ninth Parliament, I was a member of the Committee on Public Accounts. I know what it means to come to the report of this level. Remember, we handled the Hassan Basajjabalaba market saga, where about Shs 170 billion had been given out in bonanza. During that time, ministers were forced to resign. However, accountability committees made recommendations. The question I would like to ask is, what happened to our recommendations? Can we have another time to remind this House what we recommended so that Government tells us what they have done? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On that one, Government is supposed to issue a Treasury Memorandum on what actions they have taken on the issues in the recommendations.

7.07
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Chairperson, for presenting a detailed report. However, out of the big report and the issues, which you have raised, I would also like to point out this observation. Through the many financial misappropriations since 2015, I have noted that the ministry responsible for effective supervision of the staff that are involved in this misappropriation – I have not seen anywhere any action that was taken upon them over the misuse of these funds! In other words, there is outright failure of direct and effective supervision by the responsible ministry. That is very fundamental and it is what is causing the recurring misuse of funds and it is very unfortunate for it to have happened in diplomatic embassies.

Secondly, I heard you talk about the Ottawa renovation – that the Government issued over Shs 2 billion to renovate and cut the trees but you have not given us a recommendation. What happened over that loss? I do not know whether you made a recommendation. If it is not there, I wish for it to be included in your report so that we follow up the Shs 2 billion loss that even led to the condemnation of the embassy building.

7.09
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this elaborate report. This report and the reports that have come from the Committee on Foreign Affairs are almost the same. I have a few critical things that I would like to raise. 

The first one is to do with health insurance for diplomatic staff. This should not only be for diplomatic staff but we must tag this to all Ugandans because this country belongs to everybody. Tomorrow, somebody like the MP for Tochi here might be an ambassador.

For example, one staff member from my constituency – the late Olupot - was working in our embassy in Ankara. He fell sick in Turkey but he could not be treated in Turkey. He was brought back and he died from here. I support the recommendation the committee is fronting here.

Secondly, the lack of an objective assessment of staff performance appraisal affects the element to do with recognition and rewards. I wonder what the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is doing in as far as addressing this managerial function is concerned. For example, there is no –(Member timed out.)

7.11
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me thank the committee and the chairperson for that wonderful report. I support their recommendations, especially on appointments of career diplomats. 

It is okay as politicians to think that when we are not here, we will have a chance. Unfortunately, that chance will only go to a few and the mechanism of appointing those political failures is not known. However, if we leave appointment to our missions to competition and we give it to those that have qualified in that area, I think we would be doing this country a service.

Every mission you go to will tell you that we are not well funded and that is the song you find in those missions. As we think of upgrading the budgets of these missions, we must thoroughly deal with those who are mismanaging the meagre resources that are available. In that regard, I support the committee’s recommendation that for us to show that we want to be committed to supporting these missions, let us first deal with those that are corrupt and are mismanaging our resources. 

Lastly, when you go to these missions, you sometimes shudder. When you ask these officials why they are at the missions and what they are doing there, some of them cannot explain. It tells you that probably there is no strategic plan or directive for all our missions outside. People are there because they have been deployed there - (Member timed out.)

7.12
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Marcha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the recommendations of the committee. In IT, we have a saying that garbage in, garbage out. From the findings of the committee, you can clearly tell that there is total failure in our embassies from the performance of the staff to how we are doing in commercial diplomacy and managing the resources that have been deployed to these embassies.

The committee has indicated that there are monies which have been misappropriated. It seems we are now exporting corruption through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to embassies, yet embassies are supposed to be the face of this country. Just a few days ago, Uganda featured in international media because somebody linked to a Ugandan was convicted in the US and that a bribe was paid to a high-level Ugandan. 

What example are we going to set if we continue to act in that way? Appointments are not based on merit and the people who are working there do not have good examples to borrow from. We need to overhaul the Ministry of Foreign Affairs – (Member timed out.)

7.14
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a good report. I have two or three things to say.

First, from the report, you see clearly that we are talking about financial years 2014/2015, 2015/2016 and does it mean there have been years when the embassies’ audited reports were not being looked at by our accountability committees? What was happening?

The second issue is where we have people who have been singlehandedly handling finances of some embassies. Where are the systems and how can it be possible that we allow somebody to singlehandedly handle the finances of the embassy? That is why I agree with my sister that the persons who should have been supervising these individuals must also be held responsible. Where there are recommendations about repayment, those supervisors should also be involved.

The other issue is about political appointees. Personally, I would like to give some benefit of doubt to the Appointing Authority. However, I would like the Appointing Authority, for instance, to also look at people and ensure that the appointees should have the humility to learn from career diplomats.

As politicians, a lot of times we carry our ego to wherever we work; we think we are too big but where probably we have to learn, I want to believe we would work differently. When you are posted somewhere, listen to the people - (Member timed out.)

7.19
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for a job well done.

I think it is high time that we begin taking the reports from the Committee on Public Accounts seriously and the recommendations therein. Otherwise, many of the issues that have come up since I joined this Parliament have been resurfacing. It seems every time we have a new committee chairperson, or a new committee, they go and recycle the same things and we see these things recurring meaning that as Parliament, our recommendations are being ignored by the Executive.

Madam Speaker, in 2012, when you delegated us to Berlin, we got live experience of how ineffective our embassies are. The ambassador had promised to meet us but for the seven days we were in Berlin, he failed to meet us. In fact, as we were being taken around, one of the embassy officers was actually ashamed to take us to the embassy; he only pointed to it and said, “it is there in the corner where you see that flag”. We said, “Why don’t you take us there because we want to have a feel of what the office is like.”

Therefore, for us to have an effective – at least we have seen the countries that have had their foreign offices here and we know how effective they are. What makes them effective is the kind of manpower and the equipment that they deploy –(Member timed out.)

7.20
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to thank the chairperson of the committee for a good report. I support the report and I have three observations;

About the poor facilitation to the missions, I would like to give an example of Copenhagen where I was. The residence to the ambassador was god and and we were lucky to see it. However, when we went to the Chancery, it was the exact opposite. The neighbouring buildings were all renovated except ours. Madam Speaker, they made a passionate appeal to us that we should be their ambassadors and talk about it. 

The other issue that came up when we stayed there was the hackers especially on the issue of online visa applications. There were so many hackers and we were losing a lot of revenue as a result of that. Most of the systems used for online visa applications were actually being hacked and as a result, we are losing a lot of money.

They also complained about the non-response from the ministries. They cited the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; they were very bitter with that ministry because there were so many things they would lobby for and they would want the ministry –(Member timed out.)

7.22
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report in its entirety except on one recommendation. I have to declare my interest because two of my Rwenzururu people are ambassadors; one is in China and another in Congo and yet these people have been politicians.

That said, it is important that we encourage career diplomats to achieve what they are meant for. The issue of appointing politicians especially those who have failed at elections should be restricted. We do not wish to interfere with the powers of the Appointing Authority but we advise and recommend, just as the report recommends, that they should be limited. I am aware that my two former politicians are performing very well. However, the report in some instances says that in areas, this has failed. Therefore, politicians should be limited.

I would like to raise the issue of South Africa, where an accountant was replaced by the wife. I do not understand the circumstances of how a wife replaces a husband in public office save for merit. Otherwise, if there are other methods employed in such a circumstance, such matters have to be investigated so that we can get a proper solution for it.

Madam Speaker, I was one of the people who visited our embassy in Kenya and had an interaction with the ambassador – (Member timed out.)

7.26
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the entire membership of the committee for a very informative report.

Madam Speaker, I want to commend our great leaders that served Uganda between 1962-1987. Imagine a Government in the 1970s would move Uganda from being a tenant in London on the very expensive Trafalgar Square, in Paris, in Ottawa Canada to become a landlord by having buildings that are purchased and owned by Uganda. I think they need to be appreciated. This was in addition to buying houses to accommodate residencies of our ambassadors. 

Madam Speaker, today, when the chairperson read the report, I almost cried because we have failed to maintain what was purchased. In Ottawa, Government spent a lot of money on consultants. The committee gave a good report to the effect that the trees around the building had to be cut to maintain its stability. 

For three years, the Government of Uganda could not even afford to cut the trees - I can even cut a tree for free. Imagine a Government spending money on consultants who found out that to maintain the stability of the building, the trees had to be cut. Today, we have to demolish it and put up a new one because we could not afford –(Member timed out.)

7.26
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWDS Representative, Western): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to respond to this important report by hon. Osegge.

I would like to appreciate my colleagues for understanding the problems and the challenges, which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is facing. You recall, Madam Speaker, that on the 28th August upon assuming office, I wrote a letter and gave a copy to you and the Appointing Authority about the critical issues that should be tackled in order to improve performance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, I am sure that you received a copy of my letter and the Minister of Foreign Affairs equally did so.

I did this because I knew that the issues and concerns raised by colleagues in this Parliament had been coming year in, year out and we could not have concrete solutions in order to mitigate the situation. I am also aware that you have received a response from His Excellency the President that he has invited the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Public Service to meet the Committee of Foreign Affairs of Parliament in order to address underfunding and under budgeting of this ministry and the Ministry of Public Service to address the appointments of ambassadors and other Foreign Service officers, which you have raised as concerns.

Therefore, we are eager to come to the Floor of this House with a comprehensive report about all the issues that have been raised, after we have got tentative responses from the Appointing Authority.

7.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of this committee for the comprehensive and elaborate report. I would like to ask; if a minister is assigned somewhere, can we not get another person to take on the role of the Foreign Affairs minister? 

You can take a complete year without seeing a Minister of Foreign Affairs here in the House. Is that right? It disturbs some of us to know that somebody can continue to embezzle billions. Where are the supervisors? Is the Minister of Foreign Affairs still in charge?

If you move to Foreign Missions – but I must first thank that one of Burundi - he looked after us very well although we did not reach the embassy or his residence but he was with us. You find that these people struggle in a foreign land. When you have your person somewhere in a foreign land, you want that person to be well facilitated because he is not at home. There is nobody to quickly come to his or her rescue.

However, we have people in the foreign missions who are not well facilitated and when they become corrupt, it is partly our mistake. I think the Government should be able to account. How are we going to recover this money? The committee on Public Accounts works so hard to get to the people who have stolen it. How are we going to recover the money? Who are the people who are going to follow up?

Sometimes, these reports are brought here and they die here. It is very difficult that resolutions of Parliament are followed to the letter. We would like to see that this time around, money stolen is recovered. These are public resources that we need to recover. Thank you.

7.32
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and encourage my colleagues to pass not only the recommendations but ensure that action is taken.

As the country’s top diplomat especially in the Shadow Government, it grieves my spirit because foreign affairs or our missions abroad are the reflective mirror of who we are. You have heard the lamentations and the burden of grief from Members every time they visit our embassies. You have had a lot of feedback every time you interact with those that diligently work in our missions abroad.

Personally, I have no problem with politicians being appointed to missions abroad and I think it is this Parliament and Madam Speaker, the committee that you chair, that approves them. I would like to believe that you take due diligence. If they fail to deliver in our missions, blame should not be attributed to you, the chairperson of that committee. 

The chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs has just indicated that there is a report that will be coming on the Floor. I encourage the House to adopt all of the recommendations because they are valuable. I cannot use this time to exhaust it.

However, before I sit down; in foreign affairs, there are certain things that cannot wait. We need to cluster our interventions into the short-term or medium-term; inter-medium term and then the long-term. Colleagues, we are about to lose two plots in China. The Government of China donated two free plots - one in Guangzhou and another in Beijing. One of those plots is near the airport.

They have said that if we delay to start developing those plots, we will lose them by January. How urgent or how long can we wait? This is a crisis and leadership is about identifying a problem and solving it before it becomes a crisis. 

Madam Speaker, it is within your mandate and powers to direct the finance minister to find money to develop our two plots in China before we lose them. We lost a plot in Addis Ababa. Addis Ababa hosts the African Union. It is a shame. It is an embarrassment to this country – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not heard objections to the report and we have a few items on the Order Paper. I want to put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: However, there are issues that we wanted the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and speak about. I hope the Attorney-General will convey the message. It is very important that he comes to speak to us on those issues.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY RESPONSIVENESS OF THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 TO 2023/2024

7.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity responsiveness of the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2019/2020 to 2023/2024.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we recall, yesterday we had declined to transmit the Budget Framework Paper to the committees. Now that the certificate has brought, the Clerk can circulate it to the sector committees. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 174.6MILLION (US$251 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson present. Oh, you have been seated there. Do you need quorum to witness? This is not a Bill.

MR SEGGONA: Madam Speaker, away from quorum which has been raised off record, it is coming to 8 O’clock and some of us have been working in committees since morning. Would it not be procedurally right that you permit that we break off here before we handle such a sensitive issue that has to do with loans. A lot has been said about loans in this country and the threat of losing property including almost losing sovereignty.

Considering the importance of the matter and the diminishing returns that seem to be setting in, would you, Madam Speaker, not find it within your power and indulgence to discharge us so that we start on this tomorrow? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I would like to save you from the traffic because if you leave now –(Laughter)– honourable members, on a serious note, tomorrow we have a short day because we have the end of year engagement where I told you to come with your dancing shoes. Therefore, I thought we could work harder today and we celebrate tomorrow.
I would like to appeal to you. The traffic is too much. Let us stay here and work. By the time we finish, the streets will be empty. Thank you so much.

7.41
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal for Government to borrow up to Special Drawing Right 174.6 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the integrated water management and development project.

Before I present the report, permit to lay on table the following documents contained in this file;

    1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brief on the loan request.
    2. The project appraisal document
    3. The draft loan agreement between the International Development Association of the World Bank Group and the Government of Uganda. 
    4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development letters confirming that the Government of Uganda will avail counterpart funding for the integrated water management and development project.
    5. The National Planning Authority clearance of this loan. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

The objective is to improve access to water supply and sanitation services, integrated water resources management and operational performance of water and sanitation service providers in the project areas.

Project beneficiaries

The Integrated Water Management & Development Project targets to provide safe water and sanitation services in Gulu Municipality, Adjumani Town Council, Pakele, Ciforo and Dzaipi as well as the parishes of Agojo and Mungula, Busia Town Council, Namungalwe in Kaliro, Kyegegwa-Mpara-Ruyonza, Namasale, Mbale Municipality, Butaleja- Busolwe and Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi- Kibuku.

The project shall also support provision of water and sanitation services to refugees and refugee hosting communities in the districts of Adjumani, Moyo, Arua, Lamwo, Yumbe and the Mid-west district of Kiryandongo, which is currently experiencing an influx of refugees from South Sudan.

The total expected project beneficiaries are approximately 1,403,000 people with increased access to improved water supply and sanitation services. 

The components - in the interest of time I do not want to lose the key issues.  This project has four components. The first component is water supply and sanitation in small towns and rural growth centres and support districts housing refugees. 

Component two is water supply and sanitation in large towns and support districts hosting refugees.

Component three is water resource management and component four is project implementation and institution strengthening.

I will not go into performance of past projects because that will be repetitive; suffice to say, the $251 equivalent of SDR 176.4 million is an International Development Association (IDA) loan. They are co-financers of this project, including the IDA grant of $29 million and the Government of Uganda counterpart funding of about $8 million. The details can be obtained in the report on page 10.

The loan terms:

The World Bank will make available SDR 174.6 million to finance the Integrated Water Management and Development Project under the following terms;

    1. Loan Amount is $251 million 
    2. Maturity is 39 years 
    3. Repayment period is 32 years 
    4. Grace period is seven years 
    5. Interest rate is 1.56 per cent on principle outstanding
    6. Service charge is 0.75 per cent on loans passed
    7. Commitment fee is 0.5 per cent per annum on loans and disbursed amount. 

Table 5 shows that a service charge of 0.75 per cent will be applied on the principle amount of the loan disbursed throughout the period.

Furthermore, the disbursed amount of the loan will be subjected to a commitment charge of 0.5 per cent on the disbursed amount during the grace period. With the above terms, the cost of the loan is indicated in the table.

Madam Speaker, in short, this is a concessional loan and I will skip the rest and go to the committee recommendations.

The committee made the following observations and recommendations.

Project coordination mechanism: 

The committee noted that a number of departments such as the:

    1.  Ministry of Water and Environment
    2.  Urban Water Supply and Sanitation department 
    3.  Rural Water Supply and Sanitation department
    4.  Directorate of Water Resource Management and Water and Environmental Sector Relation Department
    5.  National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Planning and Capital Development Division; will be involved in the project with the Ministry of Water and Environment taking the responsibility for overall coordination and communication including the host community and refugee sub-component. 

The committee recommends that for the implementation of the host community and refugee sub component, the Ministry of Water and Environment should liaise with the Office of the Prime Minister and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees to ensure a coordinated response to refugee in-flow, resettlement and protection issues during the implementation of this project.

Procurement and management of contracts
The committee noted that under the ongoing World Bank Debt Financed Water Management and Development Project, which is worth $135 Million that was approved by Parliament in February 2013 and became effective on 12 August 2013 with an initial closure date of 3l December 2018, various contracts were executed albeit with time delays and cost overruns –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, maybe just read through the subject and the recommendations. The Members have the text.

MR BATEGEKA: The committee is basically pointing to improved efficiency in implementation of the projects to avoid cost overruns and related challenges.

On local content, the committee recommends that in order for the economy to immediately benefit from debt financed projects of this nature, Government should strategically consider building the capacity of local contractors in strengthening their contracting capacity to conduct projects of this nature, complexity and scope in the water and environment sector.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 174.6 million, equivalent to $251 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Integrated Water Management and Development Project (IWMDP) be approved. 

I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson.

7.52
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and also thank Government for the request.

I support this request because implementation of Government policy to ensure clean water in all villages faces the challenge of inadequate appropriation of funds to support the ministry. This afternoon from West Nile, a colleague from Madi Okollo County raised an issue where we lost a Ugandan who died in the course of searching for water. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that getting water in many parts of this country during the dry spell is a challenge. To me, this is one of the remedies to this problem.

In refugee hosting communities, our population has grown and the budgets given to the districts remain static. This is one of the ways through which we can have improved services to the nationals and also to the refugees.

Lastly, I request that we have adequate strategies to ensure supervision over these funds so that we are able to safeguard the funds and also have value for money. Thank you.

7.54
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan and I wish us, as a country, to be very prudent. 

It is good to borrow but it is not easy to pay. In this case, we should be very concerned about the total amount of money we have borrowed. While analysing this, the committee should know the total amount we have borrowed since so that when we add it to this, we have a continuation. We should be able to track it because yesterday, we borrowed Euros 249,857,697. Today we are adding $251 million. 

It is better for us, if we are to be intelligent, to sum it up. That will help us to know whether we are safe. Are we below the ceiling so that if we exceeded it, we would not be able to be given the money? That will also enable us to know, after proper analysis, which sectors have borrowed more money so that we categorise them – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give my colleague is that previously when we handled another loan, we all agreed that whenever the minister comes to ask for a loan approval, they should be showing us cumulative figures regarding how we have been borrowing. We should make it a culture. Tonight, I am scared because I have seen nothing of that nature and that is the concern the Member is raising. 

This information was given to the ministers; we support the loan but can we see these cumulative figures? These are our people who are going to benefit. We do not want to let them down. Thank you.

MR ACHIA: This will really help us to be conscious of our loan system. 

Finally, the most important thing is on the performance of the externally funded projects. This is very key; the performance of the project for which we are going to borrow for must be analysed. What has been the performance of the other? Therefore, we must look at all these aspects as indicators which can help us to determine whether we are continuing well or we are just going anyhow. Thank you.

7.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need water and because we need it, we want the Ministry of Water and Environment to go and - Madam Speaker, you can see the Attorney-General is going out. How can the Attorney-General go out of Parliament when -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he told me that he needs some small service and I have allowed him to go. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need water and we need all the requests from the Ministry of Water and Environment of all its projects so that we approve them at once. 

I am raising this because yesterday, we approved a loan for water. Today, we are approving another and it seems another one is lined up. At the end of the day, we are going to approve about $2 billion for water but that money will be stuck in the Ministry of Water and Environment and there will be no implementation.

Consumption in Uganda especially in the Ministry of Water and Environment is at 30 per cent; the 70 per cent is never consumed yet we pay service charge on those loans every day. 

Secondly, after them putting this water – currently the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) is running around with meters so that people can pay for water - what happens with most projects which have been installed is that people destroy the pipelines so that they get water because they cannot afford the rates of NWSC.

I would like to get confirmation from the Minister; will our people in the villages in Busolwa be charged for this water? Busolwa is a village; it is not a town. I want to know whether we are going to sell the water at the NWSC rates.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, it is good that we want water but most of these projects - when the people in the ministries want to steal money, they know where to go. They know everybody will jump at water projects. I would like the minister to help me; there were projects which were meant for small towns - Soroti, Kaberamaido, Iganga, Sironko - but they included sewerage systems. 

I have never seen a sewerage pipe in Sironko and yet it was part and parcel of the deal. So, who ate that money? I have heard them talk about sanitation; what is sanitation? Is it only water or is it with swerage?

Finally, I ask, Madam Speaker, that you direct the Auditor-General to do a value for money audit on all these projects in the Ministry of Water and Environment. In fact, I would like to appeal to the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy that before you come with your report, you should indicate the balance brought forward on loans in the different ministries and how much has been utilised. 

It is important because even in our Rules of Procedure, we passed a recommendation that before a report comes to Parliament from a committee, they should show us the status of loans in that sector. However, I have never seen you bring the status.

Madam Speaker, we urgently need a value for money audit in the Ministry of Water and Environment projects. We have a problem there. They say they are going to implement this; they do not do it. I once got an engineer and asked him about the sanitation project and he said that it rained and the pipes were swept away by the rain. Can you imagine?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need a value for money audit in the Ministry of Water and Environment. However, I support the loan but it is bad to borrow every minute without getting value and yet we are committing the people of Uganda. In terms of performance, we are in problems but yet we continue to commit our children. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the clerk to identify the loan requests we have approved in this House in the water sector then we can send them to the Auditor-General.

8.03
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I support the project but I do not support the loan. As a country, our appetite for loans increases by the day. I think it is a question of priority. The project is a good one but I believe we can find that money internally; it is a question of priority once we put our priorities right.

I remember during the State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned that he sat with a few of his NRM colleagues and took a decision because he was tired of getting money from foreign countries for road to construction. They took deliberate decisions and today, a huge amount of our budget goes for the road sector - a deliberate decision can also be taken by Government. If these are strategic areas which Government has interest in, we can also take a decision without necessarily going for loans.

I have a challenge when the minister comes and says we are doing very well in the region; that we are the least borrowers in East Africa but just because we have not hit the 50 per cent mark should not be an excuse to keep on getting loans. We are mortgaging this country. We need to calculate the accumulated amount.

In addition, we need to spread the years; if we stopped getting loans today, by which year shall we have paid all this money? Somebody made a calculation and said that for all the loans that we have, we shall pay them in 78 years. And we are not about to stop; I have seen the Order Paper. After this, there is another request coming. How long shall we continue with this? We have to get our priorities right. I thank you.

8.05
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know water is life and the way our people struggle for water is so alarming. Therefore, I support this very important loan.

The beneficiaries - Gulu Municipality for example which always has no water in every dry season - in the end, you find people hiring trucks to get water from almost from 30 to 40 kilometres. 

Madam Speaker, we need to look at other things very objectively. When they talk of refugee hosting districts, they normally exclude Amuru District yet the largest number of refugees usually comes through Amuru District, which borders South Sudan. At the border currently, we have more than 5,000 South Sudanese who are staying within Amuru District. I would like to request the chairperson and the honourable minister to include Amuru Town Council on that list so that it can benefit from this very important project. 

Currently in Amuru Town Council, we have only two boreholes serving the whole town council. People move more than three to four kilometres in search for water. I know we were not on the programme but I kindly request that Amuru Town Council be included in this very important project – (Interruption) 

MR OGUZU LEE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that this project is not based on a thorough needs assessment. Recently, the UN recounted the number of refugees. They found that the numbers that the Office of the Prime Minister and the United High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) were presenting were exaggerated and plans were being based on wrong figures. 

Here, we have a ministry requesting that we approve a loan to give water to refugee hosting communities and yet there was even money collected in Munyonyo for refugees, and it was misused. We also heard that the project implementation will be in liaison with the OPM and UNHCR. How sure are we that this money is going to do what it is supposed to do? 

In my view –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you were very generous to your colleague. Lt us move on to hon. Mawanda.

8.10
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the report and the loan but with two or three concerns:

    1. Counterpart funding

These projects have timelines. At times, the loan money is availed and the counterpart funding from Government delays hence affecting the performance of the project. 

    2. The 0.5 per cent commitment

	Government pays this money and when counterpart funding fails to come through, we lose this money. Therefore, we would like to see and know how prepared the Government is, if this loan is taken or given. We need to know that the counterpart funding will be available. 

    3. These technical people have a way of changing words. We have always questioned capacity building and now they are bringing it as “institutional strengthening and consultancy”, which is about capacity building. How much money is going into that component? You have just hinted on it but you have not told us how much money has been set for capacity building. They spend a lot of money on capacity building and less on the project itself. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Eitunganane takes the Floor, among the beneficiaries, the chairperson of the committee mentioned a place called Namungalwe–Kaliro. Namungalwe is in Kigulu in Iganga and not in Kaliro. It is on the road to Kaliro but it is in Kigulu North. 

8.12
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Water and Environment because at least he is present when this loan is being processed.

Madam Speaker, water is life and there is no way I can deny the people of Adjumani and others the opportunity to get clean water because they deserve it. Clean water in an area helps to prevent waterborne diseases and the way to go is to provide it for our people.

I would like to find out one key critical issue. There was a loan that was approved by this House, I think in the Ninth Parliament, extending water to 10 kilometres from the main sources of major towns. Is the minister in position to provide this House with the statistics on how far that project has gone? This is because there are already towns that have enough water but the surrounding areas lack water. I would like to know how far the minister has gone with extending water in the main towns. 

On the implementation of these projects, we need to devise a means of tracking how these projects are implemented, especially the reporting mechanisms so that –(Member timed out.) 

8.14
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity again. I remember last year, we approved a loan for infrastructure for refugee hosting communities. I stood here and asked that all implementing agencies for UNHCR should give a percentage of their income to the refugee hosting communities. 

At that point, nobody could tell me if the loan we were borrowing had a relationship with how much the implementing agencies were putting into the refugee hosting communities. I would like to ask a similar question; are we borrowing for water into also the refugee hosting communities?

We also know that the implementing agencies are supposed to give 30 per cent of their income to those refugee hosting communities. I would like to believe, Madam Speaker, that the 30 per cent that they are supposed to give to the hosting communities also involves issues of health, education and water. 

Therefore, when borrowing like this, do we make an assessment for instance, of how much those agencies are providing in terms of water services? This is such that whatever we are going to borrow already takes care of that. Therefore, with that, we are not borrowing because we know the agencies are already providing. However, we don’t see to take cognisance of that fact – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that one, I will instruct the Clerk to work through our budget office to check that loan that the honourable member is talking about and see whether the component of the other agencies is included. Thereafter, we shall be able to discuss it.

Honourable members, although there are some reservations, in principle, Members do support the loan. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House do approve this request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: There is a church service going on and the traffic has cleared. (Laughter)  Please go via the church to your homes. 
The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) ouse adjpurned  hhhh

