

Tuesday, 11 December 2018

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have two matters to communicate. The first is that I have received a letter from the President of the Pan-African Parliament complaining that Uganda has not ratified the Protocol on the Constitutive Act of the African Union; the Malabo Protocol. This protocol was signed by the Heads of State in 2014 and all member states are supposed to sign and ratify it. We are being identified as those who have not done so. 

Last week, I spoke about this issue. Therefore, I would like to direct the Minster of Foreign Affairs to come on Thursday this week and brief the House on when he is going to bring the protocol and also table all the other treaties of the African Union and all the international bodies that we are party to. You recall that that last week, we found ourselves in some difficulty because the protocols of the East African Community have also not come here, yet, we were being asked to process our consent.

Secondly, honourable members, you may have seen that there are big tents outside. I encourage Members of Parliament to visit the tents. There is a very magnificent exhibition for science, innovation and technology. If you go there, you will be amazed that Ugandans are really very brilliant people. We are cheating them by failing to fund them. All innovators there are waiting for money but they do not know where to get it from. 

Therefore, as we go to the Third Meeting, which will be dealing with the budget, I would like to ask Members to really ensure that we put in some money for innovation. There is so much and we need to support our people to create opportunities. Let us quickly go to a few matters of national interest.

3.00
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a growing vice amongst our communities in Uganda and as the shadow security ministry, I find it an obligation to put it across.

Madam Speaker, a one Joseph Ssebudde lost 10,000 chickens in Mubende just recently due to arson.  A one Hamza Kimbugwe lost 18,000 chickens as a result of arson. Arsonists are people who burn people’s property deliberately with an aim to cause destruction, mayhem and harm. 

Fifty houses were burnt recently in Kamwokya here in Kampala and that was in addition to the gutting by fire of timber in Ndeeba in Rubaga North just recently. The same happened to timber sellers in Kireka. 

Just yesterday, as we were watching news, we realised that there was burning of a sugar plantation and a lorry carrying sugarcane in Atiak. I think the plantation belongs to a one Amina Hersi. A one Edward Musisi lost 50 acres of eucalyptus and pines in a place called Ssekanyonyi in Mityana. Finally, I have also been notified that Halima Nalukwago –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR NSEREKO: Halima Nalikwago lost 30 acres of pineapples in Luweero. Honourable members, across all divides, this is indiscriminate. People invest a lot of money and even borrow to employ others. For example, in chicken or sugarcane businesses, even markets - for someone to identify these arsonists, we need more intelligence. 

Madam Speaker, all the people we have interacted with have clearly told us that on making distress calls to security agencies, they take long. There are mafia organisations with people that are telling others, “You either pay us or we burn and destroy your property.” 

Madam Speaker, this is going to create the scampering of both local and foreign investors. No one will invest their money when there are mafia groups going around in this country, working alongside some people in security organisations that send threatening notes even to our local people that “you either pay or I burn your poultry house” or that “you either pay or I burn your farm on which you have eucalyptus.”

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs or Security should come up with a comprehensive report of those people who have burnt these people’s property and what steps have been taken. The statement should also indicate whether arrests have been made or investigations into these mafias and gang societies have been made. Otherwise, it will worsen and make investors leave this economy and also become a deterrent to people starting small businesses.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the list of people who have suffered arson in the recent past, apart from the schools which we know - we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give us a report of how they have handled these issues and whether he can assure us and investors that we are safe. Honourable minister, will you be able to come next week?

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, arson by definition is a crime. Not all acts of fires are criminally caused. Sometimes, some are accidental. Therefore, you need to give me time to go through the entire list. I ask for two weeks to come with a comprehensive list.

THE SPEAKER: You come before we close for Christmas; we are closing on the 20th.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, whether we are closing tomorrow or the following day, I have given you the basis of why I am asking for two weeks. There are very many issues of fire. Some of them are arson – deliberate setting fire –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, people need to know that they are secure as they go for Christmas. You report on the 20th.


3.06
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the education levels in my constituency, Busongora County   South, especially to do with secondary education.

My constituency is divided into the lower and the upper sides. The upper side consists of five sub-counties and the lower three sub counties. The lower side has two seed secondary schools, a vocational institution and a tourism institute. The upper side has none, yet, it consists of five sub-counties with 36 primary schools. The lower side has 15 primary schools but the upper side does not have Government secondary school.

In 2014, the upper side had 720 pupils who sat for Primary Leaving Education (PLE), with 300 girls and 420 boys.
 
In the last senior four examinations, 200 students were able to sit for the examinations of which 82 were girls and 118 were boys. These were the students that we were able to trace from the different schools. This meant that 480 students who had sat PLE - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what do you want the Government to do?

MR MBAJU: Madam Speaker, having had five sub-counties without secondary schools for some time now, my prayer is that since the community has established three secondary schools, Government should take up these secondary schools as Government-aided. If not, a programme for rolling out seed secondary schools be given a priority in my constituency. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to respond.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague from Busongora County South. The fact is that the ministry is aware of what is happening and we have planned to provide a seed secondary school in every sub-county within his constituency in the shortest time possible. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us hear from hon. Kinobere. Where is he? Okay, he is not here. Can we have hon. Tumuheirwe - only two minutes.

3.10
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a wave of insecurity in Rukungiri District, which has been termed “gun violence.”

The people of Rukungiri are living in fear as they have been terrorised by unknown gunmen. On Friday, 7 December 2018, gunmen whose number is yet to be ascertained waylaid residents of Buhunga Sub-county and shot dead a one Godwin Aine, businessman, who was a coffee processor and took away some money and properties. Earlier, the Chairman, LC II of Kyanga Parish had been attacked in his home by gun welding people. They robbed and injured him.

Madam Speaker, residents no longer sleep in their homes as they are worried. These incidences have been reported to the police in Rukungiri who have informed us that they are aware that there are two illegal guns out with wrong people but they cannot trace them. 

The Police also informed us that they are very thin on the ground. They do not have enough personnel even in Criminal Investigation Department (CID) to investigate these matters. Those who are there are poorly facilitated.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should intensify deployment of police to enhance the security of our people and their property.

The second prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should inform this House when Rukungiri will get enough police personnel to protect our people and their properties. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, there are two aspects to the question. The first aspect is about the inadequacy of the police in the country. As you may be aware, we have created more districts and our population has increased yet the number of police officers recruited has been stagnant for about five years. However, we are hoping that in the next financial year, we will be able to recruit more people.

Meanwhile, we are also trying our best to enhance the capacity of those who are on duty by providing vehicles and fueling those vehicles, which has also been a problem. Once that is sorted, we shall be able to reduce on those incidences.

On the issue of insecurity in the last few months in Rukungiri, I am going to carry out an investigation and come up with a list of the issues of insecurity that have occurred in the last one month and give you a report. Thank you.

3.13
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the security situation across Karamoja sub-region. On Monday last week, we had a security meeting at Kaabong. However, on my way to the constituency, the motorcycle that was moving behind me - two people were killed. One of them was a soldier from the barracks in my constituency and the other was a boda-boda cyclist from Kaabong. Only the woman managed to survive.

Madam Speaker, there have been silent issues - people are being killed in a serial manner across Karamoja yet, there are no reported cases about the killings.  

Government should resolve this issue because there are a lot of guns entering Karamoja through South Sudan and North Western Kenya. We are not safe at all. In fact, there are many Turkanans in my constituency who have come to graze cattle because it is now a dry season in Kenya.

My prayer is that a battalion of soldiers should be taken to the border and Government should open urgent security roads. Water for security should also be put in place.

Madam Speaker, that place has no network. I would like to request that the Government ensures there is good network for communication so that the local people are able to communicate with the security agencies.

Those are some of the issues that we have not treated seriously. If I show you the pictures of the people who have been killed in Karamoja, you will not believe it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I direct the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to address the absence of connectivity in Karamoja, especially in the Ik Constituency.

I also ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come and address us on the possibility of establishing security roads in that part of Karamoja.

Who is going to explain to us on the issue of the Turkana? Is it the Minister of Internal Affairs or Minister of Security? The Turkana are attacking our people in Karamoja.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, insecurity in the Karamoja sub-region has got both internal and external elements. As the colleague has stated, sometimes to increase mobility, it is also necessary talk about security roads in that area. 

Therefore, it is a multi-ministerial Government issue and we will coordinate among ourselves to ensure we come with a statement on the matter.

THE SPEAKER: On all the issues - ICT and the security, the roads.

MR OBIGA: Involving ICT, the roads, the security roads and the internal situation within the sub-region.

THE SPEAKER: When will that be?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you are also going to say this should be on the 20th. I have a bit of assignments – there is the Rukungiri matter and the issue of fires. I would like to suggest that you give us more time to do more intensive work - more than two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Let us do it on the 20th because the Karamojong want to go for Christmas and if they are not secure, it will be a problem. Let us do both on the 20th.

3.19
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Constitution mandates the State to protect people and their property. The people of Nakaseke in Luweero Triangle are experiencing massive theft of animals. Whenever there is a political gathering, you can see policemen in big numbers. However, when you report that there is a thief somewhere, you can hardly see any policeman anywhere. 

Animal rearing is one of the activities of the people of Nakaseke in Luweero Triangle. However, today, it is becoming a very difficult activity. Therefore, I am calling upon the police to respond immediately because the people of Nakaseke can no longer rear animals - cows, goats and pigs are stolen yet animal rearing has been one of the activities from which people generate income.

Therefore, my prayer is that the police should protect the people of Nakaseke and the surrounding areas by responding quickly because people are no longer rearing animals. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Again, this one has to do with the Anti-stock Theft Unit in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I do not know whether they are there or you are going to dispatch them. The Anti-stock Theft Unit is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, we will add that on our report of the 20th.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

3.20
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you. I rise on a matter regarding activities of the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) in my constituency. They have taken the law in their hands and have killed some of the people in my area.

On 9 December 2018, they killed a young man, aged 24, a one Moses Namonyo, son to Mr Samuel Namonyo. The man went to the forest but he was arrested by UWA staff with some charcoal and they brought him in their camp. They negotiated a deal that the mother should give them Shs 300,000. 

However, the mother negotiated the deal down to Shs 70,000 and she went to sell a goat in order to raise that money. Surprisingly, when she came back, the boy had been gunned down. Not only being shot once, he was shot thrice in the stomach. After that, they sealed off the camp and connived with police and took the body to Mbale. I followed them but could not trace where the body is. They took back the body and ordered for burial. 

Such things have happened several times. Last year, it happened and this time, it has again happened. They are the ones who hire out the land to the local people to dig but when there is an exchange or transfer of the officers, those to whom the land will have been hired will be asked to pay again. This is one of reasons that lead to the emergence of such problems.

Therefore, I would like to ask the authorities concerned to investigate this issue well because the man who was killed left behind a son of seven months. What is going to happen with his son? I would like to ask the authority –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities  to come to us on Tuesday and update us on the killing of this young man in Elgon Forest Reserve. However, I would also like to remind members that the Committee on Trade, Indusrty and Cooperatives; and that of Tourism - there is a pending Bill on wildlife. 

We have been complaining about the relationship between wildlife and the people. Please, let us bring that law and discuss how we are going to co-exist.

3.22
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. As we go to the festive season, there are many holiday makers.  As my people of Bugisu sub-region wind up the circumcision period, December is going to be a very tough month. 

The social workers, NGOs and Rotary International have raised a red flag that the Ministry of Health has not imported “shields” to defend these people during the festive season. Therefore, can the Minister of Health tell Ugandans why they did not prepare for this festive season yet they know that December is a very busy month and that during this month, there are many holiday makers and that this can cause problems in the health sector? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: He is talking about condoms; that there are no condoms for the Christmas season. I do not know whether the minister is ready to make an undertaking.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I had not understood what “shields” he was talking about but I thank you for clarifying. True, this is Christmas period and we normally give out health messages not only focusing on disease prevention during such times but also trying to appeal to the youth not to engage in reckless behaviour like overconsumption of alcohol. We also try to ask them not to engage in reckless sexual behaviour because most of them, unfortunately, as you are aware, during this long holiday, the girls get pregnant.

Therefore, we have health messages that are already running. Maybe, we need to intensify but also to assure the country that we have adequate supplies of condoms and what we do not want the youth to do is simply pick condoms to go and engage in reckless sexual behaviour.
The key message to our young people is to abstain from sexual behaviour. However, we will follow up; if there is under supply in Mbale because of the Imbalu that is on, we will follow up and ensure that there are adequate supplies.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, please, join me in welcoming a delegation from Kigulu County North, Iganga, represented by hon. Bwino and hon. Kaudha. You are welcome. (Applause)

There is also a delegation from Lusanja in Kasangati Town Council, represented by hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. I know they are here to listen to the Attorney General on their issues.

3.26
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the suppliers of coffee seedlings to the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). 

Since the 2016/2017 Financial Year, major suppliers of coffee seedlings to UCDA have not been paid in the districts of Busia, Namayingo and Bugiri as well as Iganga, Namutumba, Kamuli and Luuka. In fact, almost all the districts of Eastern Uganda have been affected. This has caused a lot of suffering to our people to an extent that a managing director of a farm supply company from Busia is in prison because he borrowed money to make the seedlings to supply but he has not been paid. We have companies from Busia who have not been paid to a tune of almost Shs 47 million. 

It is my prayer that these companies and others from the districts as mentioned in Uganda be paid their money before Christmas. In the African culture, we believe that festive days are those that people are supposed to enjoy and at the same time, to help these companies pay back the loans they borrowed from the banks.

Secondly, I request the responsible ministry to investigate what is causing the delay of payments to coffee seedling suppliers because it is a major complaint.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, on a number of occasions, I have had to make calls to UCDA on behalf of my farmers who have not been paid. So, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, how can you salvage the situation? This was in 2016/2017 and now we are in 2018/2019.

3.29
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Sssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are paying even right now but for the last supplies of the other season because of poor funding.

The budgeting period is coming in; I would like to appeal to honourable members to provide more money if we have to fulfill the coffee roadmap that we agreed upon of producing 20 million bags by the year 2022. 

The other problem is that we take time because certainly, verification is necessary to make sure we are paying the right people. Since coffee seedlings are not – (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information you are giving the House. I am concerned that the matter of seedling suppliers has been coming here for some time. Even in the current budget, there was a debt of Shs 90 billion. As Parliament, we requested that the committee gives at least Shs 54 billion. 

We have seen Government many times requiring supplementary budgets to settle such matters. Has your ministry worked on a supplementary budget for coffee seedling suppliers as we continue to listen to this matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, respond. We have a few other things to handle.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the last time we talked about a supplementary budget, Parliament insisted that the supplementary budgets should be only for unforeseen and unavoidable issues and coffee was not one of them. 

What Government did - at some stage, we had more seedlings than the budget. Cabinet authorised the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allow these seedlings be received by UCDA on the promise that, that money would be paid. While we got the Shs 54 billion but we had arrears of Shs 90 billion and so, the Shs 54 billion could not pay everybody.
We are now paying and in the new budget, we have asked for more money. If our request goes through, we are sure that all nursery operators will be paid. Thank you.

3.33
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Wednesday, court in the United States convicted a one Ho Chi- Ping for alleged bribery of $500,000 to Uganda’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa. I have read in the newspapers stories to the effect that the President has asked hon. Kutesa to explain himself and that the Attorney-General would investigate him. 

Madam Speaker, tarnishing of Uganda’s image is not for only hon. Kutesa. I would not have bothered about it if it was him as an individual but he was in the capacity of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Uganda. 
There is an alleged $500,000 again that he carried in gift packs to the President. Now, the image of the country is weighed down. So, I am surprised that Government has not found it credible to present a statement to Parliament.

Whereas one of us, hon. Kabafunzaki was forced to step aside as the allegations and investigations were going on, can we know what the status of hon. Kutesa is now that a conviction has been entered against the one who gave him the bribe? (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo is that the hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa was not only a Minister of Foreign Affairs but he was also the President of the UN General Assembly on our nomination and recommendation.

Secondly, whereas hon. Kutesa said he did not receive that money, information from the President is to the effect that he told him it was not a bribe but a donation; a confirmation that money was received.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, make your prayers so that we know what to do.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, can we, therefore, at this point in time as Parliament, request that we go by the rules and precedents set before. The honourable minister should step aside and allow a thorough investigation to take place. 

Secondly, the Government should tell us the capacity and the current position, how money moved from the Hong Kong Bank and wired through the United States to a Stanbic Bank account here in Kampala without any detection from the Financial Intelligence Agency we have in this country. Do we have reliable agencies for that matter that can monitor against money laundering? 

Can this Parliament, therefore, resolve that we give Government a period of one week and thereafter, we begin to proceed under Article 119 to censure the  Minister if Government so delays? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, fortunately, the Government is here; the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General are all here. 

3.37
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. It is true that there is an allegation against the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the receipt of $500,000.
It is also true that His Excellency, the President has asked me to investigate this matter and to inquire into the truth or otherwise of this matter. 

I am going to inquire into these matters and at the end of that inquiry, this Parliament shall be made aware of the findings of that investigation. I thank - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: May I seek clarification from the Attorney General. Madam Speaker, may we know when he is going to give us this report and what controls we have over his investigations when we are not the appointing authority?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the intention, is to conclude this matter as soon as possible. In this context, I have just understood that we are going into recess on the 20th – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, point of order.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point order about?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I am putting him to order. I asked a specific question on when because this is a very serious matter for this country. However, the Attorney-General is simply telling us, “as soon as possible.” I do not have a weighing scale for his ability of knowing what soon means. 
Is he in order by not telling us the specifics?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, tell us when you are going to bring the report.

MR BYARUHANGA:  Madam Speaker, if the Member had allowed me to continue, that is precisely what I was going to do. I expect to bring back the report as soon as we resume in January.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us an interim report before we close?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, yes I can, to the extent that it will be ready - yes, I can.

THE SPEAKER: That is why we are talking about an interim. 

3.41
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on matter of national importance. Yesterday, I was attending a meeting at the district- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have some order. There is so much excitement, hon. Itungo is on the Floor.

MR TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, as I attended a meeting of Road Fund yesterday at the district, I learnt that a group of 177 primary school teachers have not been paid. From the explanation, the district normally sends them to the Ministry of Public Service. When they reach there, they are sent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and when they reach Finance, they are sent to Ministry of Education and Sports, from where they are told that since services have been decentralised, they should go to Ministry of Local Government. 

Madam Speaker, this matter was here last week concerning teachers in Serere District and I remember the minister promised to send a team there. 
We are going for Christmas - these teachers have been teaching our children. However, while we are going to enjoy Christmas with our children, these teachers will be suffering. My prayer is that these teachers should be paid before Christmas so that they can enjoy that festive season. 

Secondly, there should be desks at both the district and Ministry of Public Service where they get information because these teachers are suffering. 

Lastly, the minister should now clarify - it seems this is another nodding - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a similar question was raised from Serere District about teachers’ salaries and you had undertaken to send a team there. I do not know whether you can answer in relation to the Mbarara teachers’ salary.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I undertake to report to this House on the situation in Serere and Mbarara districts tomorrow because as I said, this payroll was decentralised to the districts and whatever happens there, the centre can monitor. 

Therefore, I undertake to give you a report tomorrow on Serere, Mbarara and all others in regard to the status of the payments for teachers –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Bahati gave a commitment on Thursday that by Friday - he actually said, “tomorrow, there will be a team in Serere.” I was with the CAO of Serere District yesterday. No one from your ministry, as you promised us here, has stepped in Serere District in regard to this matter. You told us on Friday and I informed the district but no one has been there.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, if hon. Okupa could give us an opportunity to provide an answer tomorrow because what we want are the teachers in Serere to be paid. Whether somebody is there physically or not, we must sort that one out. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that puts an end to matters of national importance. Honourable members, I will have to amend the Order Paper to allow the Attorney-General to answer on the issue of the Lusanja evictions, which has been on the Floor of this House several times. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your procedural guidance. Earlier, you informed us that Parliament will be closing on 20th December and I am alive to the fact that as backbenchers, we have four commissioners representing us in the Parliamentary Commission, whose term of office expires this year. 
However, in your communication, so far, I have not heard any information with respect to guidance on how we are going to elect those Commissioners – (Interjections) - I will take the point of information but allow me to elaborate my point. 

Madam Speaker, the office of commissioners of Parliament is established by the Administration of Parliament Act, as amended. Section 2 (b) of the Act requires nomination of the candidates for election to the Commission of the four members of Parliament referred to in subsection (2) - and those are the back bench commissioners and it reads, “shall be made by the Government and opposition sides.” 

I am aware of the Rules of Procedure, in particular Rule 11 (1) (f), which talks about four members of Parliament, one of whom shall come from the Opposition and none of whom shall be a minister. 

Whereas, Madam Speaker, I appreciate that there is an apparent conflict. I am aware that the office is created by a substantive provision of the Act. The Rules of Procedure made pursuant to the Constitution are intended to guide us on how we execute our substantive functions. The Constitution also requires us to observe democratic principles of governance and administration. 

Now that we have not been guided on the rules to be followed, may I seek your guidance on how and when we are going to – because the current Commissioners’ term is ending in a week’s time and we are closing Parliament. May I seek your guidance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have to study this a bit because I believe these rules emanate from the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, 2017. However, the appointment of the commissioners is under the Administration of Parliament Act. We will need to find a meeting point. Let me sleep over it and I will give you a ruling tomorrow. I cannot do it now because I have not studied it. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. Hon. Ssekikubo raised a matter, which touches on the integrity of the country and the House. In your ruling, Madam Speaker, you guided that the Attorney-General shall carry out the investigation and report to the House. 

However, the matter involves a minister and the appointing authority, the President, if you read the evidence so far gathered. 
Therefore, I wonder whether in this respect, it will not be this House to carry out its own investigations by a relevant committee and reports back. This is important because as the matter is, the appointing authority is also being accused and he is instructing one of his appointees to carry out the investigation concerning a member, which investigations may again also lead to the appointing authority - I wonder how the Attorney-General will report on that matter in those circumstances.
 
Therefore, I am seeking your procedural guidance, whether it is proper, so as to protect the integrity of this House because one of the Members is within this House and for the general public and the country – the last time I was in Burundi, they asked us if we were from Uganda where the minister and President are being accused - of course, as a Ugandan, I was indicted - whether we would not have a committee to investigate and report to this House? It is better than waiting for the minister getting to another minister then to the appointing authority, who is also another suspect in this matter.  

I seek your guidance on this matter, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we had a substantive motion here, on which we debated and took a resolution, then it would be simpler for me. However, it has come as a matter of national interest. There are no justifications. We have not debated it; it is premature for now.

MR SSEKIKUBO: As per your guidance, Madam Speaker, may I, therefore, give notice that I present a substantive motion to that effect? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. This matter has been here before and in your very wise ruling, you ably informed us that the matter was being investigated in court. The court proceedings have now terminated in favour of the State and the minister’s alleged accomplice has been convicted.
 
I am motivated by the fact that the minister is our Member and this is an issue that speaks to the integrity of this House, where our Member, who cannot travel to the UN, is under “fire.” Allegations and counter allegations have been made against him. 

Wouldn’t it be fair to this honourable member, the hon. Sam Kutesa to, one to be investigated by his own peers in the House and two, to come and give us a statement? 

The honourable member is perennially absent from the House. Even in the face of these allegations, Madam Speaker, he is absent. May you find it, within your powers, to summon him to appear, now that he has not appeared by himself and give us a statement? 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, again as I indicted, I would have been happy to see the text of the judgement here. I have not read it. If you want this matter brought to the Floor of this House, prepare a proper motion, which we can debate here and take a decision. Thank you. 

Let me invite the Attorney-General to make a statement on the Lusanja matter. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON AN UPDATE FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ON THE DECISION ON THE FATE OF FAMILIES THAT WERE EVICTED FROM THEIR RESIDENCES IN LUSANJA, RAISED BY HON. ABDUL LATIF SSEBAGGALA

3.53
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the evictees in Lusanja. By way of background, on 12 January, 2017, a civil suit was filed in Nabweru Chief Magistrate’s Court under Land Civil Case No. 7 of 2017. The parties were a one Medard Kiconco Vs Patrick Opendo and 16 others. This matter was handled by Her Worship, Esther Rebecca Nsambu and it was seeking orders for the abatement of a nuisance, also a demolition order and delivery of vacant possession, a permanent injunction and award of damages plus costs of the suit. This was what was being sought by a one Kiconco. The matter proceeded without the defendants filing a defence. 

On 3 October 2017, Her Worship, Esther Rebecca Nsambu delivered judgement with orders declaring the defendants as trespassers, also gave a permanent injunction against the defendants and also ordered demolition of their structures as well as general damages in the sum of Shs 20 million plus costs of the suit. 

On 24 October 2017, the file was forwarded to the Executive Division of the High Court. At the execution division, file No. EMA 245 of 2017 was opened –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order. Honourable members, you have always wanted to hear about this issue. 

MR BYARUHANGA: On 7 November, 2017, a notice to show cause was issued for the judgement debtors to appear on 15th November 2017. The notices to show cause were allegedly served and witnessed by a one Henry Sejjeba, the Chairman LC1 of Mpererwe, Sekanyonyi Zone.

In December 2017, some of the defendants filed a Miscellaneous Application No. 3I7 of 2017 at Nabweru Chief Magistrate’s Court seeking for orders that the Ex Parte Judgment entered on the 3 October 2Ol7 by Her worship, Esther Rebecca Nsambu be set aside.

However, the same application was dismissed on 2 July 2O18 under Order 9 Rule 22 of the Civil Procedure Rules for failure to prosecute it for a long time.

In addition to filing Miscellaneous Application No. 317 of 2017 at Nabweru Chief Magistrate’s Court, the applicants also filed Miscellaneous Application No. 2880 of 2017 for a stay of execution and also filed Miscellaneous Application No. 2940 for interim stay of execution. 

On 19 December 2Ol7, the application for interim stay of execution was heard by the Deputy Registrar and allowed on condition that the applicants deposited security for costs of Shs 20 million. 

Subsequently, on 19 December 2017, the High Court Execution Division dismissed the application No. 2880 of 2017 on the ground that the same had been overtaken by events since the applicants had now accepted to deposit security for costs.

After dismissing the application to set aside the Ex parte Judgment on 2 July 2018 under Order 9 Rule 22 of the Civil Procedure Rules for failure to prosecute it for a long time by the Chief Magistrate Court Nabweru, the High Court Execution Division proceeded with the execution process and on 23 August 2018, His Worship Baker Rwatooro, Deputy Registrar issued a warrant to Moses Kirunda who trades as Spear Link Auctioneers & Court Bailiff.

On 12 October 2018, the Bailiff Moses Kirunda went ahead to execute the Court Order by giving vacant possession of land comprised in Kyadondo Block 206 Plot 671, the abatement of the nuisance and demolition of the defendants illegal structures.

It was at that point, Madam Speaker, that His Excellency, the President, was requested to visit the people of Lusanja. After the President directed me to investigate the matter and report back to him, where upon I contacted the office of the Chief Justice of Uganda who commenced investigations. 

Madam Speaker, under the investigations and disciplinary actions of the judicial officers involved, we started with Her Worship, Esther Rebecca Nsambu – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, point of procedure. We are wondering – the Attorney-General is reading a long document whose copies we do not have.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the office of the Chief registrar investigated the conduct of Her Worship Esther Nsambu Rebecca while handling Land Civil Case No. 7 of 2017 - Medard Kiconco Versus Patrick Opendo and 16 others - and found that the Chief Magistrate lacked jurisdiction to handle the matter. 

The Chief Magistrate also handled the suit until the end without visiting locus and three, there was no proper service of summons against the defendants, among others. The investigation also found that there was no merit in her explanation other than asking for forgiveness and pardon. As a result, this matter was forwarded to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action.

The Judicial Service Commission has already preferred three charges against Her Worship Ester Rebecca Nsambu namely:

a) 	Conduct prejudicial to the good image of service contrary to Regulation 23(a) of the Judicial Service Commission Regulations, 2005
b) 	Producing poor standard work under Regulation 23(f) of the Judicial Service Commission Regulations, 2005  
c) 	Unsatisfactory performance of duty under Section F-S No. 2(q) of the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010. That was about the magistrate.

For His worship Baker Rwatooro, the office of the Chief Registrar investigated his conduct while handling Land Civil Case No. 7 of 2017 - Medard Kiconco Versus Patrick Opendo and 16 others  - in the Execution and Bailiffs Division and found that His Worship Baker Rwatooro failed to exercise due diligence as required by Rule 6 of the Practice Direction No.1 of 2017 in respect to issuing orders relating to land, which affect or impact on the tenants by occupancy and there was no merit in his explanation because he only insisted that the notice to show cause was served on the defendants. As a result, that case too was forwarded to the Judicial Service Commission for disciplinary action.

Madam Speaker, the Judicial Service Commission has already preferred two charges against His Worship Baker Rwatooro namely;

a) 	Conduct prejudicial to the good image of service contrary to Regulation 23 (a) of the Judicial Service Commission Regulations,2005; and 
b) 	Producing poor standard work under Regulation 23 (f) of the Judicial Service Regulations, 2005.

For Moses Kirunda, who trades as Spear Link Auctioneers & Court Bailiffs, the office of the Chief Registrar is currently investigating his actions while he was handling the execution arising from Land Civil Case No. 7, with a possibility of taking disciplinary action if found liable.

The status of this matter

Madam Speaker, the office of the Chief Justice and that of the Principal Judge have already intervened in the matter and the file has since been forwarded, by the Principal Judge to the High Court Land Division for revision. This was done under Section 83 of the Civil Procedure Act, Cap 71, which provides thus: “The High Court may call for the record of any case, which has been determined under this Act by any magistrate’s court and if that court appears to have:

(a) 	Exercised the jurisdiction not vested in it in law; 
(b) 	Failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or 
(c) 	Acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity or injustice, the High Court may revise the case and may make such order in it as it thinks fit; but no such power of revision shall be exercised unless the parties shall first be given the opportunity of being heard, or ….” 

The Chief Justice and the Principal Judge are proceeding under this Section 83 (c).

Madam Speaker, the Office of the Attorney-General will work closely with the Office of the Chief Justice to ensure that the affected people of Lusanja are heard in court during the revision proceedings including all the interested parties in order for justice to prevail.

In the interim, as the revision of the case is ongoing before the High Court Land Division, the Office of the Attorney-General will work with the Office of Chief Justice – and they are doing so - to halt any further evictions or any evictions at all on the suit land until the court case is concluded and after further orders are made by court.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I appreciate the efforts of Parliament in addressing the plight of the people of Lusanja. The Executive, through my office, is committed to work with the Judiciary to ensure that the affected people are heard in court during the revision proceedings including all the interested parties for justice to prevail since this matter already in court. Thank you and I so submit. (Applause)

MR SSEGGONA: Point of clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Before I allow a comment or two, honourable Attorney-General, look at paragraph 2 (3) – Kirunda, I want to understand why no one is willing to acknowledge that this man executed an order at night, which is against the law. Why is no one – what are they looking for – no, the orders cannot be executed before 6; he did it at midnight. Why is no one taking action against him? - No, this is unacceptable. I have been asking this question for the last three months. Why is no one taking action against Kirunda?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, in addition, what happens to the police that went and participated in an illegal execution?

Two, what happened to the Office of the Minister of Justice and Judiciary that do not provide money to magistrates to visit locus? In the end, the parties are the ones that finance the movement to the locus. What happens to those poor litigants that do not have money to facilitate magistrates to visit locus? Anyhow, where are the police in that statement that went and participated in beating up people in an execution at night?

4.07
MR ROBERT KYAGULANYI (Independent, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to respond to the statement by the Attorney-General. For clarity, I would like to remind this House that Lusanja Village lies both in Kyandondo East Constituency and Kawempe North. My colleague, hon. Latif Sebaggala is not in the House today but this is our position. 

First and foremost, the evictions in Lusanja were illegal, illegitimate and highhanded. That was the position of the President when he visited the locus. Justice Catherine Bamugemereire said the same thing. This morning, the spokesperson of the Judiciary apologised for the same, which he called a terrible mistake. He went ahead to say that the eviction order was meant for the land in Ssekayoni in Mpererwe not in Lusanja. 

We wonder how more than 350 families could be evicted over a wrong court order. That shows us the impunity that goes on every day in our country. If it was not for the aggressiveness and the demonstrations that the people in Lusanja staged, maybe their concerns would not have been raised today. 

Madam Speaker, the victims are in the House today. Through me, they are asking this question: how long are they going to wait for that justice? As we enjoy the comfort of this Parliament, right now, it is raining and when it rains, only God knows the condition those people go through.

I must report that those people are suffering and their children are dying. I went there last week and some colleagues, who were watching on television, saw a 13-year-old girl in P.7 who was raped because she did not have a home. More than four children have died because of unbearable diseases and conditions. As their Members of Parliament, we have gone to them and they are asking Government to punish the perpetrators of this crime. I must report that the DPC of Kasangati, one Jaffer Magyezi supervised these illegal and illegitimate evictions. This DPC has not been apprehended. Therefore, they are calling for the apprehension of the DPC, the bailiffs and all the police officers who watched over this crime.

Two, the victims want quick and swift compensation. (Applause)

Three, as their Members of Parliament, we have explained to them that the evictions were illegal and illegitimate. We have advised them to reconstruct their houses. 

Madam Speaker, in Kyadondo East, we have a policy called Okwebereramu, which means self-help. We have embarked on an effort of donating iron sheets, bricks and sand to the people of Lusanja to see that they themselves can help in rebuilding their lives.

Madam Speaker, what we would like to seek today is a guarantee from the Attorney-General, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that police and other Government institutions are not going to interrupt these people as they try to rebuild their houses. These people who are in the House today and are not interested in long speeches. All they are interested in is justice and they want it now. I beg to submit. (Applause)

4.12
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, we have heard the statement from the Attorney-General and indeed, it does not offer real time solutions. Like you have heard from the hon. Robert Kyagulanyi who represents them, the people are asking two questions like every one of us that has a family here today - their livelihood has been destroyed. Their fundamental right to a home has been destroyed. They are prone to diseases, they do not have toilets, they do not have sufficient food and they do not have who to run to.

The Government is saying it will help them in court. The issue is how? We are talking about legal aid. Can you tell us the standby lawyers you have appointed to represent them? Even before that, having realised that there is an illegality and we have brutal men who are called bailiffs in this country that pick up people and destroy people’s property under the watch of security personnel, people need answers of transfers of these security personnel. People need this comfort and we need to rise up above our shoulders, carry materials and help these people to rebuild homes and sleep decently in this country.

Otherwise, with these rains, we shall have a cholera outbreak there. Their children come back from school; they have nowhere to sleep and they are sharing toilets, men and women are bathing together in the same area. We must be humane. Anyhow, the final question is: hon. Attorney-General and Leader of Government Business, this is only Lusanja but how many Ugandans outside there, including Ugandans in Bududa and Apaa who have not been given this fair hearing - shall every single Ugandan first demonstrate so that this Government understands that they have plight and pain? Can we come up with a collective effort that shall help Ugandans who are suffering from this injustice emanating out of courts to seek redress immediately – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General is a very senior lawyer. He is aware that under Article 126(2)(c), there is a requirement for adequate compensation for all victims of wrongs. Now that the Government admits that its officers, right from the Judiciary, to the police and a bailiff who is an officer of court - why wouldn’t the Attorney-General commit to compensation? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you know that several times when there have been fires in the markets there, the response has been swift. Now that you know that the eviction was even in the wrong place, are those Ugandans going to be left there on their own to sleep in those tents? Can’t the President carry a “big sack” and take it there? (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I call upon the leaders to have the principle of empathy. When you see a two or three-year-old sleeping out without choice and children not going to school as a result of the misgivings and the misconduct of the officers that are paid by the taxpayers, then we must rise above self and see to it that we solve these problems immediately other than giving continuous lip-service. Thank you very much.

4.16
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I speak with tears - (Laughter) – yes; I have now come to understand why the NRM is performing poorly in urban areas. How can the Judiciary do irregular things to the voters? At the end of the day, these judges do not even go for burials or public places –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable. Deal with the subject; do not talk about the judges. (Laughter)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, we get few votes because of these errant officers. The Attorney-General has clearly said that the mistake is with Government, through the Judiciary. My humble request is that instead of wasting time and saying that people should be heard in Court - what assurance do we have that the other Court will not do the same? 

I request, if it is within our mandate, that these people go back and the minister in charge of disaster should bring iron sheets and bricks and we construct houses for these people.

4.18
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, the people of Lusanja are not interested –(Interjection) - can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR NSAMBA: The people of Lusanja are not interested in the Court processes. What they are interested in are their homes and land, from which they were illegally evicted. Very many times, we have seen this Government compensate people with interests in certain areas like the Lufula, where they compensated colossal sums of money to Basajjabalaba. If this man has interest in people’s land, the Government can compensate that man and leave these people on their land.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for highlighting that where there is need for Government to come with sacks of money, they do not appear but where there is a political threat is where they wake up and come with sacks of money. We must request for one issue; that let Government deal with Kiconco the way they want but let the people of Lusanja stay on their land. Thank you.

4.20
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I need clarification on two things. The steps for eviction include having an inventory and opening boundaries. Attorney-General, were those steps followed? If we are to compensate these people, where do we start?

Secondly, you accepted that there were a lot of irregularities in this eviction. However, in your report, you have not told us how many people you have arrested on malicious damage because that was aggravated malicious damage. There are also other criminal offences that were committed, especially during and after the eviction.

We have been told that that the District Police Commander (DPC) has issued directives that no police post should register any case apart from him. I do not know how many cases have been registered. The media is showing us –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, all the questions that we are raising are supposed to be answered. I am looking at the Attorney-General of this country and these questions are being directed at him but he is not recording anything. He is only holding his cheek. (Laughter) 

Is he in order not to take us seriously especially when he has demonstrated contempt by not telling us what he has done for these people as we have all observed and he has conceded that there is no court order against these people of Lusanja. At the end of the day, he is going to gloss over our questions. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I believe he is listening. However, in his statement he said the order was in respect of a place called Sekanyonyi and not Lusanja. Therefore, all things done in Lusanja were an illegality and the Government must address it. The order was not even meant for them.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, I was wondering what other cases have been registered as a result of that criminal act of evicting people illegally. This has been happening all over. In my constituency, I have two internally displaced people’s (IDP) camps where an eviction on plot 34 was carried out to evict the entire village, including plot 37. We have to fight this method of evicting nationals and making them landless in their own country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need answers today. 

4.23
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for bringing that report but the report points out very many illegalities. However, as usual, it will always be the chief magistrate of a court to bear the burden of even the lower cadres.

For the Nabweru Court that we are talking about - remember that we had Aggrey Bwire, the former Chief Magistrate of that court and he was dismissed by the Judicial Service Commission and today, we have a problem with a one Esther Nansambu. 

The Attorney-General needs to interest himself with the issue of Nabweru Court. The registrar at that court has powers that you cannot believe. If we do not transfer or dismiss that registrar, all the ugly deals in Kampala – from land to massive evictions – go through that registrar. I do not want to mention the name here but the minister should interest himself with the matter. We will keep on having problems. 

I did my investigations and found out that every magistrate in the courts around Kampala declined the issue of this land. They went to this very notorious – and I think he has high connections in this Government. That must end.

Madam Speaker, if the courts concerned themselves with the procedure - even the High Court would give it to these people who wrongfully got the order – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, we are in the same area and this court has jurisdiction around my constituency - Nansana Municipality.

These people always give wrong orders; they never visit the locus. What happened to Lusanja happened to the people in Buso and Kijjude. The same people grade houses at night.
	
Madam Speaker, we must do something about these magistrates and the police that escort them at night.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, for that information. In summary, the message I am putting on the record of Parliament is that that registrar has blessings from the Government and whoever supports him will keep this country in a total mess. If it takes a minute to dismiss a chief magistrate – now there is a Nansambu today. How about that registrar? Who is he?

Madam Speaker, we need to concern ourselves. Thank you, very much.

4.26
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters. First, why is Mr Kiconco still at large? I thought that by the time the Attorney-General reported to Parliament, Kiconco would be already behind bars because of the illegality.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to report to you the conduct of Kirunda, in particular. It is not the first time he is behaving like this; conniving with judges to mistreat citizens and carryout evictions on wrong sites. It happened in Makindye- Katwe-Kinyoro three years ago, when an investor wanted to grab land and used him to do the same thing that was done in Lusanja.

Indeed, people were wrongly evicted in the night by wrong characters who raped and beat up people. The next morning, when I went there – I was councillor then - this man wanted to beat me. He connived with the District Police Commander (DPC) of Katwe to beat me up.

Therefore, when I hear the same issue of connivance again perpetrated by this man Kirunda - I think he should be behind bars. He is a criminal, who has caused havoc and he has created a lot of disorganisation in Kampala and the neighbouring areas.

One time, I talked to this man and he was discrediting Parliament. He said, “You, members of Parliament, can do nothing to me.” If someone can even go to the extent of disrespecting Parliament, why should we leave him to be at large, even after getting a report of Parliament that he connived with the judges to carry out evictions on the wrong site? I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was not the judges. There was a chief magistrate and the registrar. Those are the people who were in the state.

4.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have one observation that I would like to point out to the Attorney-General and those in Judiciary; if you see these people who were evicted and compare them to those who evict them - and you can see the order. At least these people are close to the central region here but those in the rural areas suffer most. Sometimes, it is about envelopes; giving envelopes to the magistrates. It is very common that they sometimes take money at the expense of the poor people.

We must care more for the vulnerable people than support those who are strong and rich. This is what happens all the time. For those people who are up country and those listening to us – these people have been very vigilant. They stood their ground but there are a lot of people who cannot stand firm like the way the Lusanja people did. 

Therefore, I am appealing to Ugandans to stand firm; as long as you stand up for the truth. The devil will – (Member timed out.)

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank my colleagues who have empathised with the people of Wakiso District, especially the people of Lusanja who have suffered.

I do not have to repeat what my colleagues have said but the truth – I know this has been in Court but unfortunately, even the people who have been in Court are not the people who were evicted; that is the most hurting part of it.

I am speaking as a Member of Parliament representing Wakiso District and of the people who were affected. I am not standing here to address this Parliament as a minister. 

The people were wrongly affected but I praise God that at last, the truth somehow has come out. I am glad that the magistrate managed to apologise. However, apologizing after putting people to such suffering is very unfortunate.

Madam Speaker, I would like thank His Excellence the President because when this happened, the President came to commiserate with the people and he stopped further evictions because the evictors were supposed to come back the following day to evict 300 more families. He requested that it should stop until we find a way forward on how to help the people.

I also want to thank the Prime Minister because we intervened but I request that we must find a way forward now to see how to resolve the problem. The people are still suffering. Much as we have given them some sort of support, it is not enough. We need to find a lasting solution to the people of Lusanja since the magistrate said she made a mistake.  

Madam Speaker, I pray that we resolve that something be done to solve this problem once and for all.

4.34
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To the extent that I was responding to this matter, it was for me to prepare and present a comprehensive statement on the final decision of the fate of the evicted persons in Lusanja.

Madam Speaker, I have heard everything that has been said. In my statement I was enumerating what we had done thus far. The mischief clearly originated from the members of the Judiciary, which as I have already elucidated in my statement, was the investigation that was carried out by the Chief Justice and the Principal Judge.

There are only certain ways that certain things can be addressed. As far as wrong doing by the Judiciary is concerned, there are set ways about what to do. The first is to take them to the Judicial Service Commission who are their appointers. Concurrently, investigations on whether there was crime or criminal intent are on-going. 

I just stated what the Chief Justice had reported to me –(Interruption)

MR SEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I am sure the Attorney-General knows the rules. I agree with the Attorney-General that where crime is suspected, there must be investigations. I have been in this country long enough to witness the President remove the pips for the Officer in Charge in Natete on site.

One, not even an eviction but a demolition in the night with men in police uniform, with beatings, destruction of property and abuse of a court process; is the Attorney-General in order in telling us that investigations are going on when nobody has been arrested? 

The DPC is in office and all the police officers are marauding around and he has not advised Government on what to do and how to do it. Is the Attorney-General in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you know this is a simple but very clear matter. The people were lawfully going about their business and sleeping in their houses. The agents of the State came and destroyed their homes for no reason. They were not part of the case. Is there anything to be investigated?

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Speaker. There are investigations that need to be done. Of course, the honourable member knows I have no power to remove anybody’s pips. Madam Speaker, you pointed out here which message we shall take back to the Principal - that why compensation can’t be made for the people –(Interjections)– you asked why compensation is not being done in this case as opposed to the other cases. I agree with you -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to others to thank you for having allowed this debate. I would like the Attorney-General to clarify on the fate of the people that were wrongly evicted. 

I would like these people and those listening to us to be assured that they are going back to maybe receive new houses and decent places of abode. Are you speaking with authority?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, we would like to thank the Attorney-General for the statement and since it was found that it was members of the Judiciary who caused problems, certainly, there will be investigations - he is not listening. The investigations are going on and they could take forever.

Our concern is, what measures have you put in place to ensure that these people are reinstated in the area in which they were wrongfully evicted so that they can go on with their lives. That is what we want - and your investigations can take for as long as you want but we want these people to be reinstated so that they go on with their lives.

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the debate and the statement you gave to us, honourable Attorney-General. You are giving us a report on the final decision on the evictees in Lusanja. Can you show me in your report, the final decision for those people because what you are saying is nothing final according to what happened to those people.

They are still sleeping out and yet you are talking about taking them to Court. Nothing is final in the benefits of the people who were illegally evicted from their land. Please be serious.

4.41
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion under Rule 58 (k) “Motion without notice”. The House has ably debated the minister’s report and the minister has conceded to wrong doing by all parties involved. We are not reaching a conclusion as to the remedy to the victims.

I would like to move that the House move a motion to resolve that Government, having considered the illegalities involved in the eviction of the people of Lusanja and having conceded to the commission by its own officers and officers of the Judiciary; moves to compensate the people of Lusanja, reinstates them, aids them to rebuild their homes, offers food rations until their lives are restored and Government moves to prosecute all individuals and agencies involved in this illegal eviction. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by several members of the House. We have debated it, haven’t we? Can I put the question? Is there any one objecting?

4.43
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion that has been moved by hon. Mpuuga but with some amendments. On several occasions, we have asked Government to prosecute all the culprits concerned but we have not got any reports. 

The issue of land eviction is everywhere. As a colleague said, these are lucky they are in Kampala and they were heard easily. If they were in Buyende, it would take ages for the Attorney-General to even investigate.

I would like to move an amendment, since the Prime minister is in the House, that in two weeks or before we break off for recess, the Government moves in to compensate and make the arrangements. We need the Attorney-General to come and report that the District Police Commander (DPC) who was involved has been interdicted or this kind of action has been taken.

We want to see action taken on the police officers who moved at night and that the untouchable Mr Kirunda has been subjected to action.  Today, the spokesperson said we can revoke - do this and the other - and all the officers concerned. 

As my colleague said, in Nabweru, the issue may not only be with the magistrate. As they carry out the investigations, you may find that the registrar, who is a perennial actor in these games, was part of the game. 

Therefore, we need the Government to come before 20th December to tell us the actions taken against those people and the position other than just saying they will act when we do not have a deadline for when they will do so.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Okupa and then I will invite the Prime Minister.

4.46 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The technical people should help us; the machines behind are not working and that is why we have to step here.

I have been wondering why the Prime Minister is quiet yet we need action because there are people who are outside and it is raining. I thought the Prime Minister would come and say, “Today we are providing posho, beans, matooke, Iron sheets or tents as a remedial measure.” These people are outside.

The Prime Minister is seated relaxed as if nothing has happened. Can we have the short term, medium term and long term solutions to the problems that are facing these people? I would be comfortable if the Prime Minister assured the people affected that they are going to be taken care of from mid-night tonight. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Prime Minister will really remove Government from impunity. Please show this country that you do not accept impunity by taking action. (Applause)

4.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the issue of Lusanja has been in the public domain and in this House for quite some time. Government has already reported to you before that when this incident occurred, Government officials led by His Excellency the President visited the area, sympathised with the wanainchi and provided some essential basic needs for their survival like beans and posho and in some areas, some tents.

Investigations have been going on and the Attorney-General – and I would like to thank him - has updated us on what has so far happened. My view is that the investigations should be completed and a timeframe should be given. 

Within a week, the Attorney-General should come back to the House and give us the results of the investigation so that on the basis of that a rational way forward can be taken. I think it is premature for this august House to list a number of people who should be interdicted or jailed. Action by Government should be on the basis of investigations. 

Therefore, I oppose this motion on the grounds that we wait for the Attorney-General to give us his investigation report within a week and on the basis of which Parliament can take necessary measures. In the meantime, the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and his team have been supplying some essential elements to ensure that our people in Lusanja, who are victims of this situation, can survive while a final solution for them is being found.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, can we know exactly what is being investigated?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the more competent person to answer that question is the Attorney-General – (Interjections)

4.51
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I think it is risky. Whereas I appreciate the sentiments of Parliament for instance the examples that were given about the bailiff, the best qualified person to come out with the result of what the bailiff did is the chief registrar, under the law. 

As far as the magistrates are concerned, the best and the most qualified person to arrive at the decision of what they did wrong and what should be done to them is the Chief Justice and the Principal Judge -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, I do not think this House is following up the magistrate. This House is asking you why you have not taken action against a bailiff who acted illegally and at night against the rules of court and why you have not taken action against the police who accompanied the bailiff. Knowing that the execution was done in the wrong place, what is Government doing for those people? They were not part of the case; that is what we would like to know.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, you have just pointed out that what this House is looking for is what is going to be done to the bailiff and the police. 

The Prime Minister presented that within a week, we would come back and state clearly that we have found this wrong and –(Interruption)

MR KIGOZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the Attorney-General information that several times, policemen have got people suspected of doing wrong things and put them in prisons and started investigations. Why do we have to wait for investigations to have these people in prison? Why?

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General. I come from Ngora in Soroti specifically - Plot 51 - the people of Aputon village were evicted at night between 9.00 p.m. and 4.00 a.m. and one was killed. They were escorted by the District Police Commander that time and the RPC was aware.

They said that they were going to investigate but it is over a year now and there is no report. The people there are suffering in the same way the people of Lusanja are suffering and nobody is listening to them.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion; it should give us a way forward if we have to address the issues of Lusanja. If we do not go with that arrangement, we are going to have a challenge, as Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that you reformulate that motion because I do not want to be caught by Article 93. Can we give ourselves time, formulate it and then vote on it tomorrow? Draft it in such way that it is not creating a charge - yes, let us do that because Article 93 is going to strangle you and I. Reformulate it, we shall take the vote tomorrow.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, that it is evident that these Court orders have issues - even in my constituency two weeks ago, they evicted 20 homes and we had no way out. However, now that it has come out clearly that these court orders have got issues, don’t you think, Madam Speaker, that in that motion we need even to address such issues where people have been illegally evicted?

THE SPEAKER: I think, let a few Members sit together to draft the motion - hon. Mpuuga, hon. Nsereko, hon. Ssegona, hon. Ssebunya, hon. Akello, hon. Bitangaro.

4.57
MAJ. (RT) DAVID GUMISIRIZA GUMA(NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, the people of Lusanja - I have not been there but I watched the whole thing on television. It was a sad moment and very disturbing. There is absolutely no doubt about the extent of the suffering of those Ugandans.

However, in spite of their suffering, the Leader of Government Business has asked for a week. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence - just seven days; today is Tuesday; why don’t we really be - (Interjections) - just seven days and give benefit to Government –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, we have all been in this House and we have all been listening. This is a super emergency and Members have contributed and all of us have been alert; is it in order for a Member to start dillydallying with non-issues? He is talking about a week and so on while people are suffering and even at a point the Speaker had ruled, is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be serious about our work here. This matter started in the third week of October and it was brought here in the third week of October. Government is still thinking; the whole of November and we are now in the middle of December and the Government should be given more time? No. 

Honourable members, draft that motion. We shall deal with it tomorrow.

5.00
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the matter we are discussing this afternoon - 

THE SPEAKER: Order! We have finished with that.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, if I am not allowed to say what I would like to say, I am not walking out of here. In Kapelebyong, 4,000 people were evicted [HON. MEMBER: “By who?”] that is what I want to bring out.

Madam Speaker, it is not that we do not know what to say when we are on the Floor of Parliament; a Court took a decision in Soroti to evict and to stop my constituents from cultivating land for the whole year. The Police and the DPC fired over 100 live bullets towards my people; I have the cartridges and this is how serious the matter is.

Madam Speaker, I beg that the motion that was moved be stretched to cover all the areas that are affected so that we have a comprehensive position and this matter touches systems of Government which are not functioning as required.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The committee should consider that. They will bring it to us tomorrow to discuss and agree.

RESPONSE BY GOVERNMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE STATUS OF THE RESETTLEMENT OF LANDSLIDE VICTIMS IN THE ELGON SUB REGION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a report was received here and that report touched 30 members of this House. I think they are entitled to speak to us before we debate.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, on 5 December -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa what is the issue?

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 21 November 2018, the minister came here before us. - 

THE SPEAKER: Which Minister?

MR MBWATEKAMWA: The same minister standing here to give a statement. He gave us a report about what was happening in Bulambuli. It reads, “The 11th October landslide disaster in Budada and the progress in the resettlement of persons at risk of landslides” by hon. Hillary Onek.

Madam Speaker, we were not even given an opportunity to debate. We were promised that since the minister had given his statement, we shall wait for the committee report for debate. I do not know if it is procedurally right for the minister to give us strong statements on the same matter before discussing the gist of the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report will be discussed today. Listen to the minister and then we will go to the debate. They will all be done today. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just before the minister takes the Floor, there is a Member who was named - hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu. Is he going to make a statement because that has been the procedure that we follow?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a statement by the two ministers. Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu will speak and then we shall debate. 

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to respond.

On 5 December, 2018, the Committee on Presidential Affairs –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule are you submitting? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is under the rule you applied to those who spoke. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, you have said that the two ministers should speak and that hon. Mudimi will speaks; what about other members, who are not here and are mentioned in the report? Who will speak for them?

THE SPEAKER: You will speak for them. 

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, on 5 December 2018, the Committee on Presidential Affairs went and investigated the status of the resettlement of landslide victims in the Elgon sub region.

It is true that this response has never been put before this House before. I am doing it for the first time; from the time the report was presented. 

It is also true that my senior colleague gave this House a status report of the resettlement, not a response to the committee’s investigation. What I am doing now is to provide precisely that.

Following the 2010 Nametsi landslide disaster, Cabinet directed three resettlement strategies; 

    (i) Use of Kiryadongo Refugee Settlement; 
    (ii) Resettlement within Bugisu Sub-region; 
    (iii) Urbanisation in safe locations within villages at risk. 

The response to the committee’s report is uploaded on your iPads. 

Madam Speaker, that committee of Cabinet chaired by Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali established that 100,000 people in the Elgon Sub-region are at risk of landslides and floods and therefore, need to be resettled. 

It is important to note that under the Kiryandongo (Phase I), 603 households (5,500 people) were transferred from Nametsi to Kiryandongo. Under Phase II, 2,868 acres of land was procured in Bulambuli District for resettlement. 

The Committee on Presidential Affairs presented a report on the status of the second phase of resettlement programme to Parliament on 5 December 2018. 

The Office of the Prime Minister went out to procure three plots of land in Bunambutye Sub county Bulambuli District. The three plots of land are available. 

I would like this House to note that no financial loss was occasioned to the Government and the people of Uganda. The resettlement process has started targeting 900 households and the first 101 houses will be ready to be handed over to the carefully selected beneficiaries beginning next February 2019. Like I have told you, 100,000 people are supposed to be resettled but we are starting and by February, we should have resettled some people.

The committee acknowledged that the procurement procedures and processes were dully followed; take a look at the committee reports on pages 8 and 9. The transaction documents presented, including the three land titles, were acknowledged to be correct and authentic. 

The committee raised a question on the value for land. The competent authority in determination of value for any property is the Chief Government Valuer. In the procurement process, the Chief Government Valuer was fully engaged in determining the rates paid for each acre. We are laying it on Table on appendix 1 and we will be laying that proof to that effect. 
 
The Office of the Prime Minister, therefore, did not procure air neither did it exaggerate the price. The land exists and the value was established by the Chief Government Valuer. 

Madam Speaker, on the question of due diligence on the procurement of the three plots of land, after extensive due diligence was undertaken, there were administrative reviews involving PPDA, the Solicitor General, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, CIID, DPP, district leaders and the community. I have also attached a document as proof of that. 

I would also like colleagues to know that while in the Office of the Prime Minister, in any procurement, we maintained the eyes-on and hands-off approach. The Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Engineer Hillary Onek was also petitioned and he halted the procurement process. He held a meeting with the complainants, district leaders of Bulambuli and the vendor representing Simu Oil Company. The meeting resolved that the land was free of encumbrances.

It should be noted that no procurement of land today in Uganda of that magnitude of 2876 acres can be completed without complaints. This is the case with many development projects in the country today. I would like this Parliament to be alive to that reality. There is nowhere in Uganda where you will get more than 1,000 acres of land without any issues. 

I would also like to draw the attention of this Parliament to the fact that the Cabinet has resolved that the people of Sebei should be resettled near their area, particularly in a place like Ngenge. However, as we talk, people are already beginning to claim Ngenge. Some people say it is their place and they are moving around with land titles. Therefore, this is not a new thing.  

I would like to assure the honourable members that all the complaints raised during the OPM procurements of the three plots of land were amicably resolved. The cases of land claimants now before us arose more than eight months after the conclusion of the procurement process. Any other complaints that will come up in future shall be handled administratively and politically without stopping the development activities that are being undertaken by Government.

Madam Speaker, just for emphasis, the Bulambuli Resettlement scheme is being developed in three plots of land.  
 
    a) Plot 94 is 270 acres and it will host 250 two-bedroomed permanent houses standing on one acre of land each. 
    b) Plot 157 curved out of plot 93 is 918 acres and it will host 650 houses standing on one acre of land each 
    c) Plot 198 curved out of plot 10 is 1,688 acres and it is reserved for mechanised agricultural production. 

Madam Speaker, OPM working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) and Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE), will support mechanised agricultural production in this land. 
 
To avoid high overhead construction cost, when the members of the public learnt that we are going to embark in this project, many private companies were rushing, thinking that they would cash in on the construction. As Government wanted to cut costs, we decided that no private companies would be allowed to do this job. We decided to give the UPDF Engineering Brigade, the Uganda Police Construction Unit and the Uganda Prison Services and they are not being paid any money. That is what is happening. They are now on site and work is progressing well. With your permission, Madam Speaker, we will be showing you a video of the progress that is taking place already.
 
It is also important to note that the Ministry of Water and Environment which is assigned with the responsibility of providing safe water has drilled and completed a power-driven production well (high-yielding borehole) now in operation providing water to the site and the settlement. In addition, a standby water tanker-truck from the ministry is on site to supplement the production well should need arise. 
 
Madam Speaker, as earlier indicated, storage containers and building materials including cement, sand, aggregate stones, etc. are already on site. As we await connection to the main power grid, being handled by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, a power generator has been connected to drive the block making machines and the water production well. 
 
Surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development are re-opening of boundaries of the first 270 units on plot 94 to be sure that this land is ready for development.
 
A workshop, to update area Members of Parliament, LC V Chairpersons, CAOs and other district leaders on progress so far made and on the procedure for verification, selection and registration took place on Friday, 7 December 2018 in Mbale. If you have had the opportunity to look at the New Vision, you have seen that the leadership of Bugisu has indicated that they are happy with the project. All they need is to be involved to move with the process.
 
In consultation with Local Governments, those initially to benefit from the first 900 houses will include: 
Bududa; given the magnitude of the problem will take the first 500 houses.

Bulambuli will take 100 houses; there are people displaced in the highlands and not in the low lying areas;

Sironko will take 100 houses; there was a landslide which killed people and yet up to date, there are still people in this place that are homeless.

Manafwa will take 100 houses because it had a landslide. Fortunately, it did not kill people because they had moved away from the area that suffered the calamity and they are displaced today.

Namisidwa will take 100 houses because it has a crack in the mountain that has displaced people.  
 
In conclusion, basing on the above, you clearly see there was no financial loss caused to Government and the people of Uganda by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, there is a problem; each time they mention the OPM especially because of what Kazinda did, people think we are all thieves (Laughter). I would like to make it clear that we are honest people. We have arrested Kazinda and his team and overhauled the management of the OPM. (Interjections)

Madam Speaker, the other day when hon. Oulanyah was in the Chair, there was a delegation from South Sudan and some were members of Parliament. When hon. Oulanyah introduced them, there was one called hon. Kony. Everyone stood up to see this Kony. The man is an innocent Member of Parliament but because the name is Kony, everyone was interested in him. That is the problem in the OPM, we do a good job everyday but we do not sing about our achievements.
 
The land was procured in accordance with PPDA Act 2003 and extensive due diligence and administrative reviews were done involving PPDA, the Solicitor General, the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development (MoLHUD), URSB, CIID, DPP, district and community leaders. If we can doubt all those institutions of accountability, then we have a problem.
 
The political leaders acted diligently and technical officers acted professionally in executing their work to the conclusion of the assignment and there is value for money. Engineer Onek for example, is deploying his professional skill as we talk, to work with the engineering brigade in designing houses and making sure the costs are as low as possible.
 
The political leaders provided adequate political supervision and oversight throughout the entire procurement process that included halting the process at a certain point of time in order to allow all complaints to be resolved. 
 
The Criminal Intelligence Investigation Department (CIID) carried out an investigation on the alleged fraud involving the sale of the three plots of land, the DPP also got involved and after studying the process followed and finding them correct, cleared it to proceed and conclude. There was no record to indicate that there was any influence from the political leaders to call the DPP or the CIID. 
 
Land was subsequently purchased and the three titles secured in names of Uganda Land Commission are now safely in the hands of Government. 
 
I, therefore, urge colleagues to consider the plight of the people of the Elgon sub-region because in two months’ time, the first season rains will be on and further delays of the resettlement programme will expose the survivors to harm. (Interjections)
 
Madam Speaker, in case Parliament decides to cancel the entire land acquisition process as recommended by the committee, there is a likelihood of Government incurring huge financial losses and more deaths as a result of the anticipated landslides in the next three months. In all these operations, the common denominator should be the protection and preservation of human life. 

I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that working with the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, we would like to make Bunambutye a model settlement that could be adopted in other parts of the country to avoid land fragmentation and to achieve the needed organised food production that our country desires.

Our prayer to the colleagues and members of Parliament is to support the process. I stand ready to invite the whole House under your leadership to come in February to see what we have done in Bunambutye. If they find that there is anything wrong, they can hang us there. However, to block a noble project like this is not acceptable.

Madam Speaker, I would like to be on record that by the time we become members of Parliament, we have taken trouble to build our names. Madam Speaker, you have taken trouble to build your name. It is extremely dangerous for any Member of Parliament to tarnish it by a stroke of a statement without facts. 

We have names that we have built over time and it is dangerous to tarnish the names. I beg to stop. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we now have the video before hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu comes in?

MR ECWERU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My technical person could just run a video so that my colleagues can see what is going on there. I will be explaining to them what is happening.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu speak while they sort out the technology problem. If it fails completely, then we will do something about it. 

5.29
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, I have read the report of Committee on Presidential Affairs but let me summarise. There are many issues in the report, which focus on individuals and I was the most affected. Before, I read this, three Members who signed this report, have come to me and apologised. I take it in good faith. 

They said that what they agreed on the report –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please just respond to the issue. Do not evaluate the report; Members will evaluate that.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, there were many issues which were raised and there are as follows:

1. 	On Page 2, there was a claim that the powers of attorney were given to a different company and it was particularly talking about me. There was no irregularity in that aspect. Wimu Enterprise Limited, the holder of powers of attorney from Masaba Cooperative Union Limited, entered into a joint venture with Simu Oil Company Limited Company, for the purposes of bridge financing Masaba Cooperative Activity Union.

	The resolution to enter a joint venture is here. Companies enter joint ventures and leave mergers.

2. 	The committee also found that whereas Beatrice Gimono is a wife to an honourable Member of Parliament, it is actually hon. Mudimi who physically participated in the whole process. It is not correct for the committee to assume that hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu is a managing director of Simu Oil Company Ltd. The company has its directors as per the Memorandum under Article Annex(b). I task the committee chairperson to provide evidence that I am the managing director or that I have signed any correspondences in regard to that in my capacity. 

3. 	While appearing before the committee, he talked about the Chairman LCV of Bulambuli. He raised objection to OPM during the procurement process that land comprised Block 4, Plot 10 has got third party claimants. The same piece of land has court case in Mbale District. The committee ignored the letter from the Chairman LCV who wrote to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: On what rule do you rise?

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising concerns Rule 54(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“54. Personal explanations. (1) A member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it.” 

Madam Speaker, after all this, we are going to debate. Are we therefore, proceeding right to receive this personal explanation at this juncture? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should understand the simple rules of natural justice. If you are accused, you have a right to respond. Are you going to pass judgement without listening to the person who has been accused? Anyway, he has my permission because I allowed the ministers; I should also allow the backbencher to speak.

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I said I am responding to the report but not making a personal statement. The response is that the committee did not look at the letter which the LC5 chairman of Bulambuli authored, clearing the same piece of land. The letter is attached here. I can read the letter. 

It talks about clarification on Masaba Cooperative land in Bulambuli. It says: “Upon receipt of several correspondences in this regard, I write to you as follows.” He was writing to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. It is dated 17 December, 2014. It reads: “Uganda Land Commission in 1971 granted lease and title to Masaba Cooperative Union and at this time it was vacant public land. Upon the expiry of the lease in 1976 and by virtue of the powers granted by Uganda Land Act, 1998, control over land in districts has been released to district land boards. Subsequently, Sironko District Land Board renewed the lease to Masaba Cooperative Union for the period of 94 years. 

Various complaints brought to your office by some of the purported land owners should not be taken serious because most of them are fake claimants and fortune seekers who want to gain out of Government resettlement purchase plan. They are baseless and unfounded. The district land board or any tribunal has not received any formal complaint regarding the same. 

Therefore, as to this date, this land is not encumbered by anybody or institution at all who are either in possession or has legal rights over the said land. We, therefore, advise you that as far as the district is concerned, we are prepared to work together with the disaster management team in the Office of the Prime Minister to settle disaster victims.” 

It is signed by Simon Peter Wananzofu, the Chairman LC5 for Bulambuli District.

Therefore, when the committee was saying no the district chairman warned them but they went ahead. Some people went to court, as the honourable minister. Regarding these people who went to court, according to the evidence I have here – I can read it –The letter of the chairman is not mentioned anywhere and is not part of any attachment to the committee’s report. It is, therefore, very wrong for the committee to ignore such important document. 

For the people who went to court, the documents available indicate that these people have land in different locations. Charles Khauka sold land – plot 112 – to Meera Group of Companies. Wangolo Kutosi – all of them are listed here. 

Madam Speaker, I have a payment schedule where those people were paid money by Andrew Lumonya. It is here. I beg to lay the document at the Table. All these people who went to court – those people who entered into a memorandum of understanding with Government had no interest at all but only wanted to benefit from land –(Interjection)- I am going to lay the whole document at the Table. I am going to lay all the documents. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, our rules here are very clear. If you are laying a document at the Table you must lay it but you do not put it under your file. You lay it at the Table for the Clerk to receive and record it.

MR WAMAKUYU: Hon. Okupa, this is the original document but I have a copy here. I am going to lay the whole file at the Table.

MR OKUPA: Yes, but this is the rule. You lay it at the Table for the Clerk to record it.

MR WAMAKUYU: Annex F is about payment for those people who went to court – those who wanted to enter into a memorandum of understanding with Government claiming that they are land owners. They are those who came to the committee that hon. Mudimi has grabbed their land – it is here. I beg to lay.

On issue number four – on page 14 – they talked about Odwe’s report. My response is that we are talking about titles which the Uganda Land Commission granted. If the Odwe’s report was saying Government should compensate Masaba Cooperative Union, Bugisu Cooperative Union - We have many institutions; is Government going to compensate all those institutions which are there? 

My argument is that the Odwe’s report cannot hold and we cannot go by that because Government cannot compensate people in Buginyanya Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute under NARO, Bulegeni Farm Institute, Bulago Livestock Farm. The chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union is here and the same group is disturbing him – they are false claimants.

Madam Speaker, as we move, the report was majorly talking about Odwe’s report but my response is that when they were evaluating all this, Odwe said “review some of those titles” but there was nowhere where he said “please, do not transact on those titles”. Secondly, there are titles which were advertised to be cancelled and those are titles which these people have sold.

Issue number 14 is about the memorandum of understanding with the Government, which they said I refused to sign and, therefore, I caused Government financial loss. Yes, the memorandum was drawn by Mr Martin Owori, the commissioner for disaster, but it was talking about land which was outside the contract – land which had remained. This piece of land was 3,212 acres. The Government procured 1,688 acres. Therefore, Mr Owori, in his wisdom, sat and said let us enter into a memorandum of understanding with the group of people whose names I have read. 

I saw that it was not proper for me to sign the memorandum because he acted outside the contract. Secondly, I am not supposed to sign documents of Simu Oil Company and the memorandum talked about MD Mudimi and I am not the MD. Therefore, whatever the committee’s finding is, it is wrong and just blackmail.

Madam Speaker, lastly, I am talking about plot 93. This was a plot of three reverend fathers. A member asked: “How did the reverend fathers get money to buy land?” I failed to answer that. This is a congregation of the Apostles of Jesus and they are three; two are in America and one is in Australia. They started the process themselves but every time they were told “You come to the OPM for a meeting and whatever” and it was very expensive. 

They had started sort of a credit facility to help the community. The person who was in charge mismanaged the funds and, therefore, they could not trust him to represent them. Therefore, they requested that “Hon. Mudimi, help us in this process we started ourselves. Get our money and put on our accounts” which I did. 

I should be congratulated for that because many people do not deal with politicians on the issue of money. (Laughter) Even the copy of power of attorney is here. It says “to continue with the process of offering land for sale to Government of Uganda by the Office of the Prime Minister, where an expression of interest had been made by the registered propriety.

Madam Speaker, my attorney shall deposit all proceeds from the transaction of my bank accounts; Standard Charted Bank.

I did my work and finished it. However, some Members are saying hon. Mudimi, has a wallet of 6 billion - I want the Member to come here and demonstrate because my transaction to this regard was Shs 2.75 billion, of which, Government charged six per cent withholding tax, which was wrong since it was an investment.

Madam Speaker, since the Prime Minister is here, we need a refund. When a Member says hon. Mudimi has a wallet of Shs 6.9 billion, I do not believe it. 
 
Honourable colleagues, all this has been done in bad faith. Before I conclude – I do not have any problem. Maybe, I have offended some colleagues – others said I did not cooperate, I do not know which cooperation. I have not offended anyone and a few Members who know me know that I am just a simple person. 

Madam Speaker, as I sit, this report was written by a budget officer called Wadikini not the clerk to the committee and that is why some Members declined to sign. Those who apologised to me told me the same. I beg to submit and lay on the Table the document regarding this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you sit, I would like to know the source of list of names because there is no heading. 

MR WAMUKUYU: Madam Speaker, I got an extract - I have been a leader in that place for the last ten years before I moved to a new constituency. As I look for the document, I thank Members who went to the ground but they did not inform any one there and so, they were alleging that Members could have acted like thieves. 

This is an extract from Lumonya & Co. Advocates who acted on behalf of those land owners. They sold land to Meera Group of Companies, Plot 101, Block 4 and Plot 112, Block 04.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I hope you can remember when you said, I will represent those who are not here.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us complete the report by receiving the video.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have looked at that list but it just has the names of the people who received. If it is an extract, I think it would do well to hon. Mudimi to give us the report where the names were extracted from. That way, we will be convinced. Can you give us the whole report? What is the name of that report where you extracted that list from?

In the report, there is nowhere the people who received the money have signed. Could you provide that report where you extracted the list from?

Secondly, you said that you were going to lay on the Table the directors of that company where you actually said you are not a director. Could you lay on the Table the list of the directors of those companies? It would help you that these are the directors of the Simu Oil (U) Ltd. Kindly also lay on the Table the evidence of transfer because we know that the money was transferred to the Account Number 3010311186 in Centenary Bank - 

THE SPEAKER: You lay it on the Table and then we see the video so that we can move.

MR WAMUKUYU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents: 

    a) A copy of the joint venture agreement  
    b) Memorandum and Articles of Simu Oil (U) Ltd with its directors 
    c) Form seven
    d) Particulars of directors 
    e) Letter by Chairman Bulambuli 
    f) Resolution to sell land to Office of the Prime Minister by Simu Oil (U) Ltd
    g) Copies of powers of attorney granted by those three Reverend Fathers
    h) Copy of extract from Andrew Lumonya and Company Advocates whom the land owners gave instructions to sell land. They sold land to Meera Group of Companies.

Madam Speaker, like hon. Okupa has guided, tomorrow, I am going to get a copy of the agreement from the lawyer. I also beg to lay on the Table a memorandum of understanding between Mbale Municipal Council and the same group. 

They were not only disrupting the Office of the Prime Minister but everyone including Mbale Municipal Council – They are here; it is the same group.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. The rest of the documents – the bank account is known. You can check.

THE SPEAKER: Let us watch the video quickly. 

(A video presentation was made.)

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, that is what is going on. The police department is already making briefs as you can see, there is no development there. We don’t see like we are displacing people there is no development there-(Interjection)- Sorry, no but you cannot just watch without an explanation. There is need for an explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Yes finish.

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, there should have been the video but to save Parliament’s time, I would like you to make it clear here. There is no encumbrance there. The place is open. The truth is that there are two plots which are good for habitation. There is one plot like I read in my report reserved for mechanised agriculture.

As we talk now, next to it; if you are in Bulambuli, overlooking Bulambuli is a place called Kamutur in Bukedea, all the prominent people of Teso have acquired land in that area. What happens to honourable colleagues -(Interjection)-  yes, the members of the committee are saying that there is no land procured. The land is there. They say it is encumbered. It is not encumbered.

They also say that the Office of the Prime Minister did not- the problem is not between the Office of the Prime Minister and people who sold land like Masaba Cooperative Union. The problem is probably hon. Mudimi and sharing the proceeds of the procurement. That is where the problem is. However, the procurement was properly done and that should be done. To me that is the position. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know where you are looking. [Member rose] You are not the Speaker.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information on the same. Just as you saw on the video where our sister is saying that the land is there; I would like to put this clear to the House that that area was an area for four groups of people. They were rearing their cattle there in large numbers.

The Karimojong rustlers drove away all the people, killed them and burnt them in houses and everything was taken. People ran way and some of them went to Teso. The group that is claiming for the land are the people who were sent away from Teso by hon. Ecweru when they had taken refuge in Akou.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, for somebody to say that the land was bare when the Karimojong rustlers chased the people away and they are scattered in the bushes; and the report is evidence based. We have the people of Kapchorwa, today they are talking about settling the people of Manafwa and Sironko; what about the people of Kapchorwa?

For the OPM to know that there was land there-

THE SPEAKER: You are a member of the committee. You should not be speaking. Please sit down. Members of the committee will not speak. If you are a Member of the committee, those are our rules. Honourable members, our rules are clear. Please. Our rules are clear; if you are a Member of the committee, you present the report and members comment. You can only give information. Please give me time to look at the list.

5.59
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek for the indulgence that you add me a few minutes because I would like to put light in this matter and I come from the region. This area which we are talking about- I have liked the conclusion of hon. Ecweru; it could be their sharing problem.

However, I would like to make it clear that that land which you are talking about is in Bunambutye in former Bugisu region which became Sironko and after that became Bulambuli. I would like to say it without fear or favour that land does not belong to anybody from Sebei. This is Bugisu land.

Having said all that because the land in Ngenge is their land and it is true. I you want to settle people from Sebei; go and settle them in Ngenge. The people I speak for who are not here belong to Bugisu Cooperative Union. Now I am present. Bugisu Cooperative Union has 3,600 acres which was got in 1968.

In 1971 when Amin gave us - we had already got a two year lease and in 1971, we got a five year lease. After that we got 94 years. Masaba Cooperative Union was a bit lazy that is why they got theirs in 1995. However, we in Bugisu were very active.

Madam Speaker, if you allow this injustice to go on, we are worried. These people who are coming every now and then will claim land. More of the public land will go because they will come and even Mbale Municipal Council will be taken because there will be people who will claim that this was their plot of land.

I would also like to make it clear that Members of Parliament here make deals and Mudimi should not be taken as a criminal. Yes. I want us one day to close this House and we discuss how people are making deals here and using their offices. I want us to close this Parliament and I don’t want you to blame hon. Mudimi-(Interruption)-

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I raise on a point of order. Our rules are very clear that anyone who makes an allegation in this House should substantiate. This is a very serious statement from a senior Member of this House who joined in 2001 together with me.

However, “Other than hon. Mudimi, several Members of this House make deals.” This is a very serious statement and indictment on the whole institution presided over by the honourable Speaker. Therefore, I was asking for further and better particulars where possible to mention names of Members of this House who are making deals so that they are forwarded to the disciplinary committee for further actions.

However, leaving an open ended statement like this can even mean that the Prime Minster and hon. Ecweru are making deals –(Laughter)– I think this statement should be substantiated.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you know the allegation you are making is extremely grave. Can you substantiate which members are making deals in this House?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to state that there was a time a report came here where people got goats on the Committee on Infrastructure. When we asked about it, it was said that 15 goats meant 15 kilometres of roads in their constituencies. It was here –

THE SPEAKER: Name them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It was the Committee on Infrastructure. The reason I am saying this is that there are letters – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I would like to ask you to close this House and we shall speak. I do not want to tell a lie. I have been meeting many officials who say how our people are coercing them. 

Madam Speaker, I speak this from the bottom of my heart. If you want, I can even come to your office and tell you. That is why I am saying that at an appropriate time, we need this Parliament to be closed and we speak –(Interjections)– Members are complaining about people here – (Interruption)

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: The information I am giving this House is that the Committee on Trade was banished. It was scrapped because of what he is saying. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there was an issue about taxes in hardwares about the import of steel and other materials. They mentioned that there are members who had gone to people and said, “We would like to help you so that you do not pay taxes.” 

The report came and people were clamouring that they wanted that report to be taken to their committee until the wisdom of the Speaker said, that committee could not hold it. Those people are complaining. Even the Office of the Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: What did you say about my office?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there was a time we passed a supplementary budget. When I met you in the Office of the Speaker, there was an issue that was raised that a law firm was interested in some compensation. 

In fact, the compensations, which are coming here, are the biggest problem. We have law firms here; lawyers, accountants –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure under Rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

I joined this Parliament in March this year; you designated me on the Committee on Trade. I served there for two months and the committee was disbanded. (Laughter) 

The procedural point is that having a member of the committee for two months, not having even understood the business in the Committee on Trade – (Laughter) – the disbandment of the committee in such circumstances are imputed what is being alleged on the person of hon. Paul Mwiru, the Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality East Constituency. 

A member having raised the circumstance under which the Committee on Trade was disbanded, I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right that may be for the Office of the Speaker puts the record straight; that whereas the committee was disbanded there was a new member – (Laughter) – for all business, which had been transacted by the committee, and did not know what was taking place in the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your procedural guidance on that matter otherwise the future readers of the Hansards of Parliament will impute that the circumstances under which that committee was disbanded also applied to a Member of Parliament like Paul Mwiru who joined for two months. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, equity assists the vigilant. You have been sleeping on your rights. You sleep completely.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to state that this list of people they are talking about in this are also trying to encroach on the land of Bugisu Cooperative Union; the Cheprots and so on. 

Initially land in Bunambutye was fairly cheap. Then –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do respect my senior colleague. When he spoke earlier, he brought in a tribal sentiment saying, the land in Ngenge belongs to the Sabiny and the land here belongs to those; if we do not fight then the public land will be taken.

I come from Kyaka South, Kyegegwa District. I have two refugee settlements and one of them has been taken over by Ugandans. This land is in Toro Kingdom. We welcome all the Ugandans who are there. When you choose to go there, whether you are a Munyarwanda (Rwandese) or Mukiga or Mugishu –

THE SPEAKER: What is your point of order?

MR KAFUUZI: My point of Order is that if the Constitution talks of freedom of movement and I can go and live in Jinja and I legally acquire land, is it in order for us to start ring-fencing, zoning and locking ourselves in plots of land under tribal reasoning?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not internalised, which tribe or land is where. Let us listen to the debate first and then we shall take a decision. Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have land here in Kampala and indeed I bought. I have never said I customarily own it. The argument these people have is that they customary own this land. That is the only problem. We are saying you are free to come and - That is why we can allow people from Bududa to come and stay there so long as –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just address the report. Now you are going into issues of land ownership.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. I would like to tell the learned lawyer that he should always be listening but not to jump on issues anyhow –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude in half a minute.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to conclude that the issue I see in the report is clearly stating that hon. Mudimi sold the land wrongly. I am not bothered to know that. I would like to state that maybe as hon. Ecweru said the deal went sour. 

However, that land is not customary owned by those people. If we allow that, these people will come and claim that every land in Bunambutye is theirs. Under arm’s length is a different story. 

I see the report talking about the fact that the land was bought at Shs 300,000 in 2006 and eight years later they sold it at Shs 1,500,000. I bought five acres of land in Namugongo in 1995 at Shs 7,800,000. I sold it in 2013 at Shs 1.3 billion. Would you say that they have cheated me or I have cheated them? 

The place where people can invest money is land.  If you have not invested in it, do not complain. Go and invest but do not allow criminals to come and take property which is not theirs. I want to state that the committee went overboard; you should have asked us the locals, who are from there- the locals, what happens on land. We request you to amend so that they do not even take our land of Bugisu Cooperative Union.

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, I am here to represent the people who are not in this House and those are the people from the Sebei Sub Region.

Madam Speaker, I would not have had a problem with the programmme of the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). However, issues that must be addressed are issues to do with the injustice caused by either the Constitution or the insecurity that existed before this time.

Like hon. Nandala is saying, it is not true that demographically the Sabiny stay in Ngenge and the Bagisu stay in Bulambuli. It is true that we co-exist in both Bulambuli and the side of Sebei. Therefore, it is very unjust to say that demographically, the Sebei side is for the Sabiny and the Bugisu side is for the Bagisu.

It is true that there are some people who have been affected by the process of allocation of land - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, this committee had terms of reference when they went to prepare this report and tribal considerations were not part of these terms of reference. Is he in order to proceed with this debate along tribal considerations?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I listened to the report but I did not see any tribal issue. There is no resolution on tribes. In fact, they were not even mentioned so do not talk about tribes. Just talk about the land.

MR CHEPTORIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I am not talking about anything to do with tribe but just the committee report. The committee report here is recommending resettling some of the affected or those with grievances.

I am just looking at the allocation of the 900 houses. I am not opposed to the project but I am saying that some of the aggrieved should have been considered because when we were in Mbale with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Ecweru and the rest, we talked about other affected people and that time, they had guided that they would only address the issue of Bududa.

However, I see others have also been included and I would have loved them to include some of the aggrieved families that have nowhere to go. If we talked of 900 families, say Bududa takes 300 houses, greater Bugisu takes 300 families and the greater Sebei affected people take another 300 families so that all is equitably distributed, Madam Speaker. That is my issue.

I am saying that people are harmoniously living. When the issue of - (Interruption)-

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I see my colleague consistently arguing that Bududa has a lion share of the re-settlers and other areas of Bugisu including Sironko and Bulambuli. 

The information I would like to give you honourable colleague is that we are actually mourning these people who died in Sironko up to now, we are mourning people who died in Bulambuli and people have been displaced without homes as we speak. This is the basis on which OPM decided that they first resettle the 500 because the magnitude is higher in Bududa. Actually, we have over 1,000 displaced persons in Sironko; we have about 1,000 in Bulambuli.

Therefore, the issue which I would like to inform you about is that actually these areas require more land to resettle these displaced persons. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR CHEPTORIS: The information is taken but- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Vincent was a Principal Disaster Officer in OPM and he was a member of the team that went on the ground. I am just wondering Madam Speaker whether it is in order that a Member who was part of this is not conflicted in the submission of this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Let me think about it.

MR CHEPTORIS: Madam Speaker, my issue here has nothing to do with tribalism I am just talking about caring about all the affected people. Some of the people that are currently staying there or demonstrating around are actually both the Sabiny and the Bagisu who were unjustly- I am not blaming the process of procurement, I am not even blaming-

THE SPEAKER: You are appealing for more land and equity.

MR CHEPTORIS: I am appealing for fair consideration in allocation. The distribution is unfair in as far as prioritization of resettlement is concerned. You know in 1973, when some of these land titles were acquired, the Constitution then was saying that Government owns all the land but customarily, the Bagisu and Sabiny, some of whom were neighbours were the customary land owners. If they were overtaken by events, they should be considered in resettlement.

6.21
MR SILAS AOGAN (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me first to thank the committee for having produced the report. However, our biggest concern is the people who are suffering - that should be our main purpose of being here.

Madam Speaker, if we decided to apportion blame right now instead of apportioning action, we will be let down as a country. Therefore, I would beg that all of us speak to one thing. I know OPM has had challenges but most of us all over the world have been sinning but we go to church and repent so that God washes away the sins and we become holy once more.

Madam Speaker, our main issue here is; when is OPM and Disaster Preparedness bringing an open tick road map that shows us what we are going to do to help the people who are suffering? That should be the question now. Where is the road map –(Interjection)– before, you give me information, let me finish with this information that I have.

Madam Speaker, we would love to see a targeted deadline that by such and such a date, we shall be having an arrangement to help the people who are suffering down there.

Secondly, we would like OPM to work with the people who are down there. The problem that we have seen is that you do not work with the locals. Instead of working with the Local Council I, councilors of the area, the LC III the meeting are conducted in Kampala in hotels - that does not help us.

Madam Speaker, that is where the problem is; if we had listened to the people down there, they would have provided us with better solutions. Even the people of Teso migrated to those places. Like somebody noted, they ran away because of the insurgency that we had there. It rhymes with the Karimojong, our uncles. We understood them as uncles and now we have forgiven each other. 

Why don’t we settle? Everybody is Ugandan in Uganda and therefore we should allow people to settle in those places. You should move quickly and Parliament should do their oversight work. If you are giving us the road map, we are going to check for each date and see where you have reached. If you fail, we shall come for you. That should be the way, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is the report and some resolutions. Address the recommendations, please. 

6.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution will be in form of clarifications from either the Office of the Prime Minister or the chairperson of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I keep wondering why year in year out these allegations of mismanagement are recurrent in the Office of the Prime Minister. I think this is the fourth complaint and we are still struggling with the one of the refugees. However, let me restrict myself to this one. 

In 2004, a case was opened at the Central Police Station (CPS) Kampala on reference number CPS Kampala GF772014; may I know the fate of the report of the investigations of this matter? 

THE SPEAKER: Who are the parties? 

MR OKUPA: This was a case opened at CPS and I am quoting the reference number where –

THE SPEAKER: No, but there must be – 

MR OKUPA: The people went to complain – 

THE SPEAKER: Who are the parties? Uganda against who? 

MR OKUPA: The people who claimed that their land was taken, which the committee has named here. They are the ones who reported the matter to CPS. May we know the fate of that investigation? 

The Financial Intelligence Authority also handled this matter. Even the executive director, Mr Asubo, put an injunction stopping the transfer of money to the account number of Simu Oil Company in Centenary Bank. However, 10 days later, a letter was copied to the Executive Director, Bank of Uganda, Supervision Department, Justine Bagyenda and also copied to the Director CID and IGG asking them to release that money. Before the completion of investigations, the bank was asked to release the money; just 10 days after the injunction was put. May I know the fate of that report from the Financial Intelligence Authority? What does the committee or the Prime Minister’s Office know? 

The IGG investigated this report. Where is it? What does it say regarding the same issue? An intelligence officer attached to the Prime Minister’s Office raised a red flag. What actions did the Prime Minister take after the red flag had been raised? 

Finally, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR OKUPA: On procurement, may I know from the Office of the Prime Minister why two days before the closure of the advert for the bids (meant to be on 28 October 2013), the advert was cancelled and re-advertised? What was the reason regarding that procurement process?    

The Office of the Prime Minister sent a team on the ground that included my brother, hon. Vicent, Mr Masereje, Mr Wilson Ouzu, Mr Gilbert and Henry Obbo. What happened to that report and what is happening? I need those clarified, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

6.28
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sympathise with the people of Bududa and Bugisu. In the minister’s statement to the Floor of Parliament, he did not even tell us when that land was procured.

After the first landslides in Nametsi, not this recent one, that land was supposed to be procured but instead the people of Bududa and Nametsi were taken to Kiryandongo. Those who were supposed to have been taken to that place did not go. 

After the recent landslides, that is now how the Prime Minister’s Office comes up and said that the people must be resettled in Bulambuli. That land is in a valley and when it rains in Bulago and Buginyanya, all the water, before it crosses over to Teso, floods that valley. This is a fact. That place is always flooded. I do not know what type of houses the Ministry of Defence and the police are going to put up to make sure that our people live comfortably. That is a swampy area and that is a fact; any Mugisu will tell you that. 

Secondly, honourable minister, if there were no encumbrances – the women undressed in that area. They cried foul play so these people would have been considered. They could have listened to them. 

Madam Speaker, I went to Bududa after this last landslide and I talked to the people. They said that even in Bududa they have got land and there are people willing to sell that land – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the people said that they could be settled within Bududa itself; the lowlands, since there is plenty of land that does not flood. Even some other parts of Mbale – 

THE SPEAKER: To whom was that offer made? (The offer by the Bataaka) Who did they tell that they had got that land? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: They were speaking to people who were going there and they were telling us that instead of going there in the valley and the landslides, they could stay in that place. Of course, the Prime Minister’s Office procured that land and if they procured that land, why the outcry? Why did they wait until this last moment, before they tried to shift there? 

The minister said that in the Prime minister’s Office, Kaginda is the only thief in that ministry. I would like to remind the minister that sometime back, I was a member of the Public Accounts Committee and the people from the Prime Minister’s Office appeared - 

The European Union has now raised a red flag because of the refugees. You have inflated the numbers of refugees and have put committees that have been going round, Prime Minister. They went to Kyangwali, Kiryandongo and have come up with numbers, which were overestimated – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Stick to the report, please. 

6.32
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the submissions of other colleagues. I would like to address the policy issues to the Prime Minister. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, land vests in the people, in accordance with the tenure systems under Article 237 of the Constitution. Articles 238 and 240, create the Uganda Land Commission and the District Land Boards respectively. They hold land in the interest of the people of Uganda. It is a shame that we are talking about Government buying public land from individuals who fronted themselves as speculators, got allocated land and they sold to Government. 

This should be a lesson to Government. Government should come up with a policy that under no circumstance should Government, through the District Land Boards and the Uganda Land Commission allow acres and acres of land to be allocated to a speculator who later sells to Government. The money which we are talking about that was paid to these people would have helped to improve the lives of these people in any other way.

Some three speculators applied to the District Land Board, camouflaged as investors, and presented very good plans on what they will do on this land if they get it. Then they – (Member timed out)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Mwiru is trying to build his point, emphasising what he has called a “speculator”. 

I would like to request him to be in order to mention the speculator so that it is on the Hansard of this Parliament so that we can know who the person is and what he is trying to mean. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is he in order to talk without mentioning the name of the speculator?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, who are the speculators?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was proceeding on an assumption that the colleague had read the report because it has annexes that mention the said proprietor of the land in question.

When you read the provisions of Article 239 and 241, they say that “The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament.”

Then on the functions of the District Land Board are –


“
    a) to hold and allocate land in the district which is not owned by any person or authority; 
    b) to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in the land; and 
    c) deal with other matters connected with land in the district….” 

The point I am making is that even as we talk now, there still exists public land. I think this should be the last time where Government is buying public land from an individual who did not even develop it.

When you read those agreements on those titles, there are developmental clauses, the initial periods which have also been abused.

I am calling upon Government to wake up and take this as very seriously. Either you issue instructions to District Land Boards and Uganda Land Commission that anybody who applies for more than 100 acres must first demonstrate capacity that he is an investor and is going to develop it. If that is not the case, even Government cannot buy land which was allocated to someone who did not develop it. That land can revert to Government for free for a calamity of this nature. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.36
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not get into details, more so in the processes and procedures of the acquisition of that land. However, as an area MP of Lutseshe where the mudslide occurred, I will just seek some few clarifications mainly from hon. Ecweru.

Hon. Wamanga has just stated here, that the land we are talking about has floods. The media has exposed that several times both internally and internationally that we are taking people to the swamp. This has given us, as Parliament a big picture internationally.

Therefore, I need clarification on this so that we can clear this air. Whether it is true or false, but if we can estimate the land that is a wetland and the land that can as well be set for settlement.

Secondly, we are moving. We have started the process; the construction is on – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you first give us the name of the village, parish and sub county so that if we need to cross check, we know where to go. Everyone says that it is a wetland but where is it?

MR WATENGA: I am now talking about the Bunambutye land. 

THE SPEAKER: Bunambutye is big. You are talking about the wetland, tell us the name of the wetland and then we can proceed. I would like to know the place.

MR WATENGA: I am not lying. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Allow him to speak.

MR WATENGA: Madam Speaker, I am making my statement here that I need the minister to make a clarification on the Bunambutye land, and give us the proportion of the percentage of land which is having floods and that one that is a wetland and the percentage that can accommodate settlement. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that the land which was purchased? You are assuming that we know but we do not. I wish you could – (Interruption)

MR WATENGA: That is why I am seeking clarification from the minister.

Secondly, when you were taking our people to Kiryandongo in 2010, at the end of the day, many people ran back to Bududa. (Interjections) There were factors forcing them to come back, more so, the social factors. 

I do not know whether the minister and the ministry have learnt the lessons regarding the settlement of the people in Kiryandongo. Whether they have planned to overcome the challenges that made those people come back to Bududa. There were no medical health services, no clean water, no secondary school and such factors forced our people to come back to Bududa. I hope this has been considered this time.

Finally, I respect this Parliament, I will not go so much – (Member timed out)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the chance to read through the report and I was thinking that there is a cheaper way and I was wondering how it escaped the committee from talking about it.

If we identify the landslide prone area, we have a Government department of valuation, you go and value the land and property of the victim or the person in the landslide area, you pay him off and he looks for an area which is suitable for him or her.

Why is Government going into this expensive venture because even after reallocation of these people, you have to look after them? There are other costs which will come. You have to build and others. Why can’t you simply value the land, pay off the person and they go? This land could then remain for Government to plant trees.

I think the minister, hon. Ecweru has to answer this. Why are you insisting on reallocating people by force? Putting people into camps. Yes, you answer this. Why are you insisting on the most expensive – (Member timed out.)

6.42 
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to start from where hon. Waira Kyewalabye has left. We have several issues, why don’t we also look at the option that honourable has raised. Ministry of Works and Transport has done it and it has worked very well. 

When they are constructing roads, they compensate people and can even take the whole of your plot and people have settled. I would also like to start by giving information to this House. Honourable members, this area; Bulambuli District and Bunamutye Sub County were occupied by a variety of ethnic groups. We had the Sebei people, the Sabiny and Nandi and Bagisu and they owned land. If you even visit that area, you will realise that the naming of the areas, we have Cheptui, Katagalgwi and those are our names. We are not saying that we want to own the area and it becomes Kapchorwa District. However, the area was actually owned by some of those Ik people. 

According to even the report, we all know that there are court issues. Therefore, even if we really want to settle our people, we should also look at those issues. If there are issues, let us sort out those issues because these people have suffered under the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are spending time on many things and not focusing on the report. Please, I wish you could look at the recommendations. Those things are important but there are important for the budget. I know you are from that area; you have half a minute to conclude.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am talking about the report. For example, they talk about Odwe report. Odwe report was constituted by Government and it has resolutions –(Member timed out.)

6.45
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the people of Elgon sub region have suffered from landslides and mudslides. They should be got out of this situation before the next rains begin.

However, the committee has told us that there are land wrangles but the minister is telling us that everything is okay. Government should not ignore that issue of land wrangles. These are people, we would like to bring from hostility of nature. Now, we should not again take them forcefully to areas where they will face hostility from those claiming land.

This issue should be solved amicably. Let the Government listen to those people and compensate them so that the new settlers settle peacefully and they co-exist with those other people.
There is a rumour moving around that part of this land, is water logged. I pass through there and there is a place called Atari and Tabagonyi. They grow rice and yams.

I do not know what is wrong with the Government to tell us that; yes, part of this land is waterlogged but we will use this for such activities. Already, they are talking of mechanised agriculture. What is wrong with the Government to say, the one piece of acre is good and it is not waterlogged. This is where we are going to construct the houses. The other waterlogged areas – (Member timed.)

6.47
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to thank the committee for the report and honourable minister for his statement. In addition, I would like to thank hon. Mudidi Wamakuyu for clearing the “air” or all that was said perhaps by the committee may not be true.

However, I also read the committee report. The report says in 2014/2015, Shs 8 billion was used to implement resettlement activities in Bulambuli District. I would also like to seek for clarity and I think the programme for resettlement on that land has just began in a few weeks. 

Honourable minister, I do not know what the Shs 8 billion would have done in Bulambuli at that time? You could also clarify on that. 

Furthermore, I would like to put it clear that there are claimants on the said land. As the honourable minister said that there are some claimants who came on board a few months back this year, I think we need to settle that amicably because in the Odwe report, it is said that the land is free and there are no claimants.  That is true and I also read that report. 

There are Members who are saying that this place is a swamp. Plots 93 and 94 are land that is not waterlogged. However, as you go towards Plot 10, there is that area that has water. I would like to put it clear that that area that has water when it rains in upper Bulambuli, lower Bulambuli partly gets flooded. The most affected area is Nabongo Sub County which gets flooded. 

We do not have an excavator. I think when we get an excavator, this water will flow and there will be no water that will settle in those areas. The swamps that you have talked about, the Balaalo have moved there and they are farming. They are using that water as a source of life for their animals. They are fishing there and doing various activities. I think this land can be used but whatever is –(Member timed out.)

6.50
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister of Disaster Preparedness. I have had the opportunity to attend all the consultative meetings held by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugee. I have also had the opportunity to visit this land in question.

It is true the land gets waterlogged, especially during the rainy season. The resettlement plan that was projected at Mt Elgon in the presence of the Prime Minister and I attended, the building plan was such that houses would be built on raised platforms. That is already consent from whoever was contracted that there was water underneath. I am not disputing that the land is not habitable. If there is a plan to make it habitable like building on raised platforms, it is okay.

However, I also have a question for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. What is your plan for sanitation? When I went to the land, the few settlements that were there had their latrines dug on top of anthills. This means that you cannot dig deeper but you have to introduce water and a sewage plan like it is in the urban area. I see that as a very expensive option. As a ministry, I propose that you come up with resettlement options, including cheaper alternatives such as giving people the liberty to find where to live. There you will not construct roads like you are doing. This is expensive. 

Madam Speaker, when I went to Bududa I was at the office of the LC5 chairman and he said that there were 500 families in the mouth of disaster. As we speak, the rains are about to come. We are only focusing on the land in Bulambuli but can’t we have cheaper options where, for example, Shs 10 million or Shs 20 million is given to these people so that we can relocate them now? We do not have to wait for disaster. I think the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness has to come up with resettlement options and plans. In addition, Bulambuli land should be critically looked at to find out what other disasters might happen as a result of putting many people in one place.

6.54
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I listened to the statement given by the minister of state in charge of disaster preparedness and also read the report of the committee. My concern was about the five fundamental questions. The first one was; was there financial loss caused to the Government? The second one was; was the procurement procedure faulted? The third one was; was there value for money? The fourth one was; does the land exist?

Madam Speaker, according to the statement of the minster, I think there is value for money and the land exists and that statement exonerates my brother, hon. Mudimi, from the accusation made by the committee. If there are some issues that need to be addressed, I appeal to the Government to listen to the claimants because this is the only opportunity we have to speak for them. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend and thank the OPM for taking effort to find settlement place for the people of Bududa. This is not the first time we have had that situation. If we do not speed up the process, there is a possibility that we may even lose more people in the forthcoming rainy season. I appeal to the OPM that if you do not have the funds, even if it means coming for the supplementary –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, focus on the report and the recommendation so that we know how to move. I know all these things are important but you are moving away from the report.

6.56
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and the entire committee for the report. If they had not brought this report, there would be no discussion here. I thank my senor brother, Musa Ecweru, for his response and I also thank my brother, Mudimi. 

Madam Speaker, when you read and meditate, you may fail to understand the dynamics involved. (Laughter) I have a few concerns. The first concern that I would like all of us to know is that if you read I Corinthians 10:24, it says none of you should be looking out for your interests but for the interest of others. “Others” in this case are the people of Bududa. I remember that the day we were sworn in here, we raised the Bible and that is why I am referring to the Bible.

Madam Speaker, I get disturbed because this concerns real life. The people of Bududa died, people of Bulambuli died and people in other areas also died. There is a lot of ping-pong report here and there and that is why I am concerned. The centre of the matter in this case is that, first, we should not stop the construction which is ongoing because immediately we stop it, it means –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, in the event that we stop the construction – remember it has been raining since yesterday – there is going to be more landslide there and people are going to perish and we shall be responsible for those errors. 

The second issue, where I need clarification, is that the minister said the contradictions and conflicts in that area are being handled. I would like to ask him: Who is handling those conflicts? Thirdly, he said the “beneficiaries are going to be carefully selected”. How careful will the selection be? How sure are we that the real people are going to benefit from these houses?

Finally, I would like to make a request. There is a contradiction between the committee and the OPM –(Member timed out)

7.00
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am more concerned about the people of Bududa. The Office of the Prime Minister is preparing for them and they were not involved in the selection of the area where they are going. It looks that way, from the information that is coming through. 

I was pleased when the minister said that he was going to show us a video here. In the video, I expected him to show us the masterplan of the land – that this is the plan of the more than 3,000 acres that we are talking about; we have this number of acres for settlement; and we have this number of acres for economic activities; and these are the economic activities we are planning for the people of Bududa. The economic activities must be resonating with the economic activities they have been engaging in, in Bududa. However, for people who have been ploughing and you plan for them to go to the land where they will be grazing, you will have missed the point as a planner.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am worried a little that if the information is right that the plan is to build raised houses with the rush the minister has – I do not know! I am facing a challenge. They acquired this land –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, focus on the report.

7.02
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. I would also like to thank the minister for the elaborate statement he has made. I also thank my colleague, hon. Mudimi.

Madam Speaker, I note that the statements given by the leaders from the Bugisu sub-region are all geared towards finding a solution for the settlement of the people of Bududa. I, therefore, request the Government to begin planning in advance to have a bottom-to-top approach in settling problems concerning disasters in this country. I sympathise with the 500 families because rain has come and we expect problems any time.

As the office of disaster preparedness is handling small issues - I am calling them small issues because every leader from the Sebei and Bugisu sub-regions has been saying we need to settle that small group; if it is a small group, it means Government can handle them. Solve that problem as you settle these people because rain is coming. We should not always be in international media because of problems affecting Uganda. 

I really want to thank you, the leaders, for the tone that you have used. Talk using that tone until the 500 families are settled. Let all the districts that have this problem agree to work together and solve it.

Madam Speaker, the way forward is: quick immediate settlement of these 100 people in those areas that are not flooded. Our people should be settled as quickly as possible before the rains come. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.04
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report.

What the committee has identified in that area is true. When I was the vice-chairperson of the committee, I led a delegation to that area twice. The first time we invited the Office of the Prime Minister to show us the land that they had bought, but they were not able to take us there; they did not join the committee to go to that place. We remained in Bunambutye Sub-county and came back to Kampala. The second time we requested them to take us, they did not show up. Therefore, the committee was quite suspicious of the dealings on ground. 

When we managed to make our way to the land that is being talked about, together with the leadership of Bulambuli District, we were denied access to Plot 10. It was after serious explanations and negotiations with the people who were there that some of the people, who claimed to be owners of the land, told the committee that they wanted hon. Musa Ecweru, the Permanent Secretary of the ministry, and the Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness, Mr Owor Martin. In fact, an old man told the committee that he wanted to die with Musa Ecweru. He tried to strangle him but he was protected and taken away. 

Madam Speaker, the biggest challenge we have –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS AMERO: Thank you very much. The issue is that the committee has appropriated money but we do not see anything tangible done by the ministry. It is only today that I have seen a few materials being ferried to that place. Otherwise, by the time we went there, we could hardly see anything; we only saw a skeleton office of the police who were trying to disperse the people who had gathered there to wait for hon. Mudimi, whom they had accused of coming to do aerial surveys on their land. They wanted to get him and do away with his life.
	
Madam Speaker, there is a lot that is in the report but like the saying goes, “From soil we come and to the soil we go.” Therefore, the issue of land is quite complex. I think we need an independent body with good knowledge of land procedures to carry out investigations. Otherwise, when Parliament goes there, we are not given all the information we need. We do not even have enough time to stay there and reach out to all the areas we are supposed to reach. Thank you very much.

7.07
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is great that the Prime Minister is in the House. The issue we are discussing concerns the office of the Leader of Government Business. I know the Prime Minister very well; we can discuss this today, tomorrow and next year, because this is not the first time issues in the Office of the Prime Minister have been discussed. 

People in Bududa are suffering and they need to be helped. We need to address how best we are going to help them and how their livelihoods can be improved. We shared with the minister who said that they are on course and they have done some work. 

Ndugu Rugunda, your name is clean but people are hiding in your office to do things that are not worthy of the Office of the Prime Minister. Why don’t we use this opportunity so that whoever is responsible - Instead of lumping people in one basket, why don’t we use this glaring example to hold particular people responsible? They should be brought to book. We should leave out the innocent people but whoever is responsible –(Member timed out.)

7.10
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, we are handling a committee report which has a number of observations and recommendations.  Wouldn’t it be right for us to proceed by looking at each of the committee’s observations?

When the minister was presenting, he said no money was lost but the report indicates amounts of money in billions of shillings that was lost. We want this to be clarified together with what we are discussing. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I cannot anticipate what Members are going to say. I have said many times that we should address the recommendations but Members are not doing so; what can I do? I do not even know what they want to say.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am looking at the committee’s recommendations. One of the recommendations raised by the committee was about land. The committee asked why we should have Government land that can only be given to refugees and not to Ugandans who have problems. I support this recommendation. If we have available Government land, then why don’t we use it to settle our own people? Why do we keep Government land only for refugees? Can’t we use this land?

Secondly, most times when problems like this happen, when we are settling people, it is about getting land and settling them without sensitisation. In implementing these projects, do we have psychologists or sociologists to prepare people’s minds as we settle them? It is not about just picking them up and settling them; they must be psychologically prepared. This is one of the recommendations, which I support.

Thirdly, one of the reasons as to why people moved back from Kiryandongo to Bududa was, according to the committee report, because 603 house units were supposed to be built but only 289 were built. This was partly why people decided to go back. Can we get assurance this time that this will not be repeated in Bulambuli?

Finally, can we, as Government, have a comprehensive assessment of the problems as observed by the committee? This is a problem-prone area. As Government, can’t we have a comprehensive assessment and also acquire land in advance before such a situation happens, other than fire-fighting as is the situation now? The other time it happened, people were taken to Kiryandongo –(Member timed out.)

7.13
MR PATRICK ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I also thank the committee for trying to some extent to give a report. However, I would like to disagree with their observation that hon. Mudimi appears to have committed financial loss. Colleagues, when they talked about financial loss, I expected the committee to dig deep and show us how this resulted into financial loss, not just writing literature and making blanket statements –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, if you read the committee’s report, it based its observation on legal ownership and also on quiet possession of the land. Therefore, the committee report is even disputing the transaction between the said owners - whether it is Wimu, Mudimi or Simu Oil Company – and Government. That transaction between the said owners and Government is in question and therefore led us to lose the Shs 8 billion that we appropriated in this Parliament. 

If you read this report, especially on the issue of quiet possession, we even do not have the quiet possession. There are even questions here about how Uganda Land Commission gave out land on which there were customary owners and gave the powers to manage that land to a company called Masaba.

Now, is the honourable member in order to assume that financial loss is necessarily a direct transaction in which you give money to someone and yet in the whole dealing there was no due diligence done and that is what the committee is talking about? Is he therefore in order, –(Interjection)- and the matter is in court. Is he in order to impute wrong motives and incompetence on the part of the committee that they did not do good work when the committee has pointed out all these issues in this report? Is he in order to do so without giving any –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a report was made and Members understand issues differently. He understands the issues differently from the way you understand.

MR ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, I understand this issue. That payment was made and the Auditor-General must have conducted an audit of this. I would like to tell my colleague, when you talk of financial loss as far as purchase of an asset is concerned, it is when the purchase price is lower than the selling price. That is when you can talk about financial loss. I am not just assuming but I am speaking from a point of knowledge. 

Therefore, what was the valuation procedure they carried out? What methodology did they use for the valuation? Did they hire a helicopter to fly over the swamp to ascertain the value? If you tell us the financial loss is this amount because the purchase price was lower than the selling price, that is when you have sold the asset; the asset is there! I am not just assuming but I am an expert in this. You do not just blanket it and say that there is financial loss –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give you is that valuation of property or anything is not done by eyes. There are people who go to school and study how to value land. Even a swamp has value. You have seen rice being grown here in Kibimba and it is a swamp. 

When someone gets up to say there is no value - You know, there are some people who are studying law and they come here wanting to practice their law here in this Parliament without knowing that there is a mechanism to valuation. Tell him that there should have been an audit to get value and then you could compare with the loss you are talking about.

MS OPOLOT ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, let me complete my contribution. There was a statement made that hon. Mudimi was a speculator, but the activity of a speculator is not illegal. You cannot recommend prosecution because of my speculation. It is about reading things ahead, acquiring property and when there is a better deal, being free to sell at my price. Therefore, you do not recommend prosecution for speculation because it is not an illegal act.

7.18
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues in thanking the committee for a very good job done. 

I would like to urge the Office of the Prime Minister to pick positives from this report and also take lessons from it. If the Office of the Prime Minister had followed some of the previous lessons and learnt from them, we would not have lost people in Bududa. Right from 2010, there was a botched resettlement in Bunyoro and because of the mistakes that were made, people run back to Bududa and we lost them.

Madam Speaker, the first person to sense danger in this operation was the President. Because of that, he set up a committee of inquiry. He set the terms of reference and Office of the Prime Minister, under the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Kivejinja, constituted a committee. The committee came up with a very good report; unfortunately, Office of the Prime Minister ignored that report. That is why we ended up with a second disaster in Bududa. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge, in the interest of time, that the Office of the Prime Minister this time round learns lessons from the botched procurements they have carried out for Bududa and Kiryandongo? Your own report, authored by Odwe –(Member timed out.)

7.20
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

One of the issues raised is that Plot 10-198 is waterlogged. I have visited that plot personally. On plots 93 and 94, as you have heard, there are claimants and also when it rains heavily - the Woman Representative of Bulambuli actually requested for an excavator. Therefore, Office of the Prime Minister, as you plan to resettle the people of Bududa, make sure you have an excavator on standby for that area.

We should also consider the bigger number and explore alternatives because there are very many people at high risk. We cannot rely on one method - relocating them to Bunambutye - yet there are alternatives like urbanisation or giving people money to acquire land elsewhere, which is a cheaper and faster option because we shall do away with procurement and people will settle in areas they desire. This is in line with national objective No. XXIII of the Constitution.

The committee, on page 3, pointed out Cabinet Minute No. 383 in which Cabinet passed a resolution to allocate Shs 8 billion every financial year for three consecutive financial years. However, for two consecutive financial years, this money was diverted and they pointed out that this was done under the guidance of a member of the Committee on Budget. Members, as we appropriate, let us work with the right committees; let us do our due diligence before decisions are taken based on the opinion of one person. 

Also on this note, I appeal to Members to follow the procedures of the Contingencies Fund, which we established under Article 157 of the Constitution and is guided by Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act. We would not go through this entire – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude in half a minute.

MS KHAINZA: The Contingencies Fund is very important. I appeal to members of the committee that we reinstate the Shs 8 billion to be given to the Office of the Prime Minister as a supplementary request to help our people to be resettled.

Finally, for Kiryandongo, we have a deficit of 314 houses with no secondary school. Our children are being denied education in contravention of Article 30 of the Constitution. We should make sure that the people in Kiryandongo are given land titles because this is a serious issue. Our people need to be assured that the land on which they are settled belongs to them and there will be no more disturbances. 

I thank all the stakeholders and the President for fulfilling his pledge when he came to Bududa. I thank the different partners like the Catholic Relief Services, World Vision and Members of Parliament who visited the area and have offered us support. 

7.23
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee for the report. I also thank the minister for the information he has given and hon. Mudimi for clearing the air.

I know that in a situation like this when a disaster happens, questions are asked. People will ask, “What next?” Normally, resettlement is looked at as a first option to help these victims. However, I would like to know from the minister whether the ministry had looked at the option of giving these victims some money to look for resettlement areas of their choice. Has he considered resettling them by buying for them land and also possibly providing infrastructure in a completely new place or is it cheaper to pay off these people?

This is not the first time some of these people are being resettled. There are some people who were taken to Kiryandongo and some were brought to Kayunga where we gave them 200 acres of land in Kisalizi. Indeed, after some of these people were settled, they eventually went back to Bududa; very few are still there. How are you going to interest these people in these areas you are taking them to and make sure they stick to those areas and never go back where the landslides are – (Member timed out.)

7.26
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee and various other groups that visited Bududa. I also visited Bududa and I would like to say that the situation there, with the rivers that are flowing amidst the communities, continues to scare a lot. I wish the programme that was started by the Office of the Prime Minister and is expected to last 10 years continues without any adjustment.

After talking to the people of Bududa, and generally Bugisu, I would like, if it were possible, for the Office of the Prime Minister to consider other options available. Resettling people where land has been bought is good but there are also many people who are requesting, where necessary, to be given an option to secure land in areas of their own convenience, and they give their reasons. Remember the land in Bududa is very fertile, so there is hesitation because they think that the land in Bulambuli may not be as good as land they could secure in other places of Bugisu.

I would like to inform you that when you look at the sizes of the land owned by the people of Bududa, it is not big. These people are surviving because the land is fertile. If they are given an opportunity, as one of the options, to settle wherever they may wish to go, I think that will be a quicker and much cheaper option.

When we talk about the areas affected, this should not be isolated – (Member timed out.)

7.28
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, other unfortunate considerations notwithstanding.

When this committee went out, the paramount issue was to find a lasting solution to the resettlement of the people who are suffering. One of the issues that they wanted to confirm was whether the Prime Minister’s office had bought land and whether it was bought in compliance with the procurement procedures. Both of which were confirmed in affirmative.

There are two issues to deal with right now. One of them is the quiet possession, and that is what we should ask Government to ensure that it is done. I know for any land possession, there are always conflicts, even if you want to buy a 50 by 50 plot. Those issues can always be dealt with and that is where we want Government to assure us that they will deal with that in connection with the warranties in the agreements that were executed. 

Another thing that we need to deal with – (Interruption) - You may give the information.
MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology - which hon. Abala calls GMO - is that Government acted properly. If Members push through this proposal to give people money, the people, especially the men, will squander the money, leave the women and later go back and there will be a problem. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MUTEBI: In the ongoing financial year, we withdrew Shs 8 billion, which was supposed to be given for purposes of executing this programme. Parliament should consider restoring this money so that the programme continues, to avoid the ongoing suffering. We may also consider other options and other areas, but for the programme that is ongoing, I would implore Parliament to support the Government to go on with its completion.

7.30
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. 

I come from Namisindwa, which neighbours Bududa, and our people are there. Always when there is war and you are commanding a platoon or battalion, there must be plan A and plan B. When we meet our people, some of them say that if there is money and they can be given that money, they can use it to buy land wherever they want. We represent the people so we have to bring out their views. 

I do not concur with hon. Waluswaka’s concept that when they give people money, they will squander it. What about those people who had settled where the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) roads pass? These people got money, right from Mbale to Lwakhakha, and they have settled and built even more beautiful houses than before.

Apart from that, many good things have been mentioned by the Members. However, I request that because many people perished in Bududa during the first and second disasters, the Speaker and this august House should urge Government to set aside a national day of mourning for those who lost their lives. In that way, when a group of people go to Bulambuli or Bunambutye or Kiryandongo, our bazzukulu will ask why we are here. They will ask, “Our names are used here and also in Bududa; why are we here?” We should look to history to tell them that such and such a thing happened and that is why we are here.

7.33
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. One, the committee was there, it had all the time and they interfaced with the honourable minister. Why didn’t the minister provide all this information to our committee since they had time and it was working on our behalf?

Two, all our media houses have shown this wetland and I think they are watching us even now as we debate. Even in your video, we saw some wetlands. Is it true that now people can process land titles in wetlands and settle on them? When I am cancelling a land title, one of the reasons I would give is that it is a wetland.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inquire why the Office of the Prime Minister opted for “willing buyer, willing seller” yet they have the option of compulsory acquisition of land, which is catered for. I will get the answers.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, land was bought much earlier, why did the resettlement of these people wait for another calamity? We know that calamity and disaster do not warn. Also, how much tax was paid in regard to this transaction, so that we know if it was a genuine transaction or it was an undercover transaction?

Madam Speaker and colleagues, another problem is the impunity in the Office of the Prime Minister. It is clear that in this same House, after we passed a ruling in regard to the Office of the Prime Minister, they again did not implement it with a lot of impunity. It is on record that on 19 September 2018, you gave a directive, and you repeated the same directive on 22 November 2018, to stop the expansion of Kyangwali Refugee Camp. However, it is still ongoing up to today. An official, a one Bafaki, was on radio the other day saying that they are taking their bulldozers to continue with the exercise. They say that nobody can stop them, including Parliament. That was their statement.

Therefore, I must say that much as we are trying to fault the committee here and there, there is a lot of impunity in that office. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I happened to be in Bududa the first time and the second time we went to both Bududa and Bulambuli. From what we saw in these places, I even asked why I did not see any banana plantations in Bulambuli because the place was so dry.  That was the dry side, but then there was the wetland. That was the big concern which I saw - the difference between Bududa and Bulambuli. 

This then makes me think of giving people options. It is wrong to think that compensating or buying people off from their land does not work; it works. Let us give people options. For us we lived in camps and we know what they mean. Some people do not like to live there. Our people never wanted to live in camps –(Interruption)

MR MUDIMI: It is true, the area you went to did not have banana plantations but I have banana plantations within that area- 26 acres - and they are doing very well.

MS AOL: Well, we did not see and we were not shown; we only saw a dry area. That was one of my concerns.

The other concern is about the statement of the minister when he talked about the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). In the morning here, we had issues - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MS AOL: We had the issue of the police and even the UPDF. In health, we use the UPDF; in Operation Wealth Creation, we have the UPDF - They leave their domain and go to other things. When it comes to making bricks, why can’t we use the youth instead of taking the police away from their work. We could just take a few who are probably skilled in that area. That is a big concern because we are doing a great disservice to our people –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Leader of the Opposition for giving me an opportunity. 

The information I would like to give to the honourable members is that in Kiryandongo, the ministry hurried with the construction of houses for the refugees. In addition, when the money was allocated, they did not complete the required number of houses and money was swindled. In the end, they constructed few houses and some people decided to go back to Bududa.

Therefore, Government normally hurries with an activity with the idea of getting the little money that is being allocated. Thank you.

MS AOL: Let me conclude - (Member timed out.)

7.40     
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee. I just want to make a few comments. 

As the minister responsible for housing and human settlement, I chair the subcommittee that is overseeing the construction. We sent a team of engineers and housing officers and they are satisfied that the land, particularly plots 93 and 94, are suitable for human habitation. I think, attached to the committee report are architectural designs and structures which had been prepared by the Ministry of Lands and Housing. 

It is not true that the houses will be razed. Yes, there may be a strong base for the flat area, but it is suitable for human settlement, at least the professionals have assured us. Therefore, that is to allay fears that the place is a wetland and cannot be settled on by people. 

The other plot 10, which is waterlogged, is the one which will be used for agriculture. There is a difference between a waterlogged area and a wetland. We have computerised land transactions in the ministry. It is now not possible for you to get a title on a wetland. We work with the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), which has produced an atlas for wetlands, so it is now not possible to get a title on wetlands. 

Secondly, this settlement is not going to be a camp. From the physical planning point of view, it is going to be a satellite city, which we recommend. (Interjections) We have drawn a physical plan. Our ministry is in charge of physical planning and this place has been planned for settlements as well as other physical amenities like schools, playgrounds and green spaces. Therefore, it will be a modern settlement area and not a camp in the sense that you are talking about. 

I also want to comment on the issue of valuation as well as hon. Paul Mwiru’s question about how Government could buy its own land. Once Government has given you a lease, like in this case one of 99 years, and it develops interest in acquiring the land again, the remaining period of the lease has to be valued and then compensated. This is because as the owner of the lease, you have registered interest on that land. That is how the remaining period was valued and then compensated.

Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, valuation is a professional area. The Chief Government Valuer assesses the value of a property using a formula which, at the end of the day, gives you more than what the market offers. This is because section 33 of the Land Act provides for some statutory allowances, which the valuer has to add over and above the market value of that land. Therefore, when you are being compensated by Government, you get more money than what ordinarily you would get when you sell the land on the open market. 

Finally, I just want to assure hon. Lawrence Mangusho and the people of Sebei that Government is aware that there are people who are homeless in the Sebei Sub-region. Therefore, a decision has been taken that all the people who are – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Those who live in high risk areas in the Elgon region - Masabaland and also Sebei Sub-region - will be relocated and settled in areas that are of low risk. I just wanted to assure hon. Lawrence Mangusho that his people in the Sebei Sub-region will also be resettled. 

Therefore, what we are presenting today is just the initial phase, like hon. Musa Ecweru said. There will be other phases of resettling people in those areas. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, despite my attempts to drive you to focus on the recommendations, the majority of you avoided them. Therefore, what we are going to do is to extract them and then we shall focus on each subject and its recommendations, so that we can take a vote individually. They will be extracted and the Clerk will circulate them to you in the morning and then we can vote on them one by one tomorrow. Honourable chairperson, please take the Floor. 

7.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for the opportunity. I request to respond to some of the issues raised. 

First of all, I am so glad that from 2016 to date, the committee has only managed to bring a report on this matter during my term. I am happy. (Applause) Madam Speaker, you read keenly how the debate started and that is how difficult it was to come out with this report. Therefore, I would like to commend the members of my committee who stood firm. We do not even have a minority report. We gave you a comprehensive report with a clear flow of events. We have done our work. It is now up to you to make a decision at the end. 

I am also happy that Members from that region have confirmed these things. The Woman Member of Parliament from that area - I hope I heard her right - said that when it rains, it is equivalent to a disaster, so you need to have machines there. 

I love my country, my party, my Government and my people. Madam Speaker, only time will tell. (Applause) It is not true that the committee has been blocking the implementation of a well-structured plan by the Office of the Prime Minister. We are only telling you that we want you to do it properly, so that you do not enter into ditches. These are the pillars that we are seeing. 

I will be the happiest to see those people relocated and settled permanently. However, it would be bad of us not to tell you, “Colleagues, as we move there, this is what is on the ground”. Rt Hon. Prime minister, I respect you and I will always support your office, even at individual level, but I will never wish to misinform my Government. We also believe that these people should be resettled once and for all. 

I am happy that the minister showed us some pictures. By the time we were presenting this report, what we found on the ground was that road you saw, but it was opened by an investor and not our Government. The small square part that has been cleared was what we found as they were preparing for activities to take place. They have given us updates that there are activities in that place and we are happy. 

We do not have individual interest – never! We looked at issues as they were and as they are. I do not have any bad feeling towards our colleague, hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu, or any other person. However, when we went through all the documents, we found his name and that was how it came up here. 

Madam Speaker, my colleague raised an issue that I should clarify - the directors of Simu Oil Company. I do not want to lie; as a committee, we did not know about hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu. When we wrote to the Office of the Prime Minister, they told us that they dealt with Simu Oil Company. We wrote to them to link us to that office and the response that we got was that we should search for it. Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu came to me as a representative of Simu Oil Company and we allowed him to appear before us - If that was the mistake we made. He requested us and we allowed him to interact with the committee. 

Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

MR MUDIMI: Madam Speaker, I have tabled documents. They invited me to the committee and they invited the Director of Simu Oil Company. I came to the committee and told them that the director was not around but he requested for another appointment. It is not that I represented him. Is she order to deceive the House by saying I came to represent Simu Oil Company?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Speaker was not there in the committee, so I do not know who came first and who did not come. In addition, you did not address it in your report.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. He raised some issues about the information concerning the LCV Chairperson of Bulambuli District. We almost arrested the chairperson of Bulambuli District because we identified him as one of those leaders who was misleading the Office of the Prime Minister. In one of the letters we attached here, he stated that there were no encumbrances. When he appeared before us, he claimed that he had cautioned the Office of the Prime Minister not to tamper with the land, and then we pulled out that letter and asked him why he lied to the Office of the Prime Minister. We have it there. 

We explain the financial loss in our report, plot by plot. I do not want to go into details. However, the safe way that the Government can handle this is for Government to build its relationship with the people and not only look at business. I would like to thank hon. Hilary Onek because in our last meeting he said before the committee that somehow they had land titles but it was true that one of our colleagues had not cleared many people. This can be authenticated by the committee members here. (Applause)

It is also true that the Office of the Prime Minister initiated a process to harmoniously settle this issue. In Appendix VII attached to this report, they say that they tried as the Office of the Prime Minister to tell hon. Mudimi to help them occupy their land but they failed. What hon. Mudimi said is true, that there was a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that was initiated and he did not sign. That was an attempt by the Office of the Prime Minister to settle these things. 

On response No. 6, what the minister said is incorrect – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have all been involved in land transactions. You go, inspect the land, carry out a title check and confirm that there are no encumbrances, and then you pay. The Office of the Prime Minister went to Bulambuli and hon. Mudimi was a seller. We want to assume they went there, checked, confirmed and paid. If it is true that the Office of the Prime Minister paid for land when they knew there were squatters, then the people to be held liable are the people of the Office of the Prime Minister - (Interjection)- How powerful is Mudimi in the Office of the Prime Minister?

Is it in order to leave out the Office of the Prime Minister? I know Vicent Woboya was the one involved behind the scenes. Is it in order to leave out Vicent Woboya, who is a thief, and go for a man who was selling property? 

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, maybe hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to himself as a thief, but I have been here as a Member of Parliament when this report was read and I was also reading it like any of you; I did not come across my name mentioned anywhere in the report.  

Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to call me a thief? I think he means himself because unfortunately, there are a lot of allegations about Bugisu Cooperative Union and how it is being run and he is at the helm of it; that is why he is referring to himself. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not see hon. Woboya’s name in the report. So hon. Nandala-Mafabi is out of order. I would like to appeal to you the Bamasaba; you are making this an arena of Bugisu battles. This is not the first time; no. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy with what I am seeing. I would like to say here that there was a man called Murefu who, after a court process, successfully regained his 100 acres of land. This was out of the 118 acres, which was already included in the documents submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister. Hon. Mudimi wrote and it was accepted that the land should be reduced by 100 acres. 

The question is: what about those who did not have the capacity to go to court? I was there and I saw the poverty levels in that area. It is not far from the poverty levels in Adjumani. I know as we sit here, not all of us have got land titles, even though we are Members of Parliament.

I would like to go to statement No.6 given by hon. Musa Ecweru that we acknowledged on pages 8 and 9 that there were successful procurement procedures followed; no. Our report is here. We said, for example, that the Office of the Prime Minister contends that it followed – We were reporting. We reported up to page 10. We were fair and we wanted it to flow chronologically. After reporting what you told us, we gave you our analysis, our observations and recommendations. Therefore, I request that that be extracted.

I do not want to go into specifics because the report revealed it all. We are going to remain committed members of the committee. I am not aware that some of my members wanted to withdraw their signatures, but it is a test of leadership. I will stand firm. I would like to thank my Prime Minister and the office of the Government Chief Whip for having given me this opportunity to serve at this position. My work is to ensure that I do not tell you lies. When a report is signed, I stand by it and explain. I would like to thank all my committee members and I wish to say that let us put our heads together.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I kindly request your office to make use of this report. Where issues are irrelevant, leave them out. However, where issues are reflective, you can do your independent investigations as Office of the Prime Minister and come up with better solutions. We are not blocking you; that is why we went ahead and said you can even come with a supplementary budget. I will be at the frontline to support this. All these are in this report. 

Madam Speaker, we are grateful for the opportunity. We have done all this for God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

8.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for their very rich input. 

Like the chairperson of the committee has said, what I was waiting for and what the Office of the Prime Minister and Government are waiting for is to hear that the committee is not blocking the programme. We made it very clear that we will do whatever it takes to resettle these people.

There are issues that have been clearly observed and questions raised by Members here; for example, do we have a roadmap for resettlement? Madam Speaker, we have. Do we have resources to do that? Cabinet has also resolved that that will now be available. 
We have a 10-year resettlement plan for all the 100,000 people who need to be resettled. We have started with the community which is very high risk. We will continue with others until we conclude with all those who are landless. That is our commitment.

We have learnt a few lessons, however. In Kabarole District, for example, we resettled people and they immediately sold their plots of land to other rich people and again relocated to the forest in Kibale. When they relocated to the forest, they were again displaced. When we looked at their records - fortunately, we had done biometric registration - we realised that these were the people we had already resettled but they sold their land. We are now very careful.

When we conclude this resettlement, we will share with the leadership and put a caveat on the land of everybody who is going to be given this property. You will not have the opportunity to sell it for some minimum period of time. As far as we are concerned, these people bought the land and there is no loss made. The resettlement process has started and we have learnt a few lessons from it. 

We have talked about settling those who are complaining in two ways. Comrades, when you look at this report, it is very clear that it was not the transaction between Masaba Cooperative Union and the Office of the Prime Minister where a mistake was made because we have the land titles. What is true is that there were some complainants within the group that was led by hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu who do not seem to be satisfied with the way they shared the proceeds. That must be addressed administratively.

We have drawn the attention of Bulambuli Local Government to this. As Government, we are responsible for people who are complaining and we shall be able to handle that. It is also in our interest that these people are resettled so that we can politically settle them. The resettlement is ongoing. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, we are going to extract the subject and corresponding recommendations and we shall take a vote on them. 

Honourable members, I would like us to go very quickly to item No.4 and ask the Minister of State for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to give his response in three minutes.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CUTHBERT ABIGABA ON THE PRACTICE OF OUTSOURCING BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES

8.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Aida Nantaba): Madam Speaker, this is an issue that was raised by hon. Cuthbert Abigaba, Member of Parliament for Kibale County, on 16 August 2018. 

The issues that were raised were two: 

i) 	The honourable Member of Parliament wanted to know the steps the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance was taking to stop the practice of telecommunications companies from outsourcing engineering services to companies abroad, despite the fact that Uganda has many qualified telecommunications engineers who could do the same work.   

ii) 	The second issue was about the concern raised over an influx of foreign personnel who are contracted to manage the networks in Uganda and as a result, reducing the Ugandan telecommunication professionals to basic engineering works or not being employed at all.  

In response, Madam Speaker, I did task the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) to investigate the allegations raised by the honourable member. We engaged telecom companies that are allegedly engaged in this practice and UCC was able to establish the following: 

1. Contrary to the assertion that telecommunication companies have outsourced all their engineering services, some telecommunication companies like MTN Uganda Limited and Airtel Uganda Limited have outsourced only support services and field operations services. Even where outsourcing has been done, these operations are carried out in Uganda by Ugandans and as such, there is no transfer of infrastructure or data out of Uganda. The core communications networks are run by the telecommunication companies and by Ugandan engineers employed by these companies.  

2. 	As is provided for under the licences of all telecommunications service providers issued by the commission, all telecommunications licences cannot be assigned and/or transferred to any person or company without the express permission of the commission. Even if services are outsourced under licensed activities, the telecommunications company holding the licence is responsible for running the communications services and networks in accordance with the licence.   

Even with the outsourcing business model which is used by telecommunication companies the world over, any personnel who are working with the affected departments in the telecommunications sector are transferred to the outsourced partner on a continuous employment basis. The transfers are done with the unfettered consent of the affected employees. With the outsourced model, no single person loses his or her employment as a result of outsourcing unless the affected person chooses otherwise.  

3. 	This outsourcing model, contrary to the allegations made, has provided employment for Ugandan engineers since these outsourced companies need to recruit more engineers to run their operations and create other opportunities elsewhere that would not have been available in the outsourcing telecommunications company.

4. 	Contrary to the belief that outsourced companies are not resident in Uganda and are run in foreign jurisdictions, many of the outsourced companies are local companies while others are foreign companies domiciled and incorporated in Uganda and employing Ugandan engineers. Outsourced companies have fully utilised Ugandan employees in sectors of work like recruitment and employment relations, fibre maintenance, network rollout and maintenance, marketing and advertising, sales and distribution, data collection and processing and the support services thereto since such roles cannot be outsourced to foreigners. 

5.	Madam Speaker, the challenges that ZTE employees experienced was not within the control of MTN Uganda since ZTE International was affected by the United States of America Government directive to deny US export privileges to ZTE, hence paralysing their global business, Uganda inclusive.

Following this directive, since May 2018, MTN has taken over the management of its network operations from ZTE Uganda Limited and has absorbed all the staff that were hitherto working under ZTE Uganda. However, MTN Uganda, did not take over the business of ZTE since ZTE is an independent limited liability company incorporated in Uganda. Therefore, it is legally untenable for MTN to take over all the liabilities of ZTE occasioned by the US directive.

6. 	Contrary to the assertion that telecommunications operators have experienced a large influx of foreign personnel who are contracted to manage the networks at the expense of Ugandan professionals, I wish to state that a head count of employees in the leading telecommunications service providers as at June 2018 indicates the following: 

Uganda Telecom Limited has 368 employees and two are expatriates; Airtel Uganda Limited has 394 employees of whom only eight are expatriates; MTN Uganda has 1,102 employees of whom nine are expatriates; Tangerine has 40 employees and seven are expatriates; Roke Telecom has 80 employees and none of them is an expatriate; Africell Uganda Limited on the other hand does not outsource any of its services and has 510 employees, of whom 25 are expatriates. Note that under public private partnerships, parties are allowed to have representation at both board and management levels, to protect their interests.

7. 	Investigations further revealed that no telecommunications company hosts its data outside Uganda and the respective data centres can be visited within Uganda. 

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, Parliament recently passed the Data Protection and Privacy Bill that will provide the hitherto lacking legal framework to safeguard the integrity and safety of private data that is in the control of telecom service providers.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, while we respond to this matter because the mentioned companies fall under the ICT sector, allow me to also mention that outsourcing is not only happening in the telecommunications sector but rather is a general practice that large companies are adopting worldwide. It should also be noted that while licensing conditions can help to avert any disadvantages to Ugandans arising from outsourcing, Uganda’s labour laws are also silent on this matter. On the contrary, the foreigners talked about are granted work permits by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This, therefore, calls for a multi-sectoral approach to deal with this matter with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development taking the lead. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Abigaba is not here, so there will not be any supplementary question – Did he assign you, hon. Ssekikubo? Okay, ask one supplementary question and it must be related to what is here.

8.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Madam Speaker, I stand here to thank the minister for her response. The question of outsourcing goes to the root of the question raised by hon. Cuthbert Abigaba, to the extent that Ugandans are disadvantaged. I would have imagined that the minister would go ahead and inform Parliament about what they are doing, particularly for those areas where they can ably get Ugandans to fill those posts without necessarily outsourcing.

Secondly -

THE SPEAKER: No, ask one question.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Okay, I leave it at that. However, I do not think the minister is right in saying that the lead ministry should be the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is within her docket. Therefore, it would be good for her to say to this House that as the ministry in charge ICT, these are the measures they have put in place, without pushing the responsibility to another ministry. She should ensure that the concerns raised by this House are mitigated and solutions are found.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how does the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development come in?

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, in my presentation, I alluded to the fact that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has to come up with laws that regulate all other companies, not just telecom companies. 

Looking at the issue of recruitment, when we are recruiting we also recruit non-Ugandans or foreigners, as alluded to by the honourable member. We are saying that the labour laws are silent on whether we should recruit foreigners/expatriates or Ugandans only. Since the laws are silent, we are saying the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development must address this matter to make sure that expatriates are either stopped from being recruited or they are not stopped.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a big policy matter which you need to discuss in Cabinet before the laws are made. It is big because it touches on many other issues. I hope you will take it up. Let us hear from the Minister of Works and Transport.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JACKSON KAFUUZI ON THE RESTORATION OF THE BRIDGE CONNECTING KIRUHURA AND KYEGEGWA DISTRICTS 

8.19
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Madam Speaker, I am making a statement regarding the restoration of the bridge connecting Kiruhura and Kyegegwa districts. During the sitting of Parliament on 22 November 2018, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, the MP for Kyaka South, sought the intervention of Government to restore the bridge connecting Kiruhura and Kyegegwa districts, which was washed away by heavy floods. Madam Speaker, allow me to respond as follows: 

Madam Speaker, I have established that there are actually two roads that connect the two districts, whose connectivity has been severed in the recent past. One of the roads is the Kyegegwa-Mpara-Katonga-Kiruhura-Kazo Road. I believe this is the road the Member was referring to. This road, which lies on the national road network, flooded at a low point located about 2.5 kilometres from Mpara Trading Centre towards Katonga. However, UNRA, which has the jurisdiction over this network, responded appropriately and connectivity was restored, though they are still working on it.

The other road connects the two districts through a swamp crossing that is located between Kabagole in Kyegegwa District and Nkunge Trading Centre in Kiruhura District. The road links to this swamp crossing lie on the community access road network and were re-constructed under the Community Access Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP), which is being implemented by the Ministry of Local Government. At that point that now constitutes a bottleneck, there are culvert lines that were blocked and damaged, causing the water to flood appreciable and rendering the swamp impassable. There is no span bridge at the location.

Given the above scenario, my ministry in the short-term is going to issue Armco pipe culverts to Kyegegwa District to install at the flooded point. However, subsequently, the ministry will undertake detailed assessment and plan for commensurate interventions that may include swamp crossing using one of the force accounts units.

The Armco pipe culverts will be issued within two weeks’ time, after which the districts shall be expected to install the culverts. Further assessment will be made by the ministry engineers later in this month, to scope any additional works that may be required. If the additional works are significant, interventions may have to be planned for in the coming financial year, 2019/2020, as the funds in the current financial year, 2018/2019, are already committed and the ministry’s budget is actually constrained.

In conclusion, I wish to once again remind Members of Parliament that the need for bridging interventions countrywide is immense. However, the ministry is doing its best to address the bottlenecks much as the resources are not adequate. Looking forward, we are putting together sizable projects to construct a substantial number of bridges, which are going to be formulated. I will count on your support when these are brought to the Floor of Parliament. 

As for the crossing in question, the ministry is going to fast-track the interventions as spelt out above. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any supplementary question? She has answered the question, the Member who asked is here and he is the one entitled to raise a supplementary question if he has any.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are our mentor, Madam Speaker, and we have learnt a lot through your mentorship. 

The procedural guidance I am seeking is in relation to rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure, regarding how to handle these questions. Rule 50(1) provides that whereas the one who asks the question has a right to ask a supplementary question first, Madam Speaker, I want to know how other Members can utilise sub-rule (1) to raise supplementary questions that may arise out of the answers that the minister may have provided.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we had maybe 30 Members, this sub-rule would be good, but when you have about 100 Members wanting to speak on the same issue, it becomes problematic. Let us concentrate on the practice as we have been doing. If you have a question, you can ask and then have the supplementary.

8.26
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, I stand to appreciate; this road is very crucial and it is a central Government road. When I raised that matter, it was a market day - the bridge is just next to the market - and both districts were cut off.

I do appreciate the fact that it was worked on immediately. Uganda National Roads Authority engineers were there and they even worked through the night. Thank you very much. In law, I would say, “I have nothing useful to add”. However, now I would say that we only demand for tarmac. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. We had to have lengthy debates on the other issues because they were contentious and we needed to get people to speak so that they can go home happy. I would like to now adjourn the House so that we continue tomorrow. 

Honourable members, tomorrow there will be no matters of national interest until Thursday, so that we can run through this work which is on the Order Paper. We shall start with the usual things and then go to the motion and the Bills; we have three bills.

The Minister of Health excused herself. She will come tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
