Tuesday, 10 December 2013

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will begin by adjusting the Order Paper to move item No. 4 to become No. 3 to allow hon. Oketayot,who has been away on sick leave, to say a few things.

Secondly, as you are all aware, on Thursday 5thDecember, we received the sad news about the death of President Nelson Mandela, the first black President of the Republic of South Africa. He died in Houghton, Johannesburg, at the age of 95. Although we were aware that he was sick, his death and the finality of it all has come with great shock, anxiety, anguish and pain. We have opened a condolence book, which is outside and should be available for all Ugandans to sign and other people who may be here during this time until the end of the week. Also, this afternoon we shall paytribute to him at the same time the memorial service is going on in Johannesburg in his honour.

I also want to announce some sad news: Hon. Baryayanga has lost his father. He died this morning and burial will be on Friday in Kabale Municipality. The other details will be communicated to you. 

I want to report that the Inter-ParliamentaryEast African Community Games are on.They commenced on Sunday 8th. The following Speakers are in Uganda for the above games: Rt Hon. Justin Muturi, the Speaker ofthe NationalAssembly of Kenya; Rt Hon. Ekwee Ethuro, the Speaker of the Senate of Kenya; Rt Hon. Bernard Makuza, the Vice-President of the Senate of Rwanda; and Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly.We also have a minister from Tanzania who is leading the delegation from Tanzania.

The following football teams are in the country: Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and EALA. The netball teams are from Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.I am delighted to report progress; on the 8th, the Uganda parliamentary football team beat the Burundi parliamentary team 4 to 1 at Nakivubo. (Applause) On the same day, the Uganda netball team beat the Kenya netball team 50 to 10 at Lugogo Indoor Stadium. (Applause)Yesterday, Uganda beat Rwanda 2 to 1 and Tanzania beat East African Legislative Assembly in netball 50 to 5 goals.Yesterday, the Burundi and Rwanda netball teams didnot come and, therefore, Kenya and EALA got a walkover. Today, Uganda is supposed to play with Rwanda and if they do not turn up, we shall also get a walkover in the netball tournament.

At the national level, I am delighted to inform you and request you to join me in welcoming and congratulating the Uganda netball team, the She Cranes. Despite issues of lack of sponsorship and lack of support, they went to Singapore, arrived late and missed the first match but they managed to win the cup eventually. They won the SixNations Cup and they returned yesterday. We want to thank the President for rescuing them at the last minute. It was a very big struggle for them. I want to really ask Government to take serious interest in netball in the same way they do football and other sports. The She Cranes will come here formally on Thursday.

Tomorrow is rest day for all the teams at the parliamentary games. On Thursday, the winners and runners-up will play in both the football and netball tournaments. Friday will be another restday. The finals will be held on Saturday between the thirdplaced, runners-up and the winners in both. So, you will know by Thursday how we are faring. I want to encourage you to go and support our team in both instances.

I also wantto report that on 25November 2013, the Parliamentof Uganda and the Parliament of Ethiopia signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that will see us work together to promote peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region. I signed on behalf of the Ugandan Parliament and the Rt Hon. Abdulla Gemeda Dago signed on behalf the House of Representatives of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia. 

We are going to support one another in public sensitisation on terrorism and state-sponsored instability in our region.Although we have been friends for a long time, we have agreed to promote parliamentary democracy, deepen the multiparty system of governance and cultural diversity as a fundamental feature of world cultures, and to also support the expansion of economic relations. The agreement was witnessed by the Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah; the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi; the Backbench Commissioners; MPs hon. Steven Tashobya and hon. Milton Muwuma; and Uganda’s Ambassador to Ethiopia.

Honourable members, finally I want to comment on the way we conductourselves. During the weekend I was shocked to hear on several radio stations that there are members of this House who are claiming that colleagues have been bribed. They claimed that Members have been compromised to fail a committee report. You may score points as an individual but ultimately, you are bringing down this institution. I am a Member of Parliament and I do not know whether I have been bribed. The Deputy Speaker is a Member of Parliament and I do not know whether he isthe one who has been bribed. So, who of us has been bribed? 

Infact, I will be taking serious measures and demanding that if you make those allegations, you comehere to the plenary and substantiate with names, dates and time; otherwise, this is really bringing down the institution of Parliament.It is not fair to Members and to this institution. So, please be cautious about what you say.I think we are the only institution in this country that accuses itself. Yes, I think we are the only ones who accuse ourselves and we go home happy. We should end this, unless you can substantiate.

In the public gallery, we have youth associates with Missionaries of the Poor represented by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and hon. Nabilah. They are on this side. They have come to attend the proceedings. I thank you very much.

3.00
THELEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for your communication. 

I also want to talk about the issue of Members of Parliament being bribed in relation to the Umeme and oil reports.I want to plead with your office - these are serious allegations - to ask our Committee on Rules and Privileges to investigate this. If we do not and we sweep it under the carpet, people may think thatwe are all in the same group. Let our committee investigate and if there is some truth to these allegations, they deal with it. 

If we tend to say that Members of Parliament have not been bribed, some will go and pick money knowing that the Speaker is very good at protecting them. So, the best thing to do now, and I plead with you on this, isto send this to the rules committee so that they can investigate these allegations.One of our newspapers, the Observer, had a screaming headline yesterday that “MPs have been bribed”. In the whole of this country, it is assumed that nobody can do work without being bribed. We believe that this would be the best way to handle this case, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

3.02
MR HASSAN FUNGARROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, thank you for protecting the image of Parliament. In a meetingin Kampala organised by CCG, which you were scheduled to close that afternoon, I saw the rage ofthe public and the feeling that Parliament is useless and bad. I was the only MP at that point in the house and I had to stand up and tell the people that not everybody in Parliament is bad; if there are bad people, they should point out the bad people but not everyone is bad.

They have also taken this issue of MPs getting iPads as part ofthe uselessness of MPs. Madam Speaker, as you protect our image, we also take cognisance ofthe fact that some of us may not really be good.

Let me also take this opportunity to appreciate the Parliamentary Commission fortheiPads, although we do not have internet access on them. On my own behalf and also on behalf of the MPs who sit in Bauman House, I would also like to sadly report herethat for the past almost three months, there has been practically no internet access and yet we know that these are not free services. Parliament, and therefore the Republic of Uganda, pays for these services in the name of MPs. People believe that a lot of money is spent on us as MPs but if there is no value for money, what is the use of paying all this amount of money for internet services which do not work? Bauman House has no internetaccess and I have been given an iPad with no internet. So, what is the use of the new iPad? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you got the iPad just before the weekend and I do not think that you should condemn it as not working. Let us check what is happening and we sort it out. These are new gadgets; do not say that there is no valueformoney. I think that you are also responsible for saying bad things about Parliament. (Laughter)

Coming back to the iPads, I do not know why the public does not complain that we have been giving you paper worth Shs 45 million. It is okay to give you paper worth Shs 45 million but they do not mind us reducing that expenditure and giving you Shs 2.5 million; I find that really incredible.

3.06
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for bringing upthe issue of the bribery allegations.I want to say that some of us are concerned about how Members keep on making those allegations of bribery.

I had travelled to my constituency and one ofthe Members called me and said, “Hon. Nyakikongoro, we have been told that you are among those Members who are dishing out money.” I asked, “Money for what?” I did not even know about the allegations, so I asked, “Which money?” The Member said, “You are giving out Shs 5 million from Protea.” I said, “I do not know about that”.He then said, “You had better come out and clear your name.” These are some of the thingsthat I do not know about as I was not around. I even do know where Protea is, but people are just there tarnishing people’s names. 

I, therefore, think thatthere is need to investigate where such a rumour came from and who isresponsible for spreading those kinds of rumours to tarnish people’s images. If there are people who have really touched that money, let them be exposed so that we know who has taken the money and who is making allegations against whom. I thank you.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: I thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I have noted one serious issue of concern in today’s sitting;I think it is one of the strangest sittings we have had. Constitutionally, Parliament is composed of backbench Members of Parliamentand also Members who belong to the Executive and sit on the Front Bench. I want to bring to your attention the fact that not a single person is seated on the Front Bench and yet many of the issues that we debate here have to do with the working of the Executive. 

I, therefore, wonderhow we are moving on without the Executive. I also wonderwhether the Executive had the courtesy of alerting you of this scenario. I must confess that I have never had a sitting like this one. I am worried, Madam Speaker. Please, guide me.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, last week we were all here and we worked together up to Thursday. I adjourned the House to Tuesday and no one told me anything. However, at 6.00O’clock yesterday, a letter arrived in my office informing me that there was a retreat for the Cabinet. I said that I had asked the House to come and sit and pay tribute to President Mandela. So, we shall proceed whether they are here or not. 

3.10
MS JACQUILINEAMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. First of all, we want to thank you for the good guidance that you are giving to this House.

In regard to the issue of bribery, I want to say that the statement that you just made is very important.We, Members of Parliament, arethe same people who go out thereand misguide the press and the public. We can even look back to when we got the facilitation for cars; some Members went to address the press saying that it was not in order and was a waste of the monies of the Government. However, the same people are using that very money and are driving cars got from the facilitation from Parliament.

I think this cannot only be allegations. I am not going to name and shame people here, but you all know these characters that are with us here. I think what is really very important is that our rules have to be revisited so that these Members come and lay these allegations on the Table; otherwise, they shame the whole Ninth Parliament that had started very well.

The other thing that I want to mention is in regards to our parliamentary relationship with the press.We have a public relations office here in Parliament that is supposed to liaise with the press all the time and they should do so especially on this issue of the iPads. I think that at this point in time when we go paperless, we are going to save more for this country by having these iPads. The public out there does not even know the importance of having the iPads and why Members of Parliament have been given iPads. 

I actually have two iPads but I cannot access parliamentary proceedings while I am in a place that has no internet access. So, these iPads are going to help me do that. Someone needs to articulate this to the public so that they just do not look at us as people who are wasting public funds. Thank you.

3.12
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is humbling to hear that Parliament is dividing itself against itself. The allegations of who is being bought or bribed have been raging. Some of us on the ad hoc committee on energy were called names. I want to report that the eight of us withstood the storm and the allegations against us, and I believe that there is nobody in the eight-member ad hoc committee that received any form of bribe. Interestingly, even those of us who were in the committee were alleged to have been bribed to report the way we have done. 

Madam Speaker, the problem in this country is of attitude, that you cannot do anything good without being compromised. We stood our ground on behalf of the poor Ugandans who want electricity. As we stand now, only seven per cent of the 34 million Ugandans can access electricity. We knew that if we would accept to be compromised, we would have compromised Ugandans. Probably in the heat of the debate of this report, anything could happen and the allegations could come in if some other person is arguing to the contrary.

Madam Speaker, we, the MPs, have been labelled by some media houses as “irredeemably stupid” – (Interjection) – Yes, some journalists in the print media. Others on television have said we are “nonsense”, saying they know better than us because in Uganda to be a Member of Parliament, you have to have a minimum of senior six –(Interruption)

MS CHRISTINE BAKO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, when the committee chairperson was speaking, he said, “If we would accept”. I want to ask you, sir, was there any attempt to compromise you which you did not then accept? That will enable us appreciate the genesis of this rumour.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, that clarification –(Laughter)– is a question of “how would I prove?” How would I stand here, unless we convert this into a court house where I can give sworn evidence? Madam Speaker, what I said is that we stood our ground and we did not accept any bribe - whether there was an attempt or not is immaterial; we have the report before this House. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, even recently when I lost a nephew – unfortunately – and I was not in the House for two or three sittings, the allegation was that probably Oboth had been “seen”. I thank you for bringing this up, Madam Speaker, because we need to protect the image of this House. 

Probably, also the way we conduct ourselves portrays us as people of low opinion about ourselves sometimes. Why must we think that somebody is being bribed and why should a Member of Parliament be bribed? This is the only accountability institution by Constitution; everyone reports to us. If the issue of allegation of bribery can be investigated, it would do us good and would bring every allegation to record. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have lost opportunities to investigate matters earlier, but I think the time is now; so I instruct the rules committee to investigate this allegation and report to the House so that I can go back to Kamuli with my head high. (Applause)

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.18
MRS LOWILA C.D. OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to make this statement according to rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I find it a very big miracle that I am alive and standing on the Floor of this Parliament to make this statement. I have not been together with my colleagues for about three months now. On 31 August 2013, I went to my constituency for a weekend and while travelling back to Kampala on Monday, 2 September 2013, at around 9.30 p.m. I got involved in an accident in Nakasongola District along Kafu-Kampala Highway. I had three of my children in the vehicle, all of whom survived without any injury. I got a compound fracture on my right arm and almost lost it. My vehicle was smashed to pieces because the accident involved a head-on collision with a Fuso truck that was carrying matooke to South Sudan.

Madam Speaker, I want to testify about the mighty hand of God that covered my life and the lives of my children. (Applause) I testify about the grace, mercy and faithfulness of God. My experience in the accident is a big testimony and I am sure God spared my life so that I could give this testimony. I will begin testifying on this Floor because I would have come here in a casket. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I am always very particular about praying before any journey; I always commit all my travels into the hands of God. However, on this particular day, I saw the devil at work. I left my home in Pajule and started travelling without prayer. Although the Spirit kept on reminding me that I had not prayed, I travelled up to Kafu without praying. When I reached Kafu, the reminder became very strong and we parked beside the road and I told my children that since we had been travelling without prayer, we should pray. I then prayed, thanking God for bringing us that far and committed the remaining part of the journey into His hands. I specifically asked Him to cover our lives with the blood of Jesus. I made a strong prayer binding the spirit of death and loosing the power of the Holy Spirit over our lives.

Madam Speaker, you can imagine that I made a prayer from Kafu and after we moved for about 60 to 70 kilometres, we encountered the accident. I strongly believe that we survived because of the prayers we made at Kafu. If the devil had succeeded in tying me to continue moving without praying, I would have perished with all my children.

After that day when I got the accident, more than 20 people have perished more or less around the same spot where I got the accident. So I cannot take it for granted; I have all the reasons to greatly thank God for His great mercy, grace and faithfulness.

Madam Speaker, please allow me to thank all those who gave me support in one way or the other after I got the accident. In a very special way, I thank the people who immediately came to my rescue and ensured that I was brought from Nakasongola to Nakasero Hospital. I want to thank the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, hon. Bahati and my sister, hon. Capt. Lakot, who stood beside my husband and did not sleep even for a single minute that night. 

I thank the members of Acholi Parliamentary Group under the leadership of hon. Reagan Okumu. I also thank members of the agriculture committee under the leadership of hon. Mathias Kasamba for the great support they gave me. I thank all of you, my colleagues and friends, for all the support that you gave me.

Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to join my colleagues in congratulating you on attaining the highest position of Commonwealth women leadership.You were elected when I had just got the accident. You make us, the women of Uganda, very proud. (Applause)

I also register my condolences for the loss of our dear colleagues who departed during the course of this time: the late hon. Arinaitwe Kariisa Joy, the woman MP of Buhweju, and the late Matovu Gregory, MP for Bukanga County. My condolences to their families and their constituents. Consequently, I congratulate and welcome those who replaced them and joined us - the new Woman MP for Buhweju and the new MP for Bukanga County. I welcome all of you to the august House and wish you the very best. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, let me conclude by making an appeal to all of us; we should draw closer to God and we should commit our lives, and most especially our work, in the hands of God. Let us commit our lives to the Lord Jesus Christ who sacrificed his own life for our sake. I once again thank all of you and may God bless all of you abundantly. I have made this statement for God and my country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lowila, we welcome you back most warmly. You have been missing from your corner but we are happy to see you.

3.23
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence.In addition to what you have said in welcoming back our colleague, I want to say that this is a God-fearing country but as Parliament we also pass the budget. The honourable member, in her statement, has said that after she had got the accident, over 20 people have died in that spot. Could this be a black spot for which this Parliament must ask either the Minister for Works or the committee on works to investigate? 

In addition to prayer, we can correct this misnomer so that we can save our people. It is something that we must really deal with so that we can prevent further death. We can do something with our own resources and our own hands. I just wanted to find out whether the ministry – unfortunately, there is no minister here to give an explanation on that one.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall ask hon. Lowila to tell us the exact spot and then we shall ask the research department to carry out some research and find out about these other accidents. If it is really a black spot, we need to address it as a country.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE NELSON MANDELA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Leader of the Opposition to move the motion. 

3.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, since the Prime Minister is not around and I was the seconder, I want to ask the indulgence of the House that I now become the Prime Minister and move - (Laughter) - a motion to pay tribute to the late Nelson Mandela.

Madam Speaker, on Thursday, 5 December 2013 at 1.00 a.m. we got news that our dear one, Nelson Mandela, had passed on. All of you know Nelson Mandela is a general who never used a gun. I am sure the reason why we all delayed to come to Parliament today was because all of us were glued to our TVs watching the presidents of the world paying tribute to the late Nelson Mandela. So, Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion to pay tribute to the late Nelson Mandela. If I am seconded, I will move it.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded from both sides of the House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Nelson Mandela, as you all know, was in prison for 27 years and when he came out he ruled South Africa for five years. There are people who were in the bush for five years and they have ruled for 27 years. (Laughter) 

Nelson Mandela, commonly known as Madiba, has passed on and I would like to join the whole world, particularly Uganda, in mourning the passing of the greatest statesman of all time. As we celebrate his life, nobility and unique symbol of peace, hope, freedom and reconciliation in Africa, the father of the nations who united the blacks and the whites in South Africa preached against revenge and challenged the victims of apartheid to promote reconciliation. 

Madam Speaker, the news of Mandela’s death broke with the same shock to the world as the news of his release then from prison - long walk to freedom - did. Mandela is a generation and I will not have enough time today, or in a week or in a year to say all that is deserved to be said about him. This noble son of Africa deserves the utmost tribute and honour to his legacy. 

Madam Speaker, Nelson Mandela was born on 18 July 1918 in the district of Umtata into a branch of the Thembu dynasty and he was given the name Nelson by a teacher at the age of seven. Nelson Mandela spent 27 years as a political prisoner in South Africa before becoming the country’s first black president.Mandela was a leading member of the African National Congress, which opposed South Africa’s white minority government and its policy of racial separation known as apartheid. The government in South Africa then outlawed the ANC in 1960. Mandela was captured and jailed in 1962 and in 1964 was convicted of treason and sentenced to life imprisonment. He began serving the sentence as prisoner No.46664 on Robben Island near Cape Town. 

Instead of disappearing from view, Mandela became a prison bond martyr and worldwide symbol of resistance to racism. All of you know that it was President F.W.de Klerk, who had replaced the strong President of apartheid called P.W. Botha, who finally lifted the ban on the ANC and released Mandela in 1990. Mandela used his stature to help dismantle apartheid and form a new multi-racial democracy, and he and F.W. de Klerk shared the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, Mandela was elected the country’s President in 1994. He left prison in 1990 and for four years he did not come into power but he spent that time dismantling apartheid. He was elected in 1994 as President. Upon his election as President, Mandela appointed F.W. de Klerk as his first deputy in a government of national unity. By the way, F.W. de Klerk was the President who released him and he became his deputy. It is like Dr Kiiza Besigye becoming President and President Museveni becoming his deputy. (Laughter)

Despite his popularity, Mandela served for only one term and retired from political life in 1999. He was succeeded by Thabo Mbeki. I will ask all of you to read his autobiography, The Long Walk to Freedom, which was published in 1994. He remains a worldwide icon of resistance to racism, of exceptional leadership and selfless service, and he continues to reap awards, honours and accolades from around the globe for his leadership and lifetime achievement. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that is why we are here today to pay tribute to such a great person of the world. 

The evils of social inequalities were at the centre of Mr Mandela’s struggles. Unfortunately, in Uganda we are yet to take lessons from Madiba’s war against apartheid in South Africa. In our health and education sectors, all of us are aware that we have two classes of Ugandans – the ones who can afford and the others who are economically condemned citizens. Some of us choose to fly our daughters in private jets to give birth in countries outside Uganda while our national referral hospitals remain a death trap to the rest of us. 

The late Nelson Mandela once said, “During my lifetime, I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the African people. I have fought against white domination and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.” Before I came down to the House, I watched the President of America, President Barack Obama, talk and he quoted this. The Secretary-General of the UN also quoted this and everybody who spoke quoted this. That is why I am also quoting it. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the late Nelson Mandela lived for that ideal and he made it real. He achieved more than was expected of him. He is no longer with us; he belongs to the generations. He is gone and not forgotten but revered. As Parliament, we must stand out not only to pay tribute but to make the commitment to walk in the footsteps of Nelson Mandela - to fight injustice, discrimination and self-aggregated dictatorship, which we encounter every other day. 

In Africa, we still have a lesson to learn from the struggles led by Nelson Mandela as we remember apartheid in South Africa. Suppose a youthful Nelson Mandela had been a Ugandan and lived in Uganda today, which type of life would he be living? Would Ugandan leaders today accept the acts of the late Nelson Mandela or they would also charge and excoriate him with terrorism? Unfortunately, some leaders in Uganda have promised freedom and democracy only to become corrupt dictators, often unleashing brutality and turning quests for freedom of speech and movement into preventive arrests as was then practiced during the apartheid regime. 

Madam Speaker, Mr Mandela was a man whose heart, soul and spirit could not be contained or restrained from racial and economic injustice or the burden of hate and revenge in his life. He inspired others to reach for what appeared to be impossible. Through his inspiration, many have moved to break through their mental, physical, social and economic barriers.
He stood for civil rights and freedom of expression. 

At his inauguration as President, the late Mandela is quoted to have said, “We enter into a covenant that we shall build a society in which all South Africans, both black and white, will be able to walk tall, without any fear in their hearts, assured of their inalienable right to human dignity - a rainbow nation at peace with itself and the world.” What do we stand for in Uganda? How much dignity do we accord our people? I call upon the people who give orders to our security operatives to learn from the late Mandela what it means to treat people with dignity.

Madam Speaker, I was watching TV and I saw people fighting to enter the stadium. It is full to capacity and all those fighting to enter are leaders from the whole world. If you computed the cost to bury the late Mandela, that money could run the Uganda government for another 15 years because all the planes are going there and all leaders are there. I hope when we also lose our great ones, planes will also come to Uganda. (Laughter)

The fact that he did it all with grace, humility and ability to acknowledge his imperfections only makes him much more remarkable. As he once said, “I am not a saint, unless you think of a saint as a sinner who keeps on trying.” Nelson Mandela was always uncomfortable talking about his own death. It was not because he was afraid or in doubt, but because he understood that people wanted him to offer homilies about death and he had none to give. Of course, he was utterly a sentimental man. People hoped he would give them life, but he couldnot. 

When Madiba’s people wanted him to revenge, he removed his shoe and showed them that he had lost a toe during the hard labour punishment at a quarry in prison. He asked them, “What part of your body did you lose so that you should seek revenge? If I lost a toe and did not revenge, who are you to revenge?” We know you went to the bush and you may have lost legs, eyes, heads or even sleep, but who are you to revenge if you never lost anything?

One would think that in a free and non-racial South Africa, Mandela would have been a small town lawyer, content to be a local grandpa. This great and historical revolutionary was in many ways a natural conservative. He did not believe in change for change’s sake but one thing turned him into a revolutionary, and that was the wicked system of racial oppression he experienced as a young man in Johannesburg. When shopkeepers turned him away, when whites treated him as if he could not read or write, that changed him for ever. This is because deep in his bones was a basic sense of fairness. He simply could not tolerate injustice. It is very rare these days for people, especially the elite, to stand for principles because whenever there are challenges, people waver and do not know where to go. 

His greatest achievement is the creation of a democratic non-racial South Africa. He was a skilful politician whose policy of reconciliation saved the country from a bloodbath and ushered it into a period of democracy, human rights and tolerance. He famously said, “The struggle is my life” and he also said, “I step down with a clear conscience feeling that I have in a small way done my duty to my people and my country”. He said that when he was leaving power after leading for five years - only one term – and yet he spent 27 years in prison. 

When Mandela moved all over the world, he was sandwiched by children, sports people, diplomats, celebrities and people of all walks. Great story lovers followed him and looked for his story to make great documentaries and movies. Musicians of all cultures and classes composed songs of passionate love. Kings and other world icons sought to take pictures with him. However, our own president, President Museveni, while traveling anywhere is sandwiched by military men and a huddle of security detail; what a contradiction of character.

Madam Speaker, as people from across the whole world flock South Africa to mourn Mandela, we continue to learn lessons even about their journeys. President Obama of the United States together with his wife from the Democratic Party, the former President, George W. Bush, and his wife from the Republican Party and the former President Bill Clinton and his wife all travelled on the same plane called Air Force One. Could that happen here? Can President Museveni travel with the leaders of the Opposition and their wives on the same plane –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, could you protect me from those Members? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Instead, President Museveni’s regime is pouncing on his opponents, treating them as enemies of the state and yet there is Al-Qaeda. Teargas trucks and APCs that the apartheid regime used in South Africa against the anti-apartheid struggle are what the Government of Uganda is now using to suppress the civil rights and freedom activists. 

Madam Speaker, for your information, Government of Uganda imported these trucks, instead of having them demolished in South Africa, to use them on the people of Uganda. They imported them to use on Ugandans. In Uganda, we have white people in black skins called oppressors. They suppress innocent voiceless Ugandans using these weapons. 

Mandela said, and this again was quoted by President Obama, “No power on earth can stop an oppressed people determined to win their freedom”. You saw what happened in Kasokoso; those people stood up for their freedom. Those of us who aspire for good governance, social justice, equal opportunities, peace and love will never let Madiba down. We will fight on until we reach the Promised Land. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. I join the rest of the world in paying tribute to Nelson Mandela for the immeasurable life that he lived. For his life, we thank the Almighty God and pray that his soul rests in peace. God bless the world. 

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite Commissioner Dombo, I want to read a message from the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Latigo. He has written to me saying thus:  

“On this truly momentous and historic day when the whole world has converged at the FNB World Cup Stadium in Soweto, Johannesburg, South Africa, to honour and pay last respects to the great Nobel Peace Laureate, South Africa’s liberation hero and the world’s peace and reconciliation icon, Nelson Mandela; and as our Parliament and our country also honour and pay last respects to this exceptional son of Africa, I seek your indulgence, Rt Hon. Speaker, to register through Parliament my own message of grief of loss, but more importantly of recognition, gratitude, celebration and great thanks to the Almighty God for the life of President Mandela. 

When the passing of Mzee Mandela was announced on the night of Thursday, 5th December, it was to be expected, given the long period of his grave illness. Yet for his humanity, personal sacrifice for others and South Africa’s harmony, and for being the beacon of democracy and political tolerance that he became to us, African politicians, we all felt the rudeness of the death that took him away.We were, like his immediate family, also overcome by grief and sorrow. 

However, as in my Acholi tradition, for Madiba, by the grace of God having completed his work journey for mankind and having lived to the ripe old age of 95, we also brought out the drums as the South Africans did, are singing and will dance in gratitude and joy for a life well spent until this great man is laid in his final resting place in Qunu, Eastern Cape, on 15 December 2013.

With all the words written, all the words spoken, all the images relayed worldwide on and about this unique man, I, in all humility, have nothing more to add. I am only glad that like the occurrence in my life this year of the rare double solar eclipse, I and all of us are uniquely privileged in history to have witnessed the greatness of Nelson Mandela. It now only remains for me to say, thank you God for the great life of Nelson Mandela; thank you Mandela for obeying God’s will for humanity; thank you Madiba for being Africa’s greatest and proudest gift to the world.

To the family of Nelson Mandela and the people of South Africa, we share your great grief at the departure of this irreplaceable man and join in gratitude, pride and joy for all the great things God allowed him to do for humanity in his time. We thank you too for all you did to treat, comfort and keep him during his sickness and for the dignity with which you have embraced his departure and are saying goodbye to him.

To us, politicians, fellow Ugandans, I pray that as we celebrate Mzee Mandela’s life and say goodbye to him, we reflect on the challenges of reconciliation and harmony in our country and that we will be inspired by and draw lessons from his forgiveness of and reconciliation with his apartheid tormentors. 

May the Almighty God grant His great creation, Nelson Mandela, eternal peace and the most just reward. 

Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, former Leader of the Opposition in the Eighth Parliament.”(Applause)

3.53
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We stand here as a parliament to pay tribute to a great fallen human being. Let me hope that we shall give a befitting tribute to the late honourable Mandela and not fall into temptation of vulgarising his death with our own trivialities in situations Mandela himself would not have done. 

Madam Speaker, as we speak today, the President of Uganda is representing us as a country at the official memorial in Johannesburg.He was recognised and we are all happy that we are represented. We would have all wished to be there but because it is not easy and possible for all of us to be there now, we take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mandela now, like he did it for many of his friends when they died.

Madam Speaker, although we remember Mandela as a freedom fighter who sacrificed a lot to bring freedom to the people of South Africa and the world, it is mainly the things that he did when he was out of prison that I want to concentrate on. This is so that those who are alive now and those to come after this may have lessons to learn.

I will talk about Mandela’s spirit of forgiveness. Mandela demonstrated this on the day he was inaugurated as President, when he invited his jailer at Robben Island to be one of the guests at the high table. Those who listened to President Barack Obama’s speech this afternoon would have heard him say that President Mandela freed the prisoners and also freed the jailers. Not many people in South Africa knew that even the people who used to jail the blacks were also under bondage. 

In his spirit of forgiveness, he taught us not to seek revenge. Although it looks attractive on the face of it, revenge leaves more pain than forgiveness does. Being able to forgive is not a point of weakness as many people may think; it takes enormous strength. It means getting beyond the temptation of seeing another person suffer as you may have suffered yourself. That is exactly what President Mandela did.

Somebody said that it is also difficult to understand how a man who suffered a lot championed forgiveness and reconciliation as he did. He concluded by saying that Mandela did it with a lot of ease, and that in spite of one’s scepticism, it should be an opportunity to explore the extraordinary power in forgiveness. This is a lesson that all of us, as leaders, must take. How many times, when faced with challenges, do we forgive?

The second virtue which I want to talk about is the power to apologise. It has been rooted in the African mind that an apology only comes from weaklings, that it is the weaker ones who must apologise when they are wrong. President Mandela defied this. One time when he went to a mosque in Durban, after the 9/11 attacks, he attacked the Muslim community because of what a few believers had done. The people who listened to him revered him but they did not know how to react because it was an attack on an entire community and faith. 

When Madiba went back to his home, he reflected and wondered why he should have attacked an entire faith because of the acts of a few individuals. He drove back to the same mosque a few weeks later and said, “I have come here to offer my apology to the Muslim community and the world. Who gives me power or even an excuse to attack an entire faith because of the acts of a few individuals?” The confession of one of the faithful who was in the mosque was that the entire Muslim community stood up and revered Mandela, saying this was a great son Africa had. 

He did the same thing when he went to Zambia during the presidential elections when President Kaunda was running against Chiluba, I think. Madam Speaker, in that election, President Mandela was tempted to address the people of Zambia and ask them to vote for President Kaunda. When he back to Zambia after President Kaunda had lost, he offered a public apology to the people of Zambia. He told them that while President Kaunda had made an immense contribution to the liberation struggle, he had forgotten that it was the entire nation of Zambia that made the contribution and not only an individual. He said that he had no cause, or even excuse, to arrogate to himself the power to choose for the people of Zambia who should be their leader.

These decisions by a president and a person of Mandela’s stature would have made many people refrain. However, because Mandela did it, it is something we must learn as leaders; that after all, as human beings we err and make mistakes but when we do make those mistakes, we should go back and apologise.

Finally, there is a small book here which I would love my colleagues to read or buy when they travel, or the library should buy it for Parliament. It is entitled, “Leading like Madiba”. It is a small book that you can read within one hour. I want to quote only three statements from this book and then I will sit down.

In this book, it says, “If there is anything I have been trying to share with you through the Mandela stories, it is these four lessons: 
1. 	Great leaders are the servants of those they are privileged to lead.
2. 	Leaders lead by example.
3. 	Leaders notice and honour the good in others.
4. 	While leaders do not court trouble, they learn life-changing lessons from painful experiences. The Robben Island prisoners have taught us and the rest of the world, in a language that cannot be ignored, that when human beings make up their minds, they will achieve whatever they want regardless of the cost and the obstacles along the way. The term ‘impossible’ disappears from the vocabulary.”

Madam Speaker, this is a great man we must remember and emulate and let us give him a befitting eulogy. Thank you and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Sanjay and then hon. Tumwine. Now we shall use three minutes each.

4.02
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Today President Obama, while giving his speech, likened the late Mandela to Lincoln and Martin Luther King. He described him as the greatest liberator of the 20th Century. I refuse to agree that he has died because today I pledge that he must live on. He will live on forever because of the deeds that we have been hearing about.

Madam Speaker, allow me to recite two quotations of his that I live and breathe on day in, day out. He says, “No one is born hating another person because of the colour of his skin, or his background, or his religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love comes more naturally to the human heart than its opposite.” In our country today we do not only hate because of race and skin colour but we have gone to the level of hating because of tribe and religion. So, this quote is extremely relevant to Ugandans today. 

The second quote is, “I hate race discrimination most intensely and all its manifestations...” - which we are witnessing today - “...I have fought it all during my life; I fight it now and will do so until the end of my days.”

Madam Speaker, I say this not because I am of a different race but it is something that is relevant to each and every one of us. It is relevant to Ugandans out there. As a nation, we must unite. Mandela’s lessons must not be allowed to go with him. We must pledge here today that he must live on. I thank you Madiba, I thank you God and I thank Africa for Madiba’s gift to the world. I rest my case. 

4.09
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice, my spirit, my feelings, my emotions and all that I am to one unique great man of Africa and of the world. 

Every day is a unique day. Every human being is born on a particular day and they are a particular human being. Nelson Mandela is not the first leader of Africa. There were emperors - the Mwene Mutapas and others - who led Africa, but none of all the leaders we have had in Africa has reached a point where the whole world, on this unique day, is bowing down in respect of an African leader. This is a unique day, this is a unique occasion and this is a unique situation because of one unique man. 

People could ask, “What about the others?” None in my lifetime has experienced the respect of the whole world - flags flying at half-mast all over the world, the network of media and Members of Parliament everywhere bowing to a man like this one. He was a unique man in every way. He was a unique man in his dress, which creates a challenge to those who are not proud of their uniqueness. He was a man who even had the capacity to talk about his death in 1994 when he said, “Death is something inevitable. When a man has done what he considers to be his duty to his people and his country, he can rest in peace. I believe I have made that effort and that is, therefore, why I will sleep for the eternity.”

He was a man who had many quotations –I have just five of them that I think I can mention - for the rest of humanity to remember. He said, “Difficulties break some men but make others.” He bore all the difficulties but he never changed. He was offered release and he said, “Until the cause for which I have been imprisoned is over, I should not be released.” He said, “We can change the world and make it a better place. It is in your hands to make a difference.” He leaves us behind, each of us in our unique way, to make that great difference for our people, for our countries, for the world and for humanity. 

He said, “We must use time wisely and moreover realise that the time is always right to do the right thing. It is never too early nor is it too late to do the right thing.” This is our time, all the young people of Africa, for us to emulate Nelson Mandela and stand for his cause that he was willing to die for and has ended in peace and left the whole world challenged. He has left every leader - terrorist or oppressor - or whoever you are, even in your own home, challenged. 

He was a man who gave us, freedom fighters, pride that we should always continue and move on. He has left Africa proud. He has left the revolutionaries proud. He has left those dependants of those who died in the struggle very proud- (Member timed out_) 

4.09
MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak about a great man in the person of the late Nelson Mandela. 

I first got to know about Mandela when I was a kid, when I was young and I was beginning to form a political mind. I followed very closely what was going on in South Africa and I was lucky to meet the same man and shake hands with him later. I felt great. I was lucky to be in a government that was interested in a free South Africa and a country which took up the fighters of ANC and PAC when they were chased from Angola as a condition for Namibia’s independence. As you know, they came here to Uganda. I was lucky when the President of Uganda sent me to South Africa to meet President F.W. de Klerk then in Pretoria, and President F.W. de Klerk sent a message to President Museveni that what they had started, which resulted into the unconditional release of Nelson Mandela, was irreversible. I was so happy. 

This was a great man who I admired and adored and I met, and in a way I was involved in his subsequent release in 1990. Therefore, I agree with hon. Dombo that we should not mix up issues to bring anything negative about this great man -(Interjections)- Let us not compare this great man in a negative way - 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: There are so many positive things to talk about and to learn from. We should learn a lesson, both on this side and –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, we are dealing with a very respectable man; please, respect Nelson Mandela.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: That is the point, Madam Speaker. The Opposition has a lot to learn from the late President Mandela. You have to be human. We should not turn opposition into hatred; he did not. He suffered a lot – 27 years in prison - but he was reconciliatory, he was forgiving. He did not talk about revenge.

You are talking about the four or five Presidents of America traveling together; who knows, maybe they asked for a lift. (Laughter) Can you ask for a lift? Can the Opposition ask for a lift? So, we have a lot to learn. Let us not compare. You are comparing President Mandela ruling for only five years and having stayed in prison for 27 years to President Museveni being in the bush for five years and ruling for more than 27 years. But President Mandela was 75 years when he took power and President Museveni was only 42 –(Member timed out.)

4.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for letting me join the rest of the world to pay tribute to a true son of Africa, a champion of human dignity, an embodiment of social justice and dignity of persons. 

We want to pay tribute to President Nelson Mandela for his role in bringing to an end the apartheid in South Africa without seeking to become greater than the ANC and without seeking to become greater than South Africa. In celebrating his life, we would like to ask of ourselves, particularly African leaders, to learn tolerance and to unlearn violence. 

Today, we are talking about Africa, a continent which is in pain because of her sons - gladly, Madam Speaker, there are not many daughters. Africa is in pain with her many sons who have become bigger than Africa itself. They have become bigger than the nations that they are leading. They have become extremely intolerant and in most cases extremely corrupt. President Nelson Mandela has died a very simple man, living a very simple life. How I wish that we can learn that from his legacy. President Nelson Mandela is someone that all of us, particularly leaders, should emulate. I think he is to be read like a book and I think from him, we should draw a lot of inspiration. 

I get back to my country and I ask, “What is it that makes it too difficult in Uganda for us to talk, for example?” President Nelson Mandela talked to the oppressors; he talked to them and even learnt their language. He said, “If you needed to understand how to deal with the situation, you must learn their language.” If he could do that, what is so hard in Uganda that we must oppress each other to a level where you and I, Ugandans born of relatives, in-laws or friends from the same villages, cannot sit down and talk about the common destiny of our country? 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that in Africa, even when the world has lost a great son, I think that his legacy will live forever and ever. I want to say, fare thee well Madiba. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.17
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is truly an honour to be able to pay tribute to a great son of Africa. Madiba in his lifetime was able to bring great honour to Africa. Though Madiba at a younger age had to face difficult challenges, the end of his life is something for which I do not grieve but I give thanks for all that he has given us. 

I am grateful to say that in his interaction with the Uganda’s People Congress in the late 50s and up to the early 60s, he asked for one thing only, and that was passports for the ANC cadres to be able to go to eastern Europe at that time to receive all sorts of training, not strictly military training. The UPC Government after independence was able to fulfil that request, but he went further to put Uganda among the frontline nations for the liberation of Africa. (Applause)

What many people do not realise is that the era of leaders in the late 50s and early 60s could not accept that Africa could really consider herself independent when parts of Africa were still under oppression. Today, we have a problem of suffering of our people. Much of the inequality which the ANC stood for remains to be addressed by future generations. As those generations, Madiba has left the tag of making the reality of independence and liberation to translate into the wellbeing of people’s livelihoods. 

Madiba did a lot to ease the tension throughout the whole of Southern Africa. The independence of Namibia and the opening up of Southern Africa hinged very heavily on the life of Madiba. He rose to that challenge and gave South Africa the opportunity to move as one nation; not to look at themselves as separate nations or different peoples but one nation sharing one common destiny of a united democratic South Africa –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to say something about what hon. Akena talked about - President Mandela’s first conviction was to leave the country illegally because Africans were not supposed to travel. You can imagine! 

4.20
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me the opportunity to talk about this great man. This great Pan Africanist means a great deal, so much so that even if I died hereafter, I would die well. (Laughter) I, therefore, bring condolences from the people of Rubaga South to the people of Uganda and the people of South Africa. 

Madam Speaker, the cause of liberating South Africa taken over by Nelson Mandela will remain a political spot in the history of the black continent. I had the opportunity to meet Nelson Mandela when I was Vice-President of Global International, an organisation on environment in relation to legislators, in Cape Town. I saw a humble man, a polite man, an organised man, a man of love and joy, a man of character and sentiment and a man of passion. 

Madam Speaker, on many occasions when I remember the dead, I refer to the sonnets of William Shakespeare and Bernard Shaw’s Murder in the Cathedral. On this particular occasion, I would like you to look at my own poem which I have generated, and it goes as follows:

Madiba Mandela, Rolihlahla Mandela 

The night was clumsy,
The doves never croaked,
The kites were on strike 
When the news spread 
That Mandela had vanished. 

When Mandela launched the struggle for freedom,
This is what he said: 
There is no passion to be found playing small; 
To be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains 
But to live in a way that respects the freedom of others. 

Mandela was a hero beyond heroes. 
He was a liberator of character, 
A fountain of racial harmony, 
A mobiliser of action, 
A political animal of skill 
And above all, a unique species of mankind. 

To the citizens of South Africa, 
We praise you for nurturing Mandela. 
Do not mourn him in despair; 
Mourn him in style, 
Mourn him with hope. 

To the citizens of Uganda, 
You are a great friend of Mandela, 
Understand the history of Luweero 
As Mandela understood the history of apartheid, 
Understand the struggle in Luweero 
And Mandela will be happy. 

We praise you on many fronts. 
Through Madiba Mandela, 
You have generated music, 
Lasting music, 
Capable of nursing Africa’s wounds; 
Listen to the lyrics of Miriam Makeba, 
Brenda Fassie, 
Yvonne Chaka Chaka. 

When divine providence summons us, 
We should be near Mandela –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

When divine providence summons us, 
We should be near Mandela, 
He will keep us united 
In preparation for paradise. 
Madiba Mandela, Nelson Mandela, Rolihlahla Mandela. 

Wumustula Mirestembe Mandestela. (Laughter)

4.25
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to join my colleagues, the South Africans, the whole of Africa and the world in paying tribute to our fallen great leader of Africa. 

I was surprised while listening to one of the African television stations and they were reporting about Mandela’s orphanage as one of those orphanages which always receives money from people who hear about it. They reported that the orphanage receives even more money than they budget for. That surprised me, but I believe that is done only to good people. It is being done because everybody knew Mandela as a faithful person, as a person who stood by the poor and the suffering. So, we need to emulate that great man. 

As Africans and Ugandans, we need to look far. We shall miss him but it is very good that God gave Mandela such a long life - 95 years is not short. So, we saw a lot of things come out of Mandela. It is a great opportunity to see that Africa produced such a person whom the whole world is mourning. We are proud of South Africa, the people who produced Mandela for us. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that if all of us, leaders, could emulate that heart of being there for our people, our people would be as happy and proud as the South Africans have been of Mandela. I hope that all of us, leaders in this country, will appreciate what is good and shun what is bad instead of condemning the good that we can see with our eyes. Some of us are unfortunate because we always close our eyes and do not give honour where honour is due and say, “No” where we need to. I pray that we co-operate and emulate Mandela’s example so that we can be able to make Uganda shine. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.28
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about Nelson Mandela. 

We have lost a great man of Africa and a great man of this world. Nelson Mandela was a special man. Right from the time he was born and throughout his youth, he sacrificed himself for the freedom of the people of South Africa. At a young age, he joined ANC to liberate the people of South Africa. Regardless of the fears and threats of the developed world, he continued to work for the freedom of the people of South Africa to the extent of being convicted to death. However, because God knew he had to liberate the people of South Africa, he was not killed and instead he was committed to life imprisonment. 

Staying in prison for 27 years is not a simple thing. A child would be born and married and produce children while you are still in prison. However, God knew he was going to liberate South Africa, so he came out of prison and he came out triumphantly. The whole world was excited when he was freed and he did not abandon his mission until South Africa was liberated. 

Madam Speaker, we, African leaders, should emulate Nelson Mandela. He sacrificed his life and all the happiness of this world for the sake of his people. God rewarded Nelson Mandela abundantly; despite all his suffering and all the hardship, he lived up to 95 years, which is very rare these days in Africa. That is a blessing given to him by God. He also died a very peaceful death; he did not die in a motor accident or a slow painful death. This is because of his great deeds. So if you want to live long, work like Mandela –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, by the time he was sentenced to that long imprisonment, he was already serving a sentence of five years; so it was more than 27 years. He came from prison to stand trial. So add the five years to the 27 years. 

4.31
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to the former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela. 

Both the old and young have something to say about the late Mandela. For all the 95 years he lived, he has been doing the right things. That is why those who were born just 15 or 10 years ago still have something to say about Mandela. That is why even up to now, he directed us to follow his vision. Since people started paying tribute here, they have been talking about peace, unity and no revenge and that was Mandela’s vision. He has directed us to follow it even after he has gone. Therefore, we are still fulfilling his vision and we are making sure that we achieve it.

Madam Speaker, nobody believed that one day Africa would host the FIFA World Cup, but Mandela made sure that Africa did it. When he started debate, some people argued that Africa did not have the infrastructure but because Mandela wanted to put the whole of Africa on the world map and to show the other races that Africans could do what others had done, he made sure that South Africa hosted the World Cup and that it was the pride of the whole of the African continent. Even here in Uganda, everywhere people were singing, “We go to South Africa.” This is something we did not think of doing when other countries were hosting the World Cup. That was one of the contributions of the late Mandela.

Madam Speaker, there is another lesson we could learn from Mandela; when he started the fight for independence, he always talked about freedom for the blacks. However, during his imprisonment, he began to change his attitude; he began to talk about humanity, no longer race. He said, “We must have equal rights both for the blacks and the whites.” –(Member timed out_)

4.35
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the motion. I also thank the former Leader of the Opposition, through the Speaker, for having sent his voice – (Laughter) – You know, this is a historic event because it is the first time I have heard about a former Member of Parliament sending a letter and it is read. This is an experience I can gain from.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. There is what we call universal law, ethical behaviour and ethical struggles. The former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela, has shown to the world that unless you behave ethically, nothing good can come out from what you do and people call it humanity.

Today, we are sending words of condolence to the people of South Africa and to the whole world. Some people write laws just to justify the actions that are already in place but Mandela was not like that. If greed and pride become part of someone, especially those who surround a leader, freedom will die immediately. I thank God that Mandela was a man who was not greedy or proud. He showed the whole world that we need to build a peaceful world so that we can see the likeness of God in fellow man.

Madam Speaker, revolutionaries can stand on the aspect of faith but Mandela chose not to form – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Muwuma comes up, I want to educate hon. Okot that when we lose people even here, messages come from outside Parliament and we read them. Even when Members come, like “Fifteen Point Programme” who is sitting there, we announce them. Please, do not repeat that statement because it is uncivilised.

4.38
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kigulu South and on my own behalf, I join the entire world in celebrating the life of the late Nelson Mandela. 

Madam Speaker, every 16th of June, we celebrate the Day of the African Child. Very few people have taken time to find out how this day came to be. In 1976, the youth who were opposing the inferior education system that was being given to the blacks were murdered in broad daylight. Nelson Mandela sent a message to the youth who had survived; he said, “Please, keep up the spirit because you are fighting for the right cause.” In 1991, when he had just left prison, he lobbied the presidents who were attending the OAU Summit and they recognised this day on the African continent as the Day of the African Child. 

He did not stop at that. Having become an orphan at nine years old and adopted by a chief who had been installed by his late father, he put up an orphanage. He did this in remembrance of his background. There is something else I wish to raise about this, and that is the issue of amending the adoption and guardianship law of Uganda. This law is obsolete and we have demanded that the Ministry of Gender comes up with proposals to ensure that our children being trafficked are saved from those bandits but nothing has come to pass. Madam Speaker, I want to propose that we urge Government to ensure that something is done about the adoption law. 

I got an opportunity to visit the Robben Island prison in Cape Town some three years ago. This prison has been turned into a tourist attraction, but in Uganda whatever we have is being sold off or destroyed. Why can’t we develop the culture of preserving some of these sites to act as tourist sites? 

Madam Speaker, I convey my condolences to the people of South Africa, all the Africans and the entire world as we mourn the passing of such a great leader of Africa. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.42
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to Nelson Mandela Madiba, a man for whom more than two-thirds of world leaders have gathered in South Africa for his memorial; a man for whom all national flags in the world are flying at half-mast; a man who is making all national parliaments sit to mourn him.

Nelson Mandela has been very difficult to explain and that is why the UN Secretary-General referred to him as a unique human being. He said he was a man who was not overpowered by racial, political or economic discrimination and injustice in his country. Nelson Mandela did risk his life in order to improve the lives of others - all other countries neighbouring South Africa including Northern Rhodesia (Zambia) and Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), Mozambique and Angola which had all been living under the yoke of apartheid and colonialism. 

Madam Speaker, as a country we should seize this opportunity to emulate what Mandela has demonstrated, and that is tolerance. Tolerance is an attribute that is key to achieving development of a country. The world has spoken. The whole globe has said that Nelson Mandela has left a significant mark for the sake of giving humanity dignity. We need, if we want to ensure that Mandela has not died in vain, to ensure that we pursue policies that will pacify our countries. We need to pursue policies that will keep our peoples of different races, tribes, religions, political affiliations working together for the sake of making our countries good places where our citizens can live in happiness. 

There has been a lot of praise for Nelson Mandela but he did not take leadership as a pleasure- (Member timed out.)

4.46
MRS LOWILA C.D OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are paying tribute to a great man and there is quite a lot to learn from his life as many have been saying. 

I want to talk about the issue of sacrifice. Recently, some two young men were discussing and one said, “In economics, it is said increasing future consumption demands sacrificing current consumption” and the other asked, “Why should I sacrifice what I should enjoy now for others?” Generally, sacrificing is not an easy thing for many of us, to an extent of failing to sacrifice even very small things. I want to say there are many families that have fallen apart because of failure to sacrifice even very small things. Here is a man who sacrificed his freedom and his enjoyment and his life for the freedom of others. So, Mandela was really a great man.

One of Mandela’s statements keeps ringing in my mind: “…a struggle for which I am prepared to die.” This keeps ringing in my mind every now and then. He was a gift not only to South Africa but to Africa and to the whole world. He was a striking man, and I want to thank God for making him who he was because he was striking not only in character but even in physical appearance. I thank God for the life of Nelson Mandela and may God rest his soul in eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.48
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for according us the opportunity to pay tribute to this great human being who happened to be an African. As the world has celebrated saints, prophets and great leaders, Africa has been silent. I think we did not have a network. Thank God for Mandela; he created that network that the whole world would read and hear the signal. Africa has been connected to the worldwide network or web of saints and great leaders. We are proud that through Madiba, the whole world has got to know that Africa can produce great minds.  

When we sit here, we should not just be thinking about Madiba because he has ran his race and he has done his work; the question for us to ponder would be: Are we in any way trying to do a bit of what he has done or are we trying to just talk about him and after he is buried, we continue from where we stopped with our fights - business as usual? I think we should not mock the memory of Mandela by speaking vain words knowing that we do not mean them. I hope when we speak, we speak with our minds and with our hearts and with the respect that the whole world has given this great soul. 

I did not understand the first passport I saw - my father’s passport – because it had, “All countries except South Africa.” I think that is the first time my conscience was awakened to questioning, “why not South Africa?” I think that was a tribute. We need to thank our past governments for having done what was expected of them to support fellow Africans. I wonder, Madam Speaker, if the Pan-African spirit is still among us. I do not know if we still have it. I hope that as Mandela is being mourned and celebrated, as Ugandans we borrow a leaf to learn a little of forgiveness because I think we have embraced hate full throttle. (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to pay tribute to a great man, Nelson Mandela. One can take time to find proper words to use to accommodate our appreciation of the leadership of Mandela. He used the formula of “others, my family and I,” instead of “me, my family and others.” This has been a challenge to many leaders of Africa. 

He was so tolerant to live all those years in prison and when he came out of prison, he became a great leader. He had many chances of revenging but he never did. He was exemplary, not only to the leaders of Africa but to the world at large. His contribution to the development of his country and other countries will always be remembered. 

I would like to request all leaders of Africa to become Mandela, to walk Mandela and to administer their countries like Mandela. There are a lot of things to learn from him. We pray for his eternal life, until we meet in heaven. Long live Mandela. 

4.53
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would love to use the late Mandela’s life to reflect on Uganda. 

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission that he instituted after he became President is one of the reasons that the country healed. In our own country here, when elections are approaching, you see all the television channels, most especially UBC, airing memories of war. That is the time when the country is assured that,“if we do not win this election, this is what will happen to this country”, and you will see the skulls in Luweero, the cut lips in northern Uganda, the atrocities that the ADF committed in western Uganda being shown. Such is the country that we live in. 

After 27 years in prison, here came a man to say, “look, it is immoral to discriminate based and premised on colour” but here in our country, Madam Speaker, you even want to institutionalise war as a way of capturing the ordinary people’s minds to continue to stay in power. Nelson Mandela - long live - made it very clear that when you stay in power longer than you must, against the people’s will, you are immoral. Unfortunately, we have leaders who do not want to listen. What do they do? They cling on to power premised on the psych of war. How unfortunate! 

Today, the whole world leadership is gathered in South Africa. My prayer is that those who have even used our aviation fuel, used Ugandan taxpayers’ money, will come back with the mind-set of the person who led this country like a nobody. 

Madam Speaker, I had an opportunity to visit South Africa and in particular where Madiba’s comrades were chained, the Hector Pieterson Memorial and Museum and also to be in Atlanta to see what happened to the black people during the times of slavery. In this country today, unless we get a country that is ready to reconcile – 

At this material time, therefore, I want to implore Government to bring into place a peace and reconciliation commission. Let us look at these atrocities, let us reconcile and let us look at who did what where. It is so painful that year in year out, somebody will say, “we do not have electricity because of the Sixth Parliament” or say, “because Amin was here”. It is 27 years and he is talking about one person! What kind of person –(Member timed out.) 

4.56
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me speak to this motion. As I begin, I want to state that although the late Nelson Mandela has not gone too soon, he has gone too sweet. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the late Mandela leaves behind a very big question. I am a good Christian and in the Bible we read about the Pharisees who killed Jesus. In that context of the Bible, the Pharisees are not a tribe, but anyone could have killed Jesus elsewhere even today. Each of us, therefore, must answer this question: If the Mandela of Transkei had been a Ugandan born in Gayaza or along that road and Luzira here was the Robben Island of South Africa, where would you have been happy for Mandela to be? 

Madam Speaker, Nelson Mandela defeated the two most dangerous diseases that are either eating or have eaten most of the leaders of Africa. The first one is discrimination in all its forms, including racism, nepotism, etc. The other one is dictatorship. I have extensively read about Nelson Mandela ever since he was pronounced dead. In Mandela, I have found a very priceless piece of an African politician. He was a fighter who never fought for himself, for his tribe or even for his family but for his country. May God accord him eternal peace. Thank you.   

4.59
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you profusely, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to eulogise a great African man. 

The greatest of statesmen have converged in South Africa since the death of Nelson Mandela. They saw with their own eyes the greatness of God’s handiwork - how God can mould a man taken to prison and set him free to liberate not only a country but the whole world, the whole of humanity, and give them a new benchmark for thinking about internationalism and this idea of talking about the world as a small village. 

We have heard it all; great men have said it all, and if I tried to eulogise Mandela my voice would drown in the wilderness and the depth of the wisdom of great men like Obama. However, all I shall say is that the people of the world, and we are part of that, are only left with one thing, and that one thing is to search our souls and see where we fit in the melodrama of what Nelson Mandela has left. Those of us who lived through the 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s and now the 2000s have seen the world transform itself. 

Madam Speaker, the greatest thing that Mandela has left as a legacy is the word of Jesus Christ, the word of love. I cherish the time when Mandela had a polite disagreement with his successor, Thabo Mbeki.They disagreed on how to handle AIDS in South Africa and when there was no common ground, Mandela politely said, “I agree. You are my President; I can say no more”. When the question of morality was at the forefront between him and Desmond Tutu, Mandela politely succumbed – (Member timed out.)

5.03
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for this great opportunity given to us, leaders of Uganda, to reflect on how we are moving compared with the late Nelson Mandela. I think it is not good for us to point accusing fingers at other people before we point fingers at ourselves. 

Nelson Mandela was very simple; he lived a life of simplicity. He was not too ambitious. He sacrificed his life for people’s freedom. How about you and me? Today, we are reflecting on his life. Well, the spirit in which we take this will determine how we are going to move tomorrow. 

On Saturday, we debated on this issue on radio in Gulu and we heard a lot from the people. We cannot run away from what we are doing now - accumulating wealth through corrupt tendencies. This is not what Nelson Mandela did. What are we going to do as Ugandans to remember this great man, not only of South Africa or Africa but of the world at large? I think we should continue remembering Nelson Mandela. People who do research can be helpful here. We need to have maybe a big centre in Uganda, or a road which is very central in Uganda or something else that is central named after Mandela. For us in the North, we could even change the name of the Northern Uganda Youth Centre to the Nelson Mandela Youth Centre. This is for all of us to think about. 

If we could all think about the legacy Nelson Mandela has left in the world – He left office in 1999 and after 14 years, he is still the greatest man with great honour. Very many presidents and former presidents of the world and great people of the world are paying tribute to him. I have never seen this in my life; this is the first of its kind. Can we also consider becoming great in our communities or in our districts the way Nelson Mandela has been great in the world? Let us reflect on our lives. 

To Nelson Mandela, we say that you have lived your life and you will continue to live on. Fare thee well. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to join the rest of Ugandans, the people of the world and the people of South Africa to mourn a great man, to mourn a martyr, to mourn an icon and to mourn a hero. 

When I sat there, I kept reflecting and looking at all those people seated in Johannesburg mourning Mandela. I kept wondering and looking at some of these African leaders and asking myself this question: What have they learnt from this man called Madiba? What can be learnt from a man who gave all his life to fight for the dignity of the black man?

Madam Speaker, I lived in Europe and to explain what the black race is in those countries, Mandela comes to mind. He struggled for the recognition of the black race. Africans in South Africa were treated as dogs. You would not step anywhere near a hotel for white people. Mandela fought for that. For 27 years, this man suffered. He could have died in power, but he handed over power simply because he was not a selfish man. He never sought revenge. He fought for democracy and he handed over power. What have these Africans leant from Mandela, those who are seated there crying crocodile tears because they are doing the opposite of what Mandela did? 

I see medals being given around here and they call people heroes; what type of heroes are they? I rejected one which was supposed to be given to Wamai on Labour Day when Ugandans are suffering. I said, “No, I am not going to accept that medal”. These are people who have given up their lives for others. When I see our country importing those vehicles that used to torment Africans in South Africa, which used to harass our brothers, and those vehicles are now here tear-gassing Ugandans, what a terrible thing. What a legacy Mandela is leaving for Africans. 

Mandela brings memories of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, a man who handed over power. So when these people sit there –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU	(FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the few Ugandans who had the privilege to interface with Mandela. I had a two-hour conversation with him in 1990, when he had just come out of prison, at the Nile Hotel. 

At that time, I was a very radical person. I was a journalist and I went to interview him. I had a background of socialism, so I went to meet this man who had fought all his life for his people. Things like land and white oppression were very paramount. He was with this former wife, Winnie Mandela. I was expecting to see a man who talked tough. I thought he would say that when he comes to power, he would deal with the white oppressors and redistribute the land so that the black people can get real independence. 

At the end of the interview and subsequent conversations, I changed; I was humbled. Mandela was totally different from what I expected. He said that South Africans are South Africans, including the white people. He said that land belonged to all of them and the country belonged to all of them. He questioned what one would gain if they used “an eye for an eye” and we know what Mandela eventually did. 

The whole world was worried, especially Europe and America, that black people were taking over South Africa and were going to drive out white people from that country and the economy would go down.That never happened. Mandela did this at the cost of his popularity in some quarters in South Africa, even from among the black revolutionaries. But this was a man who lived his idea, who lived his vision and he practised what he preached. There are not many leaders in our continent who live their idea and vision and practice what they preach, including in our country.

This afternoon, I heard President Obama thanking the South Africans for agreeing to share Mandela with them in America. To share Mandela, the idea, the philosopher – Mandela has been abundant for us, Africans. The South African people also agreed to share Mandela with us. Have we shared Mandela? (Member timed out.)

5.13
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much. On my own behalf and on the behalf of the people of Obongi that represent here, I would like to send condolences to the people of South Africa, Uganda and Africa at large for this loss of a great leader.

Much has already been said about the good Mandela did. I would not want to take that line. I would like to take the line of the Mandela legacy and the issues that he stood for - why he fought. There was a problem of oppression of the weak by the strong – discrimination – and these problems are still here.  The world still has similar problems like the ones Mandela fought against. The legacy of Mandela will be maintained if we make the world a better place to live in. 

I would, therefore, like to implore the great leaders who are in South Africa to proceed from South Africa to Israel and Palestine to celebrate a situation similar to the one we are celebrating today. The peoples of Palestine and Israel have a problem. The solution to their problem is the two-state solution supported by the United Nations. The hearts of the Israelites and the Palestinians should be touched by the Mandela experience. 

We would also like to apply the Mandela example to the youth. I ask the youth of Obongi and of Uganda not to just look at the life of Mandela today when he is a celebrity. They should look at the life of Mandela when he was struggling. He was good even before he entered prison but he was even better after he came out of prison. 

The youth league of the ANC was founded on 10 September 1944 by Ashley Peter Mda, Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo, who were youth leaders. They joined the struggle, which was started much earlier by elders. What are you doing as the youth of Uganda? You can start a process or you can become part of a process and end up as great as Nelson Mandela. Follow that example.

We, the people of Uganda, should also remember those leaders of the ANC who came before Nelson Mandela. We should remember all the presidents of ANC from 1912, from John Langalibalele up to the current President, Jacob Zuma. They all contributed to the success of the ANC and to the glory of Mandela, whom we are celebrating today. It has never been easy for all of them. They were prevented from travelling around the world and that is why they were made to come and borrow passports from Uganda and from other countries. I thank the countries that supported them.

Madam Speaker, on a very painful note, and this is a message to America and to my brother President Obama, until 2008 Nelson Mandela was considered a terrorist. The ANC was considered one of the terrorist organisations by America. I conclude by saying that the power of the USA should never be used unjustly to support and oppress people around the world. Today, you swallow your words – (Member timed out.)

5.17
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a word or two as we pay tribute to our fallen and gallant hero. I rise well aware that I really do not have all the words and maybe all of us put together may not have all the words to express and represent the life and legacy of the fallen Nelson Mandela. 

Conscious of that, I will therefore pick one virtue that a number of people have hinted on. Nelson Mandela was a man who had a deeply entrenched belief in unity. This could be seen through his commitment to reconciliation and forgiveness. It has been said here that the late Nelson Mandela was imprisoned for 27 years. Imagine the pain of being in jail for 27 years and also the pain of being confined in jail when the people for whom you are struggling are being harassed, tortured and killed. One would have thought that the first thing he would do when he came out would be to revenge but he did not. 

It is, therefore, in light of this that I would urge us all - Government, Parliament, political parties, individuals and families - to value and believe in reconciliation and forgiveness. We should not tear each other apart. It is in light of that that I want to agree with my sister, hon. Nabilah Naggayi; what we say should be what we believe and what we should practice if we are to remember the fallen hero.

Finally, I want to disagree with my senior, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi; I also do not want to die now and say I will die happy –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): I thank you so much. Like the rest of my colleagues, I also want to pay tribute to the fallen hero and mourn with the rest of the world. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to draw a few lessons for us to ponder on. One is the lesson on determination and courage, especially when fighting for a justified social cause. We all know that apartheid was institutionalised in 1948 when Afrikaner nationalism was sweeping through South Africa under the rule of Dr Malan. Nelson Mandela immediately came up to challenge apartheid and the then government came up with a number of repressive laws and sanctions. One, he was deemed to be a communist and the then government came up with the Suppression of Communism Act, but that did not deter him. 

Later, they came up with the Public Safety Act that for six months banned him from talking to more than one person. Still, that did not bar him. 

In 1956, he was banned from public appearances and restricted to Johannesburg for five years. Also that did not deter him. In 1960, ANC and the Pan African Congress were banned. On 11 July 1963, when he was tried, he gave a four-hour speech, inspired by Fidel Castro’s speech, History Will Absolve Me. This was a man who was on trial but had the guts and the energy to give such a speech and tell the whole world that history would absolve him. 

On Robben Island, he was humiliated as a Class D prisoner, which is the lowest grade. He would only be allowed a visit once in six months. In 1985, President Botha offered him release from prison on condition that he unconditionally rejected violence as a political weapon. He refused and said, “What freedom am I being offered while the organisation of the people remains banned? Only free men can negotiate. A prisoner cannot enter into contracts.”

Another lesson I would want to draw from Mandela is that of reconciliation. Several people have talked about this. Reconciliation became his first mandate. He saw national reconciliation as the primary task of his presidency. He assured the white population of their protection and those in the civil service of the safety of their jobs, even though this drew internal criticism from within the ANC. 

He personally met his tormentors – everybody has said this, but I want to specifically point out Percy Yutar. Percy Yutar was his chief prosecutor at the Rivonia trial and he is the one who pressed for a death sentence. (Member timed out)

5.24
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, South Africa and the whole world are mourning and celebrating the life of the first black President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela. I thank you for putting aside today to eulogise him.

Madam Speaker, many have already talked about the attributes of Nelson Mandela. All of us remember Mandela as a selfless person who loved mankind irrespective of race, colour or religion. He believed in reconciliation, forgiveness, freedom, peace, human dignity and of course, equality for all.

I would like to thank the Frontline States like Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia among others, which fought tirelessly to see that Azania - now South Africa - and South Rhodesia - now Zimbabwe - were free from oppression of the colonialists. I would like to particularly thank the late Presidents of Uganda, Milton Obote and Idi Amin, and the current President, Yoweri Museveni, for their contribution to the liberation struggle of South Africa. 

I recall that Obote was overthrown on 25 January 1971 while attending a Commonwealth conference in Singapore. By that time, Obote had been elected as the spokesperson of the Frontline States. Because of his attack on the British government then, headed by Edward Heath, Heath said, “We shall see if some of you will go back to your countries as President.” So, Madam Speaker, Dr Obote lost his first presidency because Uganda was a committed supporter of the liberation of South Africa.

Madam Speaker, the light of the icon of Africa has burnt out but he will be remembered forever. May his soul rest in peace.

5.27
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to pay my respects to a fallen colossus. Nelson Mandela truly touched every life in this world. This is exemplified by the fact that I have been receiving messages of condolence even from my rural constituency of Kalaki.

I had the rare privilege of meeting Mandela on 24 July 1997 just after I had graduated from law school. I had been seconded on a special assignment to work for the ANC by Boston College Law School. I met Nelson Mandela, not by prior arrangement; I was going to the parliamentary library and when I was walking along a corridor with a German student, we met Nelson Mandela, the leader of South Africa, unaccompanied by security men and with no fanfare. He was just walking there with two men in suits. I could not believe that this was the man on whom the fate of South Africa hung walking alone in such a setting. I thought of some of the world leaders who move around and what they do to keep the public away from them. (Laughter)

Nelson Mandela was a great man. When he announced in 1999 that he was going to step down from power, I asked a Member of Parliament from the Western Cape, who was my supervisor, why Mandela was doing this. He told me that it was his greatest gift to the South Africans. Everybody was concerned about what would happen when Mandela died or after he left office. He was, therefore, at pains to leave office when he was still alive in order to reassure all the South Africans that even after Mandela, South Africa would continue to exist. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I cannot call Mandela a hero - I cannot - because that would be to debase his legacy, especially in this day and age when heroism, like my brother Wamanga-Wamai said, has become a licence for self-aggrandizement and corruption. I cannot bring him down to that level – (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use half a minute to conclude.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, permit me to wind up by saying that Nelson Mandela is more than just a hero. We remember heroes once every year but Nelson Mandela is a legend and legends live forever. 

Mandela once said, “I am not a saint, unless you think of a saint as a sinner who keeps on trying.” My message to us, Ugandans who hold positions that enable us to make decisions that affect other people’s lives, is this: It is not too late for us to begin trying. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

5.32
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bugungu-Buliisa and the Bunyoro Kingdom, I join the world and the over 90 leaders of the world in mourning a saint who has lived to the biblical age of the 90s. Over 90 leaders are mourning the passing of a man in his 90s, and they are mourning him because of his legendary legacy. 

Honourable colleagues, let us speak to ourselves. You are not what you say you are when you are in power; you are what they will say about you when you have left power. It is not about how you start; it is about how you finish. Heroism is about finishing and completing. You can start out a hero and you end up a villain. I want to thank Mzee Mandela for finishing his job - a race well run - and for remaining a hero up to the end. 

There are many lessons in this for my country, Uganda. We should also first thank the apartheid regime, F.W. de Klerk in particular because it would have been bloody if he had chosen to use arms against our black people. So, we should also congratulate them for having accepted this at the last moment. 

Why am I saying this? I am saying this because being principled does not mean you have to be a hardliner. Mandela was not a hardliner. He was principled but he was willing to conform according to the situation. That is why he went to prison fighting for the blacks but ended up fighting for humanity. That is why he accepted to protect the investments of the whites even when they had tormented him. That is why he accepted not to revenge against his tormenters. For us here, our Luweero heroes are fighting each other. 

What do we learn from this? I hope we are mourning Mandela as we take lessons back home that we can actually reconcile. Mandela made Africa and the black race proud. He was the conqueror of racism, the conqueror of apartheid and the conqueror of oppression; you can even add slavery if you want. 

Mandela stood for co-existence and for tolerance. That is why people are now getting worried. When President Zuma came in, people thought he was going to be a hardliner- (Member timed out_)

5.35
DR MEDARD BITEKEYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for choosing this day as a special one for honouring this great son of Africa. When Jesus was dying he said, “Do not cry for me. Cry for yourselves.” I want to join the rest of the world and this Parliament to mourn this great son of Africa. 

All of the people who have talked said that this man was a very good man and he has left a legacy. Our problem is, what legacy are we going to leave when we die - all of us this side and that side? A man who can serve five years as president of a country when he has been in prison for 27 years - 32 years now - I cannot believe it! This is a paradox. This man has got a rare genetic composition. He is not normal. This is not a usual person to joke around with. 

Madam Speaker, for any person who wants to say he or she loves Mandela, it is very simple - walk like him and act like him and this world will be a very wonderful place to live in. I hope that all the presidents who have gone to pay tribute to this man will come back changed people. That is my humble prayer. I pray that people will not tell us how they have spent too much time here and there but they will come back like Mandelas.

I was in Mozambique way back in 2005 when I was trying to escape from Uganda to look for a job as a doctor somewhere. I bumped into this man’s house that was adjacent to the late Samora Machel’s house, which was not guarded at all and he was in. I wanted to go in and see him but it was very difficult because I did not know Portuguese, but he was there and the house was very simple. It was like Dr Obote when he was still here. 

Can we lead simple lives, Rt Hon. Speaker, like the way you lead your life? (Applause) Can we be simple like some of you are simple to us? Some of us are too complicated for even our neighbours. Can we be like Mandela? There are some people even here in this House whom you cannot see anyhow; they are very complicated. But Mandela, a very big man in his country, would be seen by even a man like Wafula Oguttu here. You cannot believe it. 

There is a saying that when a man dies, he is not thanked or gauged by how much food he has eaten but he will be gauged and thanked based on what he has left behind. Mandela has left behind a legacy. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

5.38
MS JOVAH KAMETEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is right and proper that on this day when the whole world commemorates the International Day of Human Rights, this Parliament joins the people of South Africa and the whole world to honour a great man who gave his own life for the freedom and rights of others. 

I agree with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that Madiba was a role model for democracy and demonstrated politics of truth, forgiveness and reconciliation. We all strive to gain recognition but we forget that when we commit ourselves to doing good, the honours will come without us asking. So many of Mandela’s saintly qualities have been enumerated but these became apparent in the course of performing his total commitment- a cause for which he was ready to die. 

To me the challenge is: what am I committed to that I am ready to die for and which, while I am performing, will bring out my hidden qualities and make them shine? He had a vision and a commitment to see it realised. That is why he did the impossible - forgiving his adversaries and reconciling with them. It is a deliberate decision that he took and everything that anybody will say about Madiba will present a tall order for those who are leaders today to follow. 

If we take away nothing from Madiba’s life, at least we should take away his commitment to do good, his humility and compassion. So, I would charge all of us to go out there and sensitise our people about their rights and also their duties and obligations to one another and to the state, so that we can have a peaceful world, a world that Madiba fought for. As we do this, we should lead by example. Madiba indeed will remain Africa’s shining star and the world’s icon of peace and reconciliation. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like, without taking away anything from Madiba, to pay special tribute to the two mighty women of valour who stood by Madiba’s side and helped shape his legacy. Madiba fought a good fight and he finished the race. May his soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we should pay tribute to three women; there was Evelyn, Winnie and Graca.

5.41
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I would have spoken first since I share a name with Nelson Mandela. (Laughter) First of all, my father liked Nelson Mandela and hence my name, which came some few years after he was jailed in Robben Island. I did not get a chance to ask my father why he liked him because he passed away so many years ago. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I have shared part of his pain. You know what happens when you share a name with somebody. My voters many times have called me. Just a few days ago, somebody called me and asked, “Is it true that you have died? (Laughter) I told him that it is true I am dead but I can speak. 

Every other day when Mandela was taken back to hospital, our people could not internalise or listen to details to find out whether it is Nelson of South Africa. As long as they heard the name “Mandela”, they began calling in asking, “What is happening to the guy we just voted?” So, that is the situation I have lived with. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I want to thank God since Nelson Mandela’s death has happened in positive circumstances. Just imagine if he had died from prison at Robben Island, the situation would have been very terrible. People’s minds would be tortured and others would continue to be molested because of what would have happened to Nelson Mandela. 

Madam Speaker, Nelson Mandela emulated Prophet Amos in the Holy Bible - I am a Christian - whose message was recorded at length. Amos saw that prosperity was limited to the wealthy who fed on injustice and oppression of the poor. 

Mandela has been a great man. He served for only one term, which surprised many leaders across the world. He emphasised that leadership was a service that went beyond self. He must have achieved – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You used your time on other things okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MR MANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was trying to emphasise that he must have achieved his set goals. There are very few people in this world, perhaps those chosen by God, who take the decision to sacrifice their lives for the oppressed maybe through armed struggle, the press, etc. 

Uganda also had many decades of injustice and oppression was at its peak. President Museveni acted like Mandela by sacrificing his life and family to keep in the jungles amidst poisonous snakes, wild animals and bullets. Mandela, rest in peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.46
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bunyole West, Butaleja District, I join my colleagues to pay tribute to the fallen son of Africa, Madiba Nelson Mandela. 

We have a lot to talk about the fallen President, the son of Africa, but I will highlight a few. We all remember that after his term of office as President of South Africa, he assumed the office of a high profile ambassador campaigning and advocating against HIV/AIDS. He stood by that so as to save the people of South Africa. We thank him for that great work done. Up to now, the people of South Africa cherish him so much and the entire people of Africa. He opened the doors of Africa and as we talk, all countries believe that Africans are also human beings.

Madam Speaker, he continued being a peace loving person and a peace negotiator in all African countries. He formed The Elders group, which is a group of global leaders which is now headed by Kofi Annan. This is great. This means the work of his hands will never go to waste. We need to urge all African leaders to continue with his struggle. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to also highlight what others have said about the fallen Mandela. The UK Prime Minister, David Cameron, said “A great light has gone out in the world.” This means he was far greater than all the leaders who have led countries in this continent. We thank him for that. 

Kofi Annan, the chairperson of The Elders group in Africa said, “The world has lost a clear moral compass”. We thank God for his effort to build that kind of person in Africa. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.50
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am so privileged, on behalf of the people of Ngora and all the great Pan Africanists, to speak about a loving man, a passionate man, a great pan Africanist, Nelson Mandela Madiba. 

In 2008, when I was serving in the African Youth Union during the Mo Ibhrahim Youth Mentorship Programme in Senegal, we met Nelson Mandela and Desmond Tutu as young leaders. He had this to tell us: “Often in addressing young people, I make the point that what counts in life is not the fact that we have lived; it is what difference we have made to the lives of others that will determine the significance of the life that we live.” 

Today, we mourn the loss of a mentor. He was a president who served just one term but he mentored so many, some of whom may not have even seen him. Thabo Mbeki said that when he had served his term and he still wanted to serve, President Mandela told him that leadership is a calling from God and the people. Mandela told him that, “once you have served your term, it means you have done your part and others can even do it a better way, so you could rest.” That is a leader, a true Mandela. 

His Excellency Nelson Mandela surprised South Africans; after serving 27 years in jail, having accomplished the fight and still on the wanted list, Mandela stood on a podium and said, “There are others who can do even better as President of South Africa”. As a country and as a continent, I think we have a lot to learn from this great man. 

To me, I think that he is next to Jesus, but I say this because I do not have any other words to say. Mandela has died at 95 years old and I am 30 years old, but I know that this will go down in the records; there will be no other man who will be talked about and praised like President Mandela. There are so many presidents who have died unnoticed. Recently, different presidents, who I would not want to mention, passed on in silence. 

We should recognise one thing about Nelson Mandela - he was a loving father and husband. When he was in jail for those 27 years, he kept writing very sweet letters to Winnie to encourage her and make her strong. How many of us can stay in a stable relationship while we are going through trying moments? I think we have a big lesson to learn as husbands and wives to our partners. 

I want to call upon all of you who are in the fertile age; if you get a baby girl or boy – I have just got one and I would not be ashamed to name him Mandela so that he will be a loving husband and father to his family. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.54
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE	(NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bungokho South, I would like to join my colleagues and the rest of the world to pay tribute to a fallen great man. 

What do we learn from the late President Mandela? One, we learn about humility and simplicity. President Mandela was a simple person and very humble, notwithstanding the fact that he had state power. He behaved as if he did not have the state apparatus at his disposal. 

Supporting what hon. Obote said earlier on, when President Mandela had just come to power, he had to change his residence and he decided to visit his neighbours. He asked the security not to follow him. He warned that anybody who followed him would be fired. He went knocking on the doors of his neighbours and the first house he went to belonged to white people but they did not know him. When Mandela knocked, the wife in that house opened the door and she screamed because she thought this was a black man who wanted to hurt her. When he introduced himself, the husband realised that this was actually Mandela, the new President of their country, and he embraced him in excitement. So, you can see how simple Mandela was. 

Secondly, he respected the good in others; whether they were opponents or not, he was very respectful. You remember, honourable members, that Buthelezi was his arch rival. Even though Buthelezi was in the Opposition, he was made the Minister of Internal Affairs. At one time when President Mandela was leaving the country, the Vice-President, Thabo Mbeki, was also out of the country. So, President Mandela appointed Buthelezi as acting President. Most of the people in his party were shocked; they could not believe what he had done. 

Mandela then said that South Africa had many leaders with good qualities and those qualities were not confined to the people in his party, ANC, or himself; even others in other parties in the Opposition were good leaders. You can see that he was committed to harnessing all the qualities of leadership in his country. You can see what a great person Mandela was.

Another paradox about Mandela was that he believed in living one day at a time. That is how he survived in prison - you live out your day and pray to God to live well that day –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MR JACOB OBOTH	(Independent, West Budama County South,	Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Budama South, I would like to pay tribute to a great humble, simple son of Africa. 

Many have described him in different ways but I can almost hear him say to us, “Do not cry, do not mourn, but rejoice that I once was.” We should not cry because of his demise, but we should thank God that he lived with us. I do not know how many of us would be spoken of the same way if we passed on today. 

Madam Speaker, this is a great challenge not only to the heads of state but also to us because we are also leaders. Mandela believed that the solution to any situation was in everybody’s hands. I do not want us to despair; the solution to this country’s future is in the hands of Nandala-Mafabi, in the hands of the Speaker, in the hands of Oboth and everybody in this Parliament. We should not live as if someone else is going to determine the future of this country for us. We are the people of the moment and we either change or we lose. 

Some wise man was one time tricked by two wise children. This man could tell you anything. So, the two children went to him with a butterfly and they asked him, “What is in our hands?” The man said, “A butterfly”. They asked him, “Is it alive or dead?” The man said, “The answer is in your hands; if I say it is alive, you will squeeze it and it dies and if I say it is dead, you will let it fly.” 

The answer to this country’s future lies in the hands of Ugandans, and we are the leaders; we should challenge ourselves today to live the Mandela way. It gives me a lot of pride that Mandela was an African. It gives me great pride that Mandela was a great advocate for human rights. I want to see a Uganda one time where Wafula Oguttu is made the Minister of Internal Affairs even while he is still in the Opposition –(Member timed out_)

6.01
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to say something about one of our great sons of Africa. 

In 1990 when Mandela was released from prison I was in primary three and when he became the President of South Africa in 1994, I was in primary seven. Right now, he has died when I am a Member of Parliament. I cannot say I regret all these times because I have been in school and we always read about great men. 

If you read history, you will discover people who were referred to as great men, like the demigods Hector and Achilles. There are men who defined history during the Roman Empire like Caesar. There are others in Africa like AmilcarCabral,Nyerere, Nkrumah and Lumumba. I have been reading about all these great men, but if I am asked by my grandchildren and children about great men, the greatest joy I will have on earth will be to tell them that I lived during the time of one great man. I began reading about Mandela before I knew much. However, when I grew up, I learnt about his virtues and I am proud to have lived during the times of Mandela. 

There is nothing much I can say but what I know, which has been mentioned by many colleagues, is that he paid the ultimate price to have peace, democracy and other virtues under which parliaments like this one stand on. As Members of Parliament and Ugandans, I think we should not let the values and virtues that Mandela stood for be wasted and die in the pages of history. It is time we made commitments to these values, democracy and peace and we stand by them.

As I conclude, I want to say that I am still productive and now that the name “Mandela” is great, the next child I am going to sire will be named Mandela. (Laughter) May the soul of Mandela rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: The King is dead. Long live the King. 

6.04
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for setting aside this time for Parliament to celebrate the life of Nelson Mandela. When I left Sheema over the weekend, the people asked me whether I was going for burial. I said, “No, Parliament is going to set aside time so that we can actually ‘bury’ Nelson Mandela the way you want us to do.”

THE SPEAKER: Organise?

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes, they thought that Parliament was going to organise and take the entire Parliament to South Africa. Fortunately, we are here actually celebrating the life of Mandela.  

I equate Mandela to Moses in the Bible - a black Moses - because he actually led his people to the Promised Land. When I was growing up, the passports at the time had, “All countries except South Africa”. This meant that there was a problem in South Africa. When Mandela became the President after leaving prison, this was lifted. So, that was the Promised Land that everyone wanted to go to and enjoy including all other Africans.

Mandela was a transformative leader. When you read the biographies of many transformative leaders of that time and even those in the Diaspora, you could equate him to Marcus Garvey, Gandhi, Harriet Tubman and those women who were actually helping the Negros in America to survive. He had those values that you have talked about, particularly forgiveness, transparency, openness, democratic governance, non-corruption, equity and equality. 

When we are here as leaders, therefore, we should not actually keep on pointing fingers at the leaders in those top positions. We are also leaders and we even have leaders in our communities; what type of leadership do they practice? As leaders, do we carry ourselves as Mandela? Do we follow those values that we are talking about? Do we promote those values in our communities and in the work that we do? Mandela’s virtues should be a reflection of how we lead ourselves as leaders and as politicians. We are going to miss Mandela as a person but those virtues are there and we know them, so we should continue practising them.  

Mandela was a socialite; no wonder he lived all these years. Whenever there was a football match, he was there. How many of us have gone to support our own teams, even here in Parliament? We hear that our football and netball teams have won but we are not giving them support. 

Mandela liked dancing. In South Africa, their culture is so strong that whenever they would be singing, Mandela would be up and down dancing. That is why he has lived long. In spite of that physical and psychological torture that he underwent in prison, he kept on surviving. He has died at 95 years old but some of us –(Member timed out_) 

6.07
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I give thanks and praise to the Lord for the life of Nelson Mandela. The Bible says that, “There is no greater love than this; that a man accepts to lay down his life for another.” Nelson Mandela bled for other people to benefit. He sweated for other people to smile. He gave up every bit of liberty or freedom on his part for other people to enjoy. We have to give great tribute to Mandela. 

He knew that he was a mortal man but the nation and the state would endure. For that reason, he accepted to hand over power to other people. He knew that to run and finish his race did not mean that everything to be done had to be finished, but he knew that he had to hand over to other people to carry on the mantle. He accepted to deliver the power, which he struggled for for a long time, to other people. 

He fought not to dominate other people but he fought to dominate evil. When he did that, I believe his race was done. We must thank God because he lived for all that time, considering that he had lived a hard life. He spent all those years in prison and yet he was able to live for 95 years; surely, we must celebrate his life. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, I believe that Nelson Mandela was brave and ruthless when he was confronting evil but very innocent and polite when dealing with other people. One person asked him, when he was moving unaccompanied by security, why he was subjecting himself to that kind of risk. He answered, “Why would somebody kill an innocent 13-year-old?” He likened himself to a 13-year-old who knew no brutality except that he confronted injustice and the evil that was abounding in Africa. 

I am thankful to the Lord because I am standing here on behalf of the people of Bulamogi to speak these few words about Nelson Mandela. I longed to meet Nelson Mandela physically in my lifetime but I did not get the opportunity. However, at least I have been lucky to stand here and speak these words. 

I know and believe that Heaven is a place of peace, a place where there is no disappointment. I must say that I would be disappointed if I got to Heaven and I did not find Mandela there – (Member timed out_)

6.10
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that I have caught your eye at this time after I have been able to listen to colleagues. I have learnt a lot about Nelson Mandela and about what people think about those people who stand up to fight for justice. I have no doubt, therefore, that all the members in this House do agree that it is good to stand up against oppression and that it is good at all times to stand up for justice. For that, I am very grateful.

The fact that the Front Bench on the Government side is empty today speaks so loud. However, a document was distributed here and it is the motion which was supposed to be moved by the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi. The people who will read our Hansard in the future will wonder what Government thought about this great man of Africa. With your guidance, Madam Speaker, I request that at the right time you will allow this document to be adopted as one of the documents we have had today.

Madam Speaker, someone remarked this morning that when you praise Mandela, it appears as if you are abusing some leaders in Africa. The prominent question is: Can we, as leaders, tolerate a Nelson Mandela in our lives? During our regime, if a Nelson Mandela stood up, would we tolerate him? We can stand here today and say good things about Nelson Mandela but it would be a mockery of the dead if we do not attempt to follow at least some of the things he stood for.

Madam Speaker, Nelson Mandela once remarked that those in power do not have their freedom and security guaranteed unless the security and freedoms of those who are opposed to them are guaranteed. This is one thing which I want to reiterate now. Those who oppress others should not be secure in their homes when those they oppress do not have freedom.

In Nelson Mandela, we have seen that power does not lie in seats, that you are seated on a particular seat at this time and therefore you are powerful. Fourteen years after leaving power, Nelson Mandela remained the most powerful –(Member timed out_)

6.14
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must admit that variously, I have been ably represented by colleagues. I can only add that an analogy of a mirror atop the world befits this moment. This huge mirror is facing all of us as we reflect our positions in the world – if the entire globe can be reflected in this mirror.

Madam Speaker, I was not yet born when Martin Luther King illuminated the world with his charisma. I was not yet born when Gandhi preached politics of tolerance and peace. I was just in senior two when this great man finally walked to freedom from the shackles of his oppressors. I can only say that I feel proud and honoured that I have lived to visit his country, to touch and feel and read his great works and to meet and speak to people he has inspired. Standing here, I reflect a lot on his vision for his people and his country and I will eternally remain his obedient student.

Madam Speaker, his was a long walk and a rightful walk. I have known quite a number of African leaders attempting to walk, even run, but they have fatally stumbled because they never believed in their walk. This great man believed in and preached his message. I believe, like I earlier said, that this huge mirror atop us should help us reflect on whether our steps actually follow our hearts. It is the only honour we can give this great man.

Madiba, like all have said, served with humility. At no one time did he hold his people and his country at ransom, yet they knew that his was an immense sacrifice. Everybody knew, and they needed no reminder from him that he deserved better than any other South African let alone putting himself and family above the rest of the deserving South Africans. (Member timed out_)

6.17
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want thank you for this session. On behalf of the people of Ayivu County, who I represent in this Parliament, it is a great honour to join the world in paying tribute to the greatest son of South Africa who has made history. A lot has been said and my words are too few to fit in the space of tributes that have been paid, including from the greatest men who rule this world. 

It is important for our history that during moments like these, we always look back at the lives of the people we pay tribute to. I am sure each of us is doing some soul-searching and reflecting on their past and looking at the future. Even if one has few hours left, they can cause change within the few hours they have left.

Mr Nelson Mandela loved education. His famous quote about education was: “Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.” If it were not because of education, we would not have seen the first black American president. It was education that took Obama’s father to the USA. If it were not for his grandfather who loved education and sent his son to the wilderness to search for knowledge, we would not have seen the first black American president, Obama.

As an individual, I also have soul-searching to do in regard to one of those famous quotes from Nelson Mandela the great. He lamented thus: “Do not judge me by my successes, judge me by how many times I fell down and got up again.” How many times have we fallen and our neighbours – (Member timed out_)

6.21
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition to pay tribute to a great son of this world, Nelson Mandela. 

I got to know about Mandela because I was interested in debates. Some time back I was watching TV and a panellist asked the following question: “Who said that she was the most unmarried married woman?” Nobody answered the question, but it was Winnie Mandela who said that. So, I set out to find out what happened to her. 

Later, I got to know that she Mandela’s wife and then I started following what was on TV. There was a movie that showed how Winnie would sneak things in when Mandela was in prison, and how Mandela would train and she would take all the requirements to him maybe through a supermarket. However, later they said Winnie got annoyed and said that they should not have shown these pictures, so I lost track. 

It was then that I got to know who Nelson Mandela was. This was a great man. He was a courageous man, a democrat and a human rights activist. However, behind any great man there is a woman. I saw Winnie Mandela fighting a lot of wars and being beaten and tortured so much in South Africa for the love of her husband and for the struggle of the liberation of South Africa. I think Winnie Mandela’s contribution was a great contribution by women. 

Madam Speaker, I have seen pictures of Mandela with children. He loved children so much. Whoever loves children loves people and loves humanity. He fought for human rights. He also loved reconciliation, as depicted in his leadership. After suffering for over 27 years in prison and then he comes as a president for only one term shows that he really loved his country. 

Madam Speaker, today we are not here to mourn Mandela. We are here to celebrate his life and his legacy. (Member timed out_)

MS TAAKA: I am just concluding, Madam Speaker. He is alive and he is yet to be born. You heard hon. Cadet saying that he is still active, and even more people are going to bear children and call them Nelson Mandela, so Mandela is not dead. May his soul rest in peace.

6.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many of my colleagues have deliberated very positively about Nelson Mandela’s life. 

I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the conversation between Nelson Mandela and His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda. When His Excellency Yoweri Museveni met Mandela, I was still young and a student but I heard that Nelson Mandela asked Yoweri Museveni, “My son, why not to retire?” His Excellency Yoweri Museveni answered, “But people still need me.” Mandela said, “This is the right time to leave, when people still like you.”

When I learnt about the death of Nelson Mandela, I remembered the conversation between Yoweri Museveni and Nelson Mandela. Now Nelson Mandela has gone and the advice he gave to our country has not yet yielded fruit. I would like to say that the advice Mandela gave our President was being given to all of us as Ugandans because the President represents Uganda. Let the death of Nelson Mandela mark the beginning of a good Uganda. Let his advice be followed. 

Nelson Mandela spent 27 years in jail, five years as the President of South Africa and he spent the rest of his life very happy. If you make comparisons with the situation in Uganda now, the President whom Nelson Mandela advised, His Excellency Yoweri Museveni, has taken 27 years as President of the Republic of Uganda, we do not know where he is going to spend five years and we do not need him to go unhappily. 

History is very beautiful, Madam Speaker. I am a teacher of history and history will teach you to learn the past, compare it with the present and focus on the future. Therefore, let the death of Nelson Mandela mark the beginning of our country. We do not want our leaders to go so miserably. We need to be celebrating the lives of our leaders for the wonderful work they have done for this country. (Member timed out_)

6.28
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing us to have this session. It is really from your heart, and you are not mocking Ugandans like some leaders who may have decided to go to merely show off that they are going to mourn when actually, they do not believe in what the great man of Africa stood for. 

I want to say today is a great day because we are celebrating the life of a widely known and revered person of the 20th and 21st centuries. This is a man who injected new civilisation in the politics of so called “African liberators”. He did not see himself as the alpha and the omega of South Africa regardless of the sacrifice that he made for the people of South Africa. He said, “Enough is enough; I need to hand over power to another person.” We thank you, Mandela.

Certainly, we will miss him for his humility. He never showed or displayed any form of arrogance like some leaders I have heard about here in Uganda who say, “We fought and those who did not fight have no right to question...” - even the wrong they do. It is vulgar in our western language; they say, “Twatera embundu, twatunga obwogyerero;twatera embundu, twatunga obukama; twatera embundu, twatunga obugaiga.” That arrogance! This was not in the vocabulary of Nelson Mandela. 

We really want to thank Mandela for defining what it meant to be a true Pan-Africanist. He kept all his names, Nelson Mandela. You do not need to change your names or drop your Christian name like some leaders I have seen here, to show you are Pan-Africanist. He kept all his names and he showed his Pan-Africanism in the heart.

Nelson Mandela, our political role model, my political role model; in you we have lost a man of incomparable honour and unconquered strength and unyielding resolve. What we can say in respect to your honour, to your life, is to say thank you and to pray that you take the seat that Jesus went to prepare for you in heaven. 

May we, who are remaining, continue to carry the banner of value that you stood for and to challenge the corruption that is standing and killing this country. May your soul rest in eternal peace – (Interjections)-Twatera embundu-

THE SPEAKER: You will do that in the canteen. (Laughter)

6.33
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Namayingo District and on my behalf, I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Nelson Mandela. I want to pray that the good Lord gives all Africans and the world at large the strength. 

Mandela has fought a good fight and he has finished the race. The good thing is that he has left a legacy. We have seen many leaders die and not all of them can be celebrated like we are celebrating the life of Mandela. I think these good words that many people have said do not benefit him as the individual who fought for the peace and freedom of the Africans and South Africans, but these words benefit us, the current leaders. We need to learn lessons. What legacy are we going to leave when we go? 

We are here celebrating and thanking God but as individuals, we also need to reflect on our own lives. He has finished the race and we are very happy as we see the fruits of his struggle. Now he leaves us with a challenge so that we can also emulate his good attributes. We can be leaders with a vision. We can be leaders who are selfless, leaders who can serve our people diligently. 

Madam Speaker, we need to evaluate ourselves; if God calls us back home, what will others say about us? It is good to talk about others but then we also need to think about our leadership style so that one day when people come to mourn, they do not cry but celebrate what we have done. 

I cannot mourn Mandela because at 95 years old, he has played his part. It is now up to us to take on the mantle as African leaders, to fight for the rights of our people and to serve our people diligently. We should not just stop at saying Mandela has gone, he has been a great leader; what about us? What about me and you? It is only his body that has been put to waste but I believe that his ideas – (Member timed out.)

6.36
MR JULIUS JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that you have chosen me. On behalf of the people of Buhaguzi County, Hoima District, I equally want to join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to a great son of Africa, Nelson Mandela, whose death we are celebrating rather than mourning. 

It is very hard to speak after many have spoken; most times, most of the words that you would have used have already been spoken. However, I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for convening this special sitting. It really proves that you are a person who recognises the work done by the late. I thank you for this sitting.

Madam Speaker, I was wondering what type of man this Nelson Mandela was or is, because many people have said he is still alive. Before I entered here, I jokingly discussed with hon. Werikhe about what was taking place in South Africa. We were watching a number of heads of state attending the memorial service and we compared this to village councillors at a burial in our villages. I imagined a man who could attract all these heads of state to come for his burial and I could not believe it. 

I also asked myself: what does it take for a person to be Nelson Mandela? We could not conclude this discussion with hon. Werikhe but I think I have finally got the answers through the communication we have had. As a leader, you just have to be humble like Nelson was. You have to be simple, focused, and have a purpose for why you are living and remain focused on that. I think I have learnt a lot through what we have discussed here, through the eulogies we have made. I think many of us have understood this and I really look at Mandela as a model I should follow.

I was thinking about the age of 95 years and I thought about the life expectancy in our country. I also imagined a man who spent 27 years in prison coming out to survive up to the age of 95 years. How many of our prisoners here can stay in prison for 10 years and survive? Nelson Mandela spent 27 years in prison and when he came out he became a president and managed to survive up to the age of 95. How many of our Ugandans here can stay in prison for 10 years and live on for the next five years, basing on the conditions in our prisons here? 

This is something that we should work on. We should improve the life of prisoners and consider them as people who can reform. If Mandela was left to die in prison, he would not do what he has done. 

Because of the little time given, I want to say, may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

6.50
MRS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in commemorating the life of this great man, Nelson Mandela. I had the honour to meet this great man and shake his hand, therefore I feel very connected with all that is going on in South Africa right now. 

I was privileged to be among those members of the United Nations who formed a mission called UNOMSA, which went to South Africa to organise and supervise the elections that brought to power the ANC and, therefore, the presidency of Nelson Mandela. So, I feel very connected with South Africa and what is going on now. 

Madam Speaker, my political consciousness matured during the period when many African countries were gaining their independence. For 30 years, we watched and prayed as many African countries and other countries of the world gained their independence. We despaired because we thought this cruel regime, this powerful apartheid regime, would never give power to the Africans. We watched and prayed. I was, therefore, very happy to be part of the UN team that brought Nelson Mandela to his presidency. 

As everyone else has mentioned, if you met Nelson Mandela, you would be impressed by his humility. When we were in South Africa trying to organise the elections that brought him to power, we saw the fighting and all the problems which had been in South Africa – (Member timed out_)

6.44
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to join the rest of my colleagues in celebrating the life of Madiba Mandela. 

We are celebrating him for his attributes. However, the question is: how many of us shall leave such a legacy? The whole world today is gathering in Johannesburg. It is a historical event that the whole world and presidents from all over the world are celebrating the life of a black man, an African. Is there any other leader whose death will be celebrated like this? God knows. 

I read about Mandela and his strategies in fighting oppression. This challenge comes back to our leadership; many times we try to sell ideas in form of rumours and then the ideas are rejected and they are fought. 

The war on apartheid was about to be lost because the minds of the oppressed were not for the struggle. However, they revised their tactics and worked on the mind-set of the oppressed. They came up with a slogan that said that the best weapon for fighting the oppressor is changing the minds of the oppressed to feel oppressed and accept to deserve to live like the rest. This is what won the struggle. If the South Africans had not agreed to that, they would be oppressed to this day. 

I would like to congratulate our South African brothers and sisters because they made Mandela what he is today. They accepted his ideas and adopted them even when he was in prison. They felt oppressed and they agreed to fight the oppressor. 

Mandela, rest in eternal peace. I thank God for the life of Mandela. God gave him life to fight the oppressors, life to win the struggle and life to live thereafter. It is a very rare thing. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.47
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Budiope East in Buyende and on my own behalf, I want to join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to this great son of African and indeed the world, the late Nelson Mandela. As leaders at all levels of responsibility, we need to pick a lesson or two from the life of Nelson Mandela. 

Nelson Mandela was a great mobiliser and a pacifier. It is said that during one of his rallies, when he was campaigning to become president, there were high anti-apartheid sentiments being whipped up by some of his supporters. He acted very first, looked in the audience and saw a white woman standing at the back and he beckoned her to the rostrum.  When she came up, Mandela told his audience, “This is the person who treated me when I was suffering from TB”. The whole audience was humbled. In that way, he disarmed the anger that was fermenting in the audience. 

Mandela was also a great orator and he used his oratory skills to mobilise and rally his fellow South Africans to fight for liberation, democracy and for the freedom of South Africa. There is a proverb in my local language, in Lusoga, which says, “Obwogezi obulungi bukira obukini”. I hope the Hansard will be able to capture this correctly. In effect, it means that a good speech or the gift of oratory skill is better than the art of dancing. So, even when you can no longer dance to dazzle the spectators, you can still give meaningful advice to the audience and the people around you. This is exactly what the late Mandela did. 

The former President of the USA, Bill Clinton, was being interviewed and he was asked to mention one of the greatest moments in his life. He said, “I went to visit Nelson Mandela, he gave me advice, I shook his hands and I was humbled”. This was the late Nelson Mandela that we are paying tribute to. 

In conclusion, I want to say that there is one unique thing about Mandela that is not being highlighted properly. In many cases, he would be seen fraternising with his former tormentors, the whites. People kept wondering; they thought he would hate these people and they wondered why he was fraternising with them – (Member timed out_)

6.50
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to pay tribute to a fallen colleague, a fallen compatriot, on behalf of the people from the lost counties. (Laughter) 

The first time I heard about Mandela was when he was being imprisoned, and I was a small boy at the time. It was about that same time that these lost counties were voting to return to Bunyoro. I asked my father, who had been involved in the Nyangire rebellion, “Who is this man Mandela whom you are complaining about because he is being imprisoned?” He told me the story of what the Banyoro had gone through and he told me that our brothers down in South Africa are going through a similar situation. 

Madam Speaker, oppression is not only meted out by the whites; even Africans can oppress their fellow Africans. This has happened in this very part of Africa. The Banyoro were not allowed to go to school, the Banyoro were not allowed to do certain things –(Interjections)– Do not ask me; you know the history of this country. 

When Mandela was released, I was an adult. My father was still alive and I told him, “Your friend has been released.” He said, “Yes, he has fought the battle”. The other day when Mandela died - I happened to have been born before computers; I am BBC - I had not been following what was happening. I knew that he was sick but early in the morning as I was about to go jogging, I switched on the TV and every channel I turned to was saying that Mandela was dead. I asked, “Is this the man my father used to say was very important?” 

I asked myself one big question, and it is the testimony I have heard this afternoon: Who is this Mandela? How different was he that we, the leaders today, are not able to live like him and do what he was able to do? This is because Mandela was just like us; he was born here in this continent, he could have eaten similar food to that we eat and he could have gone through similar tribulations as we have gone through. 

The question I now ask you, my brothers and sisters who have contributed this afternoon, is: Are you living by the same words that you have spoken today from your mouths? Do you live in the same way? You are talking of reconciliation, living together and other –(Member timed out_)

6.53
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I thank you for this opportunity. I join my colleagues to mourn the great leader, Mandela. 

Madam Speaker, colleagues have said lot about Mandela and I agree with them. However, I want to observe that we cannot separate a leader from his or her character. Leaders carry on with their character. Mandela had a good character and this is why he had the virtue of being a simple person. A simple person shows intelligence. People who lack simplicity are not intelligent because they always fear. 

Madam Speaker, people do not tolerate others because they cannot relate to themselves. Actually, people who live in fear also fear themselves. This is why you will get a leader saying, “I” all the time. Why? It is because this person fears saying, “We”; he or she thinks that it is something that will degrade him or her. (Interjections) So, Mandela has been this character who is intelligent. 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR KAGWERA: This is why one of the colleagues said that Mandela could walk almost alone. He did not fear himself and, therefore, he did not fear others.

Mandela was so principled from the beginning to the end. He had a sorted-out mind and he knew what he wanted. Some people today live a different life from what they will live tomorrow and another day, and this is why they speak different things at different times. This is because they do not have sorted-out minds.

I believe that we have lost a great man. When I was still young, - Madam Speaker, allow me to say this as these are my concluding remarks - I used to see priests preach after people had died and they talked a lot. I would wonder, “Are they preaching to this dead person?” Later in life, I realised that they would speak to the living so that they could learn. However, for a character who cannot learn, even if you said it 100 or 1,000 times, this person will not learn. For those who can learn, they are learning and for those who cannot learn, they will never learn. I thank you very much. (Laughter)

6.56
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to share the good thoughts and ideas of the greatest man of the contemporary world, Madiba Mandela. 

Mandela can be described as the greatest in the contemporary world, probably second to Mahatma Gandhi. I do not think that history has recorded what he has done as yet, not in Africa. As Africans, we must be very proud that we have been able to produce a unique person that even Obama, the President of the greatest country in the world, has said that as long as he lives, he will remember and emulate the work of Mandela. I think this is a plus. This is recognition that even in Africa, there is quality of leadership. That is what I am proud about.

Madam Speaker, we are eulogising this great man and when I look to my left, where the Government side is supposed to sit, I do not see a single person on the Front Bench. Also, when I look at the number of the Members of Parliament in this Chamber, I see hardly 10 on either side. I mourn for this country. Madam Speaker, I feel we need to do something because leadership is not just about dressing well and speaking well and being appreciated. It is to demonstrate that you are one. That is why today we are eulogising Madiba. 

If we have a Government and we are talking about the greatest leader in the contemporary world and there is no minister on the Government side, what image are we sending? What message are we sending to the South African people who are watching this debate?

Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to express my condolences to the family, the ANC party, to the Government of South Africa and to the entire continent of Africa for the loss of Mandela. Mandela endured suffering for the sake of other people to enjoy peace –(Member timed out.)      

THE SPEAKER: Make your concluding remarks.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, as a Member of the Pan-African Parliament, I forgot to speak for Uganda and I am speaking more for the continent.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one minute to conclude.

MRS OGWAL: I want to conclude by saying that Madiba fought against discrimination and oppression but what hurts me most is when we see our own Africans oppressing their own people. That is what hurts most. 

We are so saddened because the colonial master exploited our resources. When today we see our own sons and daughters exploiting our own resources and allowing the greatest population of this continent to wallow in poverty, we need to condemn ourselves. As leaders, you do not deserve to lead unless you can walk the walk of Mandela. I thank you.

7.06
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to pay my personal tribute to Nelson Mandela. Also, on behalf of the people of Kasese and the Rwenzururu Kingdom, I want to bring condolences too and register them dearly. 

I have come up with a mathematical and scientific formula for democracy and dictatorship, which I have code named D2. The assumptions on which the ceremonies in South Africa have been arranged are:

1. 	No dictator president was given an opportunity to speak. (Laughter) The presidents who spoke were carefully chosen; none of them would go beyond two terms, for example Obama and the one of South Africa.

2. 	The top and eminent democracies were very careful; - I have been watching carefully - they did not even shake hands with the dictators during this ceremony. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to fully translate and apply the formula scientifically. I have taken the period for the liberation struggle vis-à-vis the period when one stays in power. I will take the five years, which President Museveni spent in the bush as the base and the 28 years which he has spent in power. When you divide 28 by five, Museveni is running in negatives because it is just coming to 0.178 points. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your mathematics.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I take the 27 years which Nelson Mandela spent in prison vis-à-vis the five years that he spent in power and you divide those figures, you come to 5.4 points. This means that the longer you stay in power, the more the atrocities and crises you cause to your country. The shorter you stay in power, the longer the legacy and the fair democracy and diligence that you leave in your country.

Finally, Mandela spent 27 years in jail but I have been very careful to trace and track the history of the presidents who have come after him and none of them is a relative to Mandela. Here in Uganda, it is different, and this is the reason why Gen. Sejusa is away. He mentioned that President Museveni is preparing his son, Muhoozi Kainerugaba. I want to warn –(Member timed out_)

7.06
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I believe that Nelson Mandela has written one of the most beautiful and finest chapters of history in the modern times. This is being proved by whatever has been happening since he passed away two days ago. Whatever every member has contributed tonight still further proves that he has written one of the most beautiful and finest chapters of history in the contemporary times. Foreign leaders are doing the same. 

As African politicians, we must be proud of this and we must thank God for it. I think the most important thing for us to do is to read this most beautiful and finest chapter of history every day and meditate upon it, so that we emulate him and be able to make a difference when we go to our people.

Why did this man make history? I think the period we are mourning about – the 27 plus the five, which Madam Speaker has spoken about - really contributed a lot. I think in that confinement, Nelson Mandela had the time to reflect and study and draw the whole world to himself. In that small space, he reflected about life. This has happened in the past – the monks, Buddhists and in the Catholic Church and others. They live in very small cells but what they do and write is enormous. I think this is what happened to Mandela. 

I think one of the things Mandela got to appreciate was that every human being of whatever race, colour or creed is created equal - what we, who are Christians or believers, refer to as being created in the image of God. He understood the sanctity of human dignity. That is why this man was very simple and received anyone, no matter his colour, age or status. He simply kept smiling and in simplicity, with great respect and decency. I think this is what we have to emulate as leaders and politicians.

Secondly, this man – (Member timed out.)

7.09
MRS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for according Parliament the opportunity to pay this glowing tribute to one of the best sons Africa has ever produced. As I pay tribute to Nelson Mandela, I really appreciate all that has been said about him. 

I took a lot of time to read the Long Walk to Freedom and I also took time to read the Life of Nelson Mandela. When I got a golden chance of visiting South Africa, I visited his house in the South Western Township, what we call Soweto. Born in a royal family, his life was really designed to have been great. 

When Mandela found himself at crossroads in his relationship with Winnie, Mandela respected the side of the bed where Winnie slept until he married Graca Marcel. Very few living men in this world of today would do that. The other thing I will live to remember about Mandela is that each time he woke up from his bed in a hotel he never left the bed unlaid. That is how systematic and organised the hero and icon who lived the life we remember today was. 

As far as leadership is concerned, Mandela believed in providing leadership at every stage of his life. Even when he left the presidency and the South African administration was taking long to come out and give a statement on HIV/AIDS and yet the numbers were soaring, Mandela came up and condemned this and protected the victims. He said AIDS was not a morality issue but a human rights issue. He felt he should say something to those who looked at the victims of AIDS as people who should be condemned and denied the basics of life. He felt he should fight for the victims. 

To the South Africans, Mandela had to come up to provide leadership. When the going got tough as far as the struggle against apartheid was concerned, it took Mandela a lot of time and thought to begin engaging in talks with the whites - the administration of Botha. He had to get a way out. Even when the extremists, those who were so radical, thought that he was going in the wrong direction, he never betrayed them but allowed the negotiation process to begin. That is what leadership meant. That is what made his life the legacy that it is today. (Member timed out)

7.13
MS RUTH ACHIENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to speak about the great man, Nelson Mandela. Nelson Mandela abandoned his profession as a lawyer. He abandoned his own freedom and went to fight for the freedom of others, the freedom of the people of South Africa and the people of Africa. 

Madam Speaker, let us also note that Mandela was a generous man. He was generous in the sense that when he was in prison, he went to the extent of negotiating for the release of other leaders who were arrested with him and yet he was not yet negotiating for his own release. The man was kind and he was selfless. 

On top of what he did, when he got out of prison, Nelson Mandela led South Africa for only one term and during this one term, he championed the peace and reconciliation process. He did not condemn the whites who punished South Africans during apartheid but he reconciled the blacks and the whites. 

Madam Speaker, I therefore pray that Mandela’s name and character live on so that he continues inspiring us, leaders and people of Uganda, so that we also have the courage and capacity to stand and say, “Enough is enough”. I pray that African leaders learn from Mandela. They should not behave like the Bourbon Monarchy that learnt nothing and forgot nothing. I pray that his soul rests in peace. May Mandela’s name be honoured and glorified. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

7.16
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join the rest of the people of this country and the world to pay tribute to the fallen hero of Africa, Nelson Mandela. 

I got to know about Nelson Mandela when I was still a young girl, and this was the time when he was in prison. We used to hear a lot of stories about South Africa and about Mandela fighting for the freedom of his people. I would like to thank him for the revolution that he caused in South Africa. It was because of his fight that the people of South Africa opened their eyes. 

I feel very sorry because of the short time he was given to rule. He ruled for a short while. He spent much of the time in prison and I feel if he had been left free during that time, he would have done more for South Africa. I always imagine what could have happened if he had not been imprisoned that long. South Africa would be very far in terms of transformation. 

He was such a courageous man, ready to die for his people. Few of us or none at all are ready to do this. I always see our Members, when teargas is thrown they run away. (Laughter) Who is ready to die for the people of Uganda? It is not an easy thing. He resisted apartheid and never gave up; he fought to the end. This should be emulated by all African leaders including us, the Members of Parliament. We should be ready to fight for our people. 

It appears to me that he was the only one who fought hard in South Africa because he was imprisoned alone. He suffered alone for the 27 years - (Interjections) - There were others? Sorry; I thought he was the only one but even if there were others, I heard of him only. He was a fighter and even for the short term he had, we shall always remember him.

I will not forget to pay tribute to the three wives who stood beside him throughout his lifetime. (Member timed out)

7.20
MS ASUPASA ISIKO MPONGO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for this chance to speak as the last voice in paying tribute to the great fallen African son, Nelson Mandela. I thank you, in particular, for this session. I thank the honourable members who have spoken so well, so eloquently; they have articulated the goodness of Nelson Mandela and the works he did for Africa, his generosity, his resilience and his fight for freedom and democracy.  

I thank you all, honourable members, for whatever you have said about this great fallen son of Africa. However, in the same vein, I would like us to remember and focus on what lessons we take from Nelson Mandela and what we take from this session as Africans and as legislators. We must come out of this session as changed legislators. 

What was Mandela’s niche? It was largely his tolerance, his persistence, his consistence and insistence. He insisted upon what was right. He insisted when he had to succeed. He fought for the freedom of his people. 

The biggest niche of Nelson Mandela, however, was his tolerance. Honourable members, as we leave this session, we need to go out as very changed legislators who can tolerate each other. We are accorded a mouthpiece as Members of Parliament, so we can articulate whatever we want to articulate, properly guarded in this House. It would not be proper, honourable members, to go out of this House and speak out as if we do not have a platform to talk, and organise walks to work. (Laughter) 

Honourable members –(Interjection)– We are paying tribute, honourable member. I am still talking about tolerance. This is the tolerance that I have spoken about and hardly one minute passed before intolerance again jumped out. (Laughter) You are right, even the teargas is also part of the intolerance. 

We need to live a life where people listen to each other. We need to dialogue. We should, therefore, mourn the demise of Nelson Mandela with –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Shortly, I will be inviting the Leader of the Opposition to read the text of the motion but before he does that, I just want to make two clarifications. 

One, President Mandela was the most important or most prominent symbol of the struggle but there were others – Mbeki, Sisulu, Winnie Mandela. They were all struggling everywhere. So, he was the most prominent symbol. 

Secondly, we did not talk about his education. He studied at the University of Fort Hare and also at the University of Witwatersrand and he became a lawyer. He also opened law chambers with Oliver Tambo. So, I thought we should also get that on record. 

I also want to complete something which hon. Kwemara had started but did not finish, that very famous statement which all the presidents were quoting. That is a speech he made in Rivonia at the trial. He refused to defend himself against treason and he said, “I am going to explain the struggle of our people.” So, he spoke for five hours. That is when he said, “I have fought against black domination, I have fought against white domination, and I am prepared to die…” It took five hours. So, it is one of the most important speeches he has ever made and it is a landmark. 

I also had the opportunity to meet him when I was Minister for Regional Cooperation. That is the time when he was elected. I spent a bit of time with him in the meetings with the President. However, before that, in 1989 as President of FIDA, I had the opportunity to sign the international petition which demanded the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and all his colleagues. So, I also participated in a small way to that. That is what I wanted to add to this tribute. 

We have taken a long time but I think he deserved it. So, let me ask the Leader of the Opposition to read the text of the motion and we take a vote. 

6.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that addition. I also have downloaded something here, which I am going to lay on the Table. This was said by Obama today as he eulogised Mandela as the great liberator of the 20th Century. There is one small item I want to quote here, and I wish my commissioner was around because he would have understood it. 

It says, “There are too many people who happily embrace Mandela’s legacy of racial reconciliation but passionately resist even modest reforms that would challenge chronic poverty and glaring inequality. There are too many leaders who claim solidarity with Madiba’s struggle for freedom but do not tolerate dissent from their own people. There are too many of us who stand on the sidelines, comfortable in complacency or cynicism when our voices must be heard.” Madam Speaker, I will lay this on the Table. 

This is a motion to pay tribute to the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba, moved under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure: 

“WHEREAS the world both mourns the death and celebrates the legacy of the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba who was born on 18 July 1918 and died on Thursday, 5 December 2013 at the age of 95;

AND WHEREAS the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba was active in the campaign to end and indeed engaged in various political activities against apartheid in South Africa;

AND WHEREAS Madiba was sentenced to life in prison in 1964 for his political activism and spent 27 years in prison on South Africa’s Robben Island and later at Pollsmoor Prison until his release from prison in February 1990;

NOTING that after his release, Madiba’s movement to end apartheid and activities that helped establish post-apartheid South Africa led to his being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 for his efforts and the United Nations declaring his birthday Mandela Day;

APPRECIATING that on 10 May 1994, Madiba was inaugurated as the nation’s first black President after a democratic election and served for only one term until 1999, during which period he worked tirelessly advocating for reconciliation among all South African people and struggled to right the ills of racism, poverty and injustice which transformed him into an international hero with an impeccable leadership quality;

AWARE that Madiba was an accomplished politician, statesman and a freedom fighter who with humility, purity, generosity and readiness to serve stood and worked for the rights, honour and dignity of the oppressed people;

COGNISANT that the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba was one of the great leaders and teachers of the 20th Century, a role model for democracy and demonstrated politics of truth, reconciliation and forgiveness; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	The Parliament of Uganda gives thanks, honour and applauds the life and legacy of the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba;

2. 	The Parliament of Uganda shares the pain of the people of South Africa and the entire world over the death of a great leader revered as an icon of true democracy;

3. 	The Parliament of Uganda prays that the people of South Africa bear the irreparable loss with courage and fortitude; 

4. 	The Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Madiba eternal peace.”

Moved by Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, the Acting Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister –(Laughter)– I beg to move. 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for moving the motion. However, procedurally, for the record and in respect with our Rules of Procedure, since he moved and the first seconder to contribute was hon. Dombo, I we could say it was moved by him and seconded by Commissioner Dombo. There is also no offence in having me as the second seconder. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the third seconder was hon. Tanna, the independent. So let that be reflected in the record. But do not remove the Prime Minister. 

7.32
MR BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, as I support the motion, I want to say that Parliament has recognised that Nelson Mandela was one of the great leaders and teachers of the 20th Century, a role model for democracy and demonstrated politics of truth, reconciliation and forgiveness. Having recognised all that, I want to suggest that it be resolved by Parliament that this House urges all leaders and future leaders, especially on the African continent, to emulate the late Nelson Mandela. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion as amended be approved by this House

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the resolution together with the Hansard to transmit them to the Ugandan Mission in Pretoria so that it can be given to the Government of South Africa and the family. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I hope that you will represent us at the burial because it is very important for Parliament to be represented, and it would not be bad for you to choose me to accompany you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We are going to work out the logistics. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for this tribute. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 7.34p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 December 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
