


PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Wednesday, 1 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting. Her Excellency the Vice-President, you are welcome. 

Honourable members, we have 16 days of activism against violence on women and girls. It started on 25 November when it was celebrated worldwide and it will end on 10 December.
This year’s theme is: “Orange the world, end the violence against women now.” We will mobilise everybody; all the legislators, to ensure that we advocate for inclusive programmes and resources to prevent violence against women and girls.

We will also amplify the success stories demonstrating violence against women and girls and we will promote the leadership of women and girls in their diversity and participation in policy making global wise. As Members of Parliament, we should actively make sure that we guard the women and girls against this violence. 

I am, therefore, happy that we are receiving a statement from Her Excellency the Vice-President on the national campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood. I call upon all of us to be part of this campaign that is surrounding the activism in the 16 days so that we ensure our girls are protected and that women do not go through the violence that they go through today.

I thank you for coming for this session.

2.06
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you this afternoon for adding your voice to the 16 days of activism against Gender-Based Violence. It is important for us as Parliament, in the next planning phase, to include 16 days of activism on our calendar because this is a national event that has been existing. It is very important for promotion of the welfare of the girl-child, women and fighting Gender-Based Violence.

Gender-Based Violence is something that is archaic, barbaric and must be kicked out of this country. I wanted to add my voice that in the next planning phase, we strongly include the activities of 16 days of activism on the calendar of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda so that we fully participate and engage in all activities at this time, like all the other parts of the country and institutions are doing. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. When we are talking about participating, let us not sit back and say, “A statement was made.” Let us speak about it. Let us participate in ensuring that we come out and educate people on what is happening with this violence. Let us speak about the people. There are people who have gone through the same. We should be able to come out and show the public that we are in for this fight. We do not support violence against the women and the girl-child.

2.08
MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the district that I represent, in particular Ibanda South and to be specific, Irimya Parish, we have got a challenge of wild animals encroaching on the communities, spoiling crops and even claiming some lives.

When the children were still at school, there was a time when wild animals like hippopotamus and elephants came and started grazing on the compound of Irimya Primary School. This brought a lot of tension among the parents, teachers and schools.

Madam Speaker, not only do wild animals encroach on the compound of the school but there is an instance when a buffalo jumped out of the bush, hit a boda boda cyclist and claimed his life.

As we are promoting socio-economic transformation, in my area, people are engaged in agriculture. Unfortunately, these animals come, encroach and destroy all the crops. My prayer is that the Government provides this area with an electric fence so that we can have elimination of these wild animals encroaching on and destroying our crops. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bainomugisha, thank you for smuggling in something, which is not related to what we are discussing. We are discussing violence against women and children in this country and the 16 days of campaign on this violence. 

2.10
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your clear voice and pronouncement against the violation of the rights of women and the girl-child.

I understand that as a country, we have made deliberate efforts in fighting this violence but there are specific areas where we need to pronounce ourselves as leaders, be strong and condemn them. In my area, there is a big challenge of young girls being given away for marriage. This has even worsened with the COVID-19 situation. 

Most people are not earning and they are looking at these girls as a source of income. We need to launch a very serious national campaign. We need to form a serious Parliamentary taskforce against these barbaric tendencies of treating women as tools to be used to earn by a family.

I can tell you that by the time we finish the COVID-19 time, we will have many of the young girls married off. And it does not stop at being married at a young age; these young girls cannot even deliver when they get pregnant. We shall lose most of them, subsequently, yet women are the foundation of this country. 

I want to appeal to you and to this House, Madam Speaker, that we pronounce ourselves; form a strong parliamentary task force, join Government, and go into these areas and teach people and condemn the issue of violence against women and the girl child and the abuses therein that our traditions and cultures believe should be happening. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kimosho. Actually, this evil of having early marriages is terrible. I would want us to discuss that when Her Excellency is presenting her paper because the paper is on early marriages and the public must know it is not correct. You cannot just give out your daughter of 12 years, just for getting riches. I mean, you are putting this girl's life in danger. That is not right and all of us, in one way or the other, are parents. We must condemn this. 

Maybe because this is related, I will amend the Order Paper.  The Vice President's presentation comes next. Can I have just three Members on matters of national importance? 

2.13
MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public call in regards to the poor emergency response by the fire brigade in case of a fire outbreak in Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, I represent a constituency of people living in low-level housing settlements characterised by slums, yet we have several markets dealing in highly flammable materials like timber. These areas are prone to fire outbreaks, which often result into immense loss of lives and property due to slow response from the fire emergency services. 

Madam Speaker, just last night, a timber store in Ndeeba caught fire, which destroyed property, heavy machinery and already finished wooden materials, which were worth millions. 

Oftentimes, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, whenever an incident of fire outbreak happens, police fire-fighters attribute their slow response to limited water capabilities and at times, police vehicles arrive at the scene carrying no water or with water tanks of low water capacity. 

This situation is worsened by the fact that there are very few water hydrants across Kampala, which requires the trucks to go back to the station to refill and return to the scene. This results in maximum danger yet incidents of fire outbreaks are very common with the most recent happening in Kabaawo and last month and last night in Ndeeba, both in Rubaga South. 

I, therefore, want to know from Government what measures are being taken to extend water hydrants closer to timber stores, near slum areas and fuel stations in Kampala, to facilitate fast response to such incidents which have continued to happen, leading to loss of lives and property. 

I pray, Madam Speaker, that you direct the Office of the Prime Minister to have a tangible rescue plan for traders who have lost business as a result of these recent fires. And again, Madam Speaker, these incidents happen during curfew times when security agencies are in full control, enforcing curfew directives. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that curfew should be lifted to allow business owners take full charge of their businesses at night and be able to respond quickly to such issues because many of these incidents happen when they are at home and cannot do much to save their property. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government-
I think the issue of curfew is not related to the fire. 

2.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you guided that the Minister for Internal Affairs makes a comprehensive statement on the Fire Brigade responses across the country. I request that our detailed response will also include this scenario considering his prayer.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I think as you talk about the report from Minister of Internal Affairs, what he has said about the petrol stations is very important.

When you look at the movement of the person who detonated a bomb in front of Parliament, he was coming from Total, which is opposite Uganda House. Just imagine if that bomb had exploded from that place, how many places would have suffered? Therefore, it is better for us to have fire extinguishers near those kinds of areas so that we are able to arrest any situation.
 
MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. The issue of fire outbreaks in all our towns in the different constituencies, especially in the areas where they sell timber, has been common. All these traders have trading licenses; that means the traders are approved to deal in timber. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we really called the people concerned because it is happening on a daily basis. Shouldn’t someone be brought to book? These people have trading licenses given to them by KCCA and the districts and yet they are losing their property. 

These people are officially doing business because they are legal entities. Shouldn't we have a policy that there must be this and that for someone to get a trading license and shouldn't the people who give the trading license be brought to book? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the other thing we also need to know is who has burnt the place because by the time you bring somebody to book, you need to know who has lit the fire and burnt the place.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, most of the fires are accidents but they are caused by electricity or stray fire. However, even if accidents happen, the people who give licenses should know that areas with the timber could have a fire outbreak. That is why I am saying that the concerned people should be brought to book. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So as a leader, what would you advise the people who are giving licenses - not to give? No, I need a response from hon. Silwany.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I have - (Interjection) - the Leader of the Opposition is not on record. So, I will not to respond to that. 

Madam Speaker, I think before you give out a license, there must be minimum standards. They must have fire extinguishers; for somebody to operate a timber shop, they must at least have fire extinguishers. In addition, within the vicinity where there is a pool of different timber shops and things that are flammable – when trading in that, there must be fire extinguishers so that in case of a fire outbreak, you can easily fight. 

However, these people go ahead and give out licenses without taking precaution. I think the most important thing is to give out licenses after taking the necessary precautions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If I may ask a question: all the leaders of Uganda, the voice of the voiceless of all the thousands of people, are in Parliament here. Do we have a fire extinguisher outside there? I am just asking. (Hon. Migadde rose_) There is a procedural matter there and then you will come in.

2.22
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Madam Speaker, I was actually responding to the question you asked us, as leaders. For purposes of record, most of the fires we have had here in Kampala, one of the prominent areas has been Park Yard. It is a walkable distance from Clock Tower, where you have the National Fire Response Team. Even if those people had fire extinguishers, even the National Response Team has failed to respond to all those fires and most of the times, Park Yard has been burnt down almost four times.

Honourable Commissioner thought that the problem is timber. The problem may not necessarily be that they are selling timber there but providing the right facilities. For example, in the islands, we do not report fires because even if we report to police, we know that they will never come because there is no fire boat. Therefore, we do not report at all. 

I buy the proposal that the ministry responsible comes out with a comprehensive plan on how – Why would the fire brigade fail to come just here in Parliament Avenue, when it is a few kilometres away? Why did they delay? There is a need for a comprehensive plan on how they are going to respond to these various fires. If it means regional – but even if it was regional, still they would not respond to Buvuma.

We need a clear and comprehensive plan on how to address these fires.

2.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a leader, sometimes, it is important to listen to the voices and you pick. Obviously, we can blame ourselves and each other. Clearly, it is about fires. The question of the day is that: Is it an incident of isolated nature that is not happening severally? Either, we have not had a report or conclusively investigated to know the causes. However, there are some obvious reasons that we need to address.

First of all, as leaders, how do you explain the prevalence of more teargas per capita that is more than the fire extinguishers in the country? How do we explain that? We are talking about access to places that have caught fire but we are not addressing erratic urban planning. What happened to urban planning in this country?

The last time I checked, there was a Minister in charge of Urban Planning and a deputy. Before even the Minister of Internal Affairs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, how is the teargas aspect related to the fire extinguishers? 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, as leaders, we do not legislate in a compressed manner. We diversify –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondly, have you ever seen teargas being poured here in Parliament or anywhere near when there is peace?

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to debate with the presiding officer. (Laughter) However, I was speaking to the priorities of the Government given the needs of the country. As a country, are we getting our priorities right? 

If you look at our priorities, for example, for the last five years, how much have we voted to support the fire department of the police as opposed to its teargas counterpart, as planners of this country? How much have we devoted to urban planning, as a key concept of development? We cannot overcome these challenges by sloganeering about them but commitment - because it is not our space as leaders to lament.

I would like to see the Minister of Internal Affairs come here, not to advise us on how he is struggling to get a budget. If people can get budgets to give out money without recourse to outcome, why can’t we plan and budget for fire extinguishers or water hydrants? 

Madam Speaker, that we cannot have water hydrants in a country, where water is awash everywhere, that we cannot have water hydrants is a scandal. It is an invitation by the society out there to the Government to get out of its slumber and plan.

Fire in the timber market; these are markets. Before they are gazetted as markets, are they accessible? Do you have to have a PhD in Urban Planning to know that where you have a timber market, it is fire prone such that before you license, you make provisions as leaders: Local Government at national level for access of water hydrants. These are basics and I will not participate in a debate of lamentations, I am waiting for a very formidable solid proposal by Government on how they are going to make these places accessible, make water hydrants available, buy more fire extinguishers and if need be, sell the teargas trucks to scrap dealers and buy fire extinguishers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this is a matter of urgency; we need fire extinguishers. We are talking about the markets, leave alone the timber areas, these are areas where our people live. 

I would like to tell you that on that day, when there was a bomb blast here, I personally called for a fire extinguisher and it took over one hour for it to reach. That is why Members are saying, we need an urgent approach towards having fire extinguishers in place. Politics aside but what we want is fire extinguishers in designated areas, where they can easily be reached. 

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Busingye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This drives me to think that we have been very relaxed on enforcing requirements as we establish all these we are talking about; be it schools, hospitals, vehicles, buses and taxis. I think the law is very clear. Before a boarding school is licensed, they are supposed to have these in place. 

However, how many boarding schools have fire extinguishers? How many buses or banks have them? Before we run to the Government, fire extinguishers, yes, we should benefit from them but we are supposed to also protect ourselves.

It is my prayer that the enforcers come out very strictly and genuinely. Corruption has eaten us: someone will come to establish and open a school without even latrines, fire extinguishers or the necessary requirements fulfilled. This is one vital requirement that should be put in place before issuing a licence. I rest my case. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you understand what was on the Floor? I am just asking.

MS BUSINGYE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that you are the same people who issue licences to these traders. When you give licences to them, you have a condition that they must have fire extinguishers before you issue the licenses. Why do you go ahead and license before the conditions are fulfilled? At the end of the day, when the timber is burnt – remember, they are in designated areas – we are blamed for not rescuing the situation. Therefore, we should not license them if they do not fulfil the requirements. That is what was on the Floor. 

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, this Hansard is a record which the academia, the international community, and we, always refer to. Some of the intentionally misleading statements we make on the Floor – for one to come and say “per teargas capita” compared to fire extinguishers. I do not know how he calculates teargas. I do not know whether such a statement would be fair.

Madam Speaker, what is very clear is that all of us leaders are to blame. Even the Opposition is made up of leaders because it is facilitated to give alternative policy statements. I want the Leader of the Opposition to bring out a Hansard showing whether he has ever given any alternative policy statement in terms of fire brigade services in this country and we never discussed it. 

Coming here to blame is not enough. I would like us to own it as leaders and ensure that when budgeting, these things are considered but not to just come and say “spent money on teargas other than fire extinguishers.” This is my only concern, Madam Speaker. I feel it should be put clearly on record that the Government of Uganda does not prioritise teargas over fire extinguishers. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, we asked you for a comprehensive statement about the fire extinguishers. It should be presented tomorrow. 

2.34
DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 49 (1) with a question about COVID-19. So far, we have had 128,000 cases with over 3,000 deaths. We have a new variant, called the Omicron and our honourable members are travelling to Arusha for the Inter-Parliamentary Games. 

I am wondering whether there has been an arrangement for them to be quarantined on return. Otherwise, the interactions in Arusha cannot be taken for granted. It is a very big scare because science so far has it that the Omicron is more than twice the Delta variant – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Nsereko comes with his point of order, have you ever travelled out of this country and come back when you are not tested? Don’t you go through the process of testing, when leaving and coming back? We are debating as if we are people from my village who do not understand the procedures of testing. Doctor, you know very well that somebody has to go through a testing process. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you have put the Member to order that in this country, people are tested at departure and at arrival, I can now confirm that he will confirm to us that he has travelled and returned and that he is a medical doctor. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your issue has been answered. Hon. Auma - Just a minute. There is another doctor who wants to answer Dr Rutahigwa. Dr Baryomunsi?


2.37
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY, AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Elisa Rutahigwa who was my classmate for five years at Makerere University in the medical school.

The concern he is raising is genuine and the Minister of Health will be coming to update Parliament on that new variant called the Omicron. It is true this variant was first identified in Botswana and in South Africa on 9 November 2021. However, we have not taken a knee jerk reaction to close borders and behave the way some countries have done. The variant is still being studied in terms of its characteristics. I think there should be no cause for worry for now, for the Parliamentarians who are going to Arusha for sports.

Our advice is that we continue observing the SOPs. As you have correctly guided, Madam Speaker, we have already taken the decision, as the Government, to test all the incoming passengers. 

The Ministry of Health has also guided that genomic sequencing should be done. Genomic sequencing means that those who test positive, we go further to check which strain they are carrying. Apparently, it has been the Delta variant. However, whoever tests positive at the airport, we do genomic sequencing to see whether there is a possibility of Omicron having entered the country. 

Otherwise, there should be no cause for worry and the Minister of Health will come to give us technical details. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we expect a report from the Ministry of Health tomorrow, as communicated yesterday, by the Government Chief Whip. 

2.39
MS HELLEN AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 23 November 2021, we had electrocution in Busia District. Busia Municipal Council organised a football tournament at Buchicha Primary School, Solo A Village, Solo Parish in which 14 people were confirmed affected by the electrocution. Three people died on the spot, 11 people were taken to hospital in Busia District with serious electric burns. 

The deceased are: 
    1. Wabwire Eric – 16 years
    2. Brian Olengu – 21 years
    3. Isaac Wejuli – 21 years

My prayer is that there is a need for compensation for these people. Umeme also needs to work on the hanging wires because we are still worried that we might experience the same problem we had last week. 

Umeme should also not harass people. Whenever Busia has such happenings, when they come, they harass people in the district. They should talk to them in a cou manner so that they can come up with the way forward. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister for Umeme - (Laughter) – Minister for Energy? 


2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Madam Speaker, I am not a Minister for Umeme; I am a Minister for Energy in totality. I would invite hon. Auma to provide details of what happened to enable us to take action. So –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Auma, after the House, please give the Minister the report on what happened and see how they can be supported.

STATEMENT BY THE VICE-PRESIDENT ON THE NATIONAL CAMPAIGN AGAINST DEFILEMENT, EARLY MARRIAGES AND FAILED PARENTHOOD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Vice-President, please, make your presentation.

2.42
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, the statement I am going to present is on the national campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood. Before I present it, allow me to join the rest of Ugandans to commemorate the World AIDS Day. It is normally commemorated on 1 December every year.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet, in a meeting held on 22 November 2021 at State House, Entebbe, discussed and approved a paper presented by the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, Mama Janet Museveni, on a national campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood – (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we wait for the Vice-President to finish presenting then you can bring up your issues? Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, since March 2020, studies show increased cases of domestic violence, defilement and teenage pregnancy in our country. For instance, a study by United Nations Population Fund (2021) found that a total of 354,736 teenage pregnancies were registered in 2020, while 290,219 teenage pregnancies were registered between January to September 2021. 

This implies that on average, over 32,000 teenage pregnancies are recorded per month. The regions and districts most affected by teenage pregnancy are summarised in the table on page 2 of the statement, which I am reliably informed has been uploaded on your iPads.


    1. Busoga Subregion, particularly Kamuli - 6,535 
    2. Mayuge - 6,205 
    3. In Buganda, Mukono alone - 5,535 
    4. Wakiso - 10,439 
    5. Rakai - 2,711 
    6. Luwero - 4,545 
    7. Kampala - 8,460 
    8. Lango Sub region in Oyam - 6,449 
    9. Lira - 4,697 
    10. West Nile in Arua alone - 4,705 
    11. Yumbe - 3,973 
    12. Rwenzori in Kasese - 7,319 and 
    13. Kyenjojo - 4,341

Madam Speaker, these are, indeed, very worrying statistics. I would like to inform this House about this national campaign that will be launched on Friday, 3 December 2021 at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds and all Members of Parliament, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are invited.

Madam Speaker, you may be aware that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 under Article 31(1) provides for the right to found a family and the duty of the parents to care for and bring up their children. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under Article 34, provides for the rights of children. Under Article 34 (1), “Subject to laws enacted in their best interests, children shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or those entitled by law to bring them up”. 

“(2) Children are entitled to basic education, which shall be the responsibility of the state and the parents of the children”. 

“(4) Children are entitled to be protected from social or economic exploitation and shall not be employed in any or required to perform work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with their education or to be harmful to their health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development”. 

The Penal Code Act, Cap. 120 under Section 129, provides for defilement of persons less than 18 years of age. Sub-sections 1 to 7 provide for the various forms of defilement and the relevant sanctions upon conviction. 

For instance, subsection 1 states that, “Any person who performs a sexual act with another person who is below the age of 18 years commits a felony known as defilement and is, on conviction, liable to life imprisonment”. 

Subsection (2) states that, “Any person who attempts to perform a sexual act with another person who is below the age of 18 years commits an offence and is, on conviction, liable to imprisonment not exceeding 18 years”. 

Subsection (3) states that, “Any person who performs a sexual act with another person who is below the age of 18 years in any of the circumstances specified in subsection (4) commits a felony called aggravated defilement and is, on conviction by the High Court, liable to suffer death.”

Madam Speaker, the Children’s (Amendment) Act, 2016, Section 8A provides for the prohibition of sexual exploitation of children. Under section (1), “A person shall not engage a child in any work or trade that exposes the child to activities of sexual nature, whether paid for or not”, while section (2) provides that, “For avoidance of doubt, it shall be unlawful for any person to use:

    a. Inducement or coercion in the encouragement of a child to engage in any sexual activity;
    b. Children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices. “

Section 42(A) provides for protection of children from all forms of violence. Section 42(l) provides that “every child has a right to be protected against all forms of violence including sexual abuse and exploitation, child sacrifice, child labour, child marriage, child trafficking among others.” 

You may be aware that the Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post Primary) Act 2008, under Section 5(2), provides for the responsibilities of parents and guardians in the education of their children. It states that:

    a. Parents and guardians shall provide parental guidance and psychosocial welfare;
    b. Promote moral, spiritual and cultural growth; 
    c. Participate in the promotion of discipline of their children.
With the above laws in place, the Cabinet has taken a decision to invoke the relevant sections of the law to bring the culprits to book.  

You will recall that in December 2019, the world was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, His Excellency, the President, in March 2020 announced a total lockdown, which included the closure of all the educational institutions. 

The prolonged closure of educational institutions has exposed institutional failures such as weak enforcement of laws by the law enforcement agencies, negative social practices, failed parenthood and vulnerability of children, especially girls. Consequently, we have witnessed unprecedented levels of defilement, domestic violence and sexual abuse, which have resulted into increased teenage pregnancies and early marriages that have been widely reported in the print and electronic media.

The objectives of the national campaign are two-fold. In view of the above vices, Cabinet approved the national campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood with two specific objectives namely: 
    i. To undertake a structured social dialogue with key stakeholders to create awareness about these vices and agree on sustainable solutions; 
    ii. To direct the relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), specifically the JLOS sector and all local governments to take the necessary action to address the above vices in line with the law. 

Madam Speaker, we are envisaging the approach, which I am going to mention now when we were implementing the campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood, which Cabinet approved. For instance, the Whole-of-Government Approach that integrates the collaborative efforts of the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies of Government to achieve unity of effort towards a shared goal. This means that the three Arms of Government that is; the Executive, the Judiciary and Parliament will be involved in a national campaign. It is anticipated that this national campaign will re-awaken the stakeholders to act responsibly, given the magnitude of the vices.   

Her Excellency the Vice President will lead the Executive Arm of Government during the national campaign. Secondly, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Jacob Oulanyah, the Members of Parliament and the Legislature will lead this national campaign in their constituencies. Thirdly, the Chief Justice will lead the Judiciary. The development partners and Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) will provide advocacy and support Government to implement this national campaign. Madam Speaker, for avoidance of doubt, the Leader of Parliament, including you, will be very instrumental in leading the campaign. 

The scope of the campaign
The campaign will target every stakeholder including: ministries, departments and agencies, parents and guardians, political leaders, religious leaders, cultural leaders, community leaders, Civil Society Organisations, the Academia, the media, children (both boys and girls) and the general public.

The national campaign will last for a period of 12 months with effect from 01 December 2021. 

The national campaign will be championed by Her Excellency the Vice-President, Jessica Alupo, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Robinah Nabbanja and the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, Mama Janet Museveni. 

The activities to be carried out during the campaign include: 
    1) Sensitising the public about the dangers of defilement, early marriages, Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs), HIV/AIDS and teenage pregnancies. 
    2) Mobilise political leaders at all levels including the Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), development partners, the private sector, the Academia and community leaders to participate and support the campaign goals. 
    3) Social dialogues with religious leaders, cultural leaders, political leaders, parents and guardians on responsible parenting.
    4) Media engagement campaigns both print and electronic including social media.
    5) Conducting research and generate reports on defilement, early marriages, teenage pregnancies, Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs), HIV/AIDS and girls' education. 
    6) Mobilising ministries, departments and agencies to support the campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood.
    7) Dissemination of policies and implementation standards and guidelines against the above stated vices.

    8) Madam Speaker, as I come to the conclusion of my statement, allow me to highlight the expected outcomes:
    9) Increased awareness of social, economic and healthy challenges associated with defilement, early marriages and teenage pregnancies.
    10) Secondly, prosecution of perpetrators of defilement and early marriages in accordance with the law. 


In conclusion, permit me to lay this statement on Table for debate and appropriate action as Parliament may deem it fit. I beg to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Your Excellency, for the good statement. Honourable members, I will allow the debate on this for 30 minutes. Hon. Ssekikubo, you had something to say.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, sit the other side. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence over this matter of procedure. When I saw Her Excellency, the Vice-President in this House, I was comforted that on top of the statement on sexual violence, there are equally matters of extreme public importance that are to be answered by Her Excellency the Vice-President.

I was in the House yesterday, Madam Speaker, and you made a good ruling on the question of the UPDF deployment to Congo that it shall be made tomorrow. However, when I perused my copy of the Constitution, I saw that Article 98 talks about the President – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter; he is on procedure. Hon. Ssekikubo, can you continue.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I saw that Article 98(2) talks about the President who shall take precedence over all persons in Uganda in descending orders, the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Chief Justice, etcetera with all powers. I also realise that Article 108 talks about the Vice-President who shall deputise for President as and when need arises.

Madam Speaker, whereas the guidance you gave still stands, I thought that as Members of Parliament, there are matters that are deep to our hearts, particularly when the constitutional provisions are being violated. All of us swore to protect and defend this Constitution. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, Article 210 is very clear that Parliament is to regulate the Uganda People's Defence Forces. While I was seated in my sitting room last night, I saw on Al Jazeera TV - for Members who watched, it was the second headline - showing a column of UPDF troops marching, allegedly entering Congo. 

When that happens - I was here and I was part of the Parliament that enacted the UPDF Act of 2005 and therein provided that Parliament shall give its approval on top of the constitutional mandate of regulating.

Since these events happened on Monday, we are proceeding as if it is normal. The constitutional order is being violated and I remain seated here neighbouring the Lt Gen. Mugira, who is seated in this House as the Member of the UPDF with our Speaker. Nobody is coming out to tell the country. By the time we debate this matter on Thursday, it will be stale. If you did not want institutions in this country, why did we provide for them in the Constitution? I would not have risen. I thought I would hide my head but it was unbearable. 

Now that we have the second most important person in this country, the Vice-President, can we be informed. It is not only to be informed but also for the three or five days, at least we give a retrospective approval. 

However, we are here just looking on. Yes, there is a lot of business. Honourable Executive Members, can’t you forgive this country? Can you allow this Parliament to be a Parliament that you aspire for the people without making us hide our heads as we walk out of this Chambers? 

They ask us and we have no answers. Must you prick us in the eye? It is everywhere, apart from Parliament and yet, this is your Parliament. Madam Speaker and Members, we swore to protect and defend this Constitution. That is why we are a representative body with all the state institutions here. 

If we are proceeding, trampling down the very Constitution we are meant to protect and defend, I am very hurt. Even other enabling laws, the UPDF Act, is very clear. What is wrong with this country? Can the Executive, for God’s sake - at least for the semblance of democracy, even if you despise this Parliament but this is the Parliament that you have. You cannot have another one. You may despise us but we are still the Parliament. We may not know these things but we are still the Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, have you finished quarrelling? (Laughter)
  
MR SSEKIKUBO: It is endless but –


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, what you are raising is a very important issue but in yesterday’s Sitting, the chairperson ruled that we would have a comprehensive statement tomorrow. This is an abuse to the chairperson’s ruling. The Chairperson ruled that we shall have a statement on Thursday. Now, you are bringing the same thing. 
We are saying, “Let us promote a campaign against defilement and early marriages,” and that is that. The other one will come tomorrow. It is not anything for an argument.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Only that you are aware this was not a question of a statement. It is a question of this Parliament seeking –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We said that we need an action and to know what is happening, who gave them the powers to do whatever is being done. That will come tomorrow.

MR SSEKIKUBO: With that rider, I rest my case. I hope they are in the know and with your authority, I am sure and I have no doubt that they will stop the trampling of the Constitution.

3.09
MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Her Excellency, the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda for bringing this very important motion to the House. 

I have a few comments. If we are talking about Gender-Based Violence, we should also include female genital mutilation because that is also violence against a particular group of gender. I would also wish to hear - because this problem of defilement, including incest and all that we are talking about, started last year. We would wish to know about the criminals or culprits who have been defiling these girls. By now, we should be comforted that at least justice is being done and some of these people have been arrested, facing the law and/or even judgment has been made. That would give us a ray of hope that something is being done. 

I appreciate what we are mentioning but as we mention them, it is important to note that so far, the Government has done so much. This will help in the issue of advocacy, which we started as members over UWOPA on Thursday last week, and it is supposed to last for 16 days. I am happy that the Government has extended it to two years. 

We need to join the rest in the campaign and to know that when we talk about the Children's Act - I have been an advocate of that Act for a number of years. In the last Parliament, we went with a team to Luuka, when there were issues of children who had dropped out of school and were cutting sugar cane. We had about 50 members of the executive of the district but when we asked whether these people had ever seen the Children's Act, not a single hand was raised. 

I stay in Bukoto - just recently when we had a meeting, I brought it up. It is, therefore, important that we begin sensitising people that in the Children's Act, there is a provision that the Vice Chairperson, at all levels of local Government, is supposed to be in charge of children. This will help us in that advocacy so that people down there know their responsibilities. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, representing the workers. Her Excellency, much as you said the expected outcome is prosecution of the perpetrators of defilement and early marriages, we want you to give us what you have done so far. There is also incest; there is a story that came up about someone who impregnated all his daughters. What have we done to that effect? I am limiting the debate to 30 minutes, each person using two minutes. UWOPA will speak last. 

3.14
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Vice President for the statement and the campaign they are planning to launch. As the Parliamentary Forum on Population, Food Security and Development and that of the children, we had started this campaign. We are now happy that the Government is joining this cause. So, we have every reason to salute the Vice President for this gesture. 

There are issues in society, especially some faiths that discourage young girls from menstruating when they are still at home, especially when they are out of school. By doing so, they marry off young girls. I would like to interest the Vice President to engage some religious leaders that all children are entitled to study irrespective of undergoing that biological process. 

Madam Speaker, as a forum, we are engaging communities as far as teenage pregnancies and early marriages are concerned. However, there are challenges in society that are cultural in one way or another and my neighbour here alluded to one of them. 

When you go to the terrain in Sebei, there is the issue of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). There are people who feel that culturally, somebody has to be subjected to that. There are laws in place but popularising them is a task that needs to be taken up by the Government. Let us all play our part and let us engage. I think we can make a difference. I salute the Vice President for this noble cause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Milton. It is about cultures and religious norms that are in place. 

3.16
MS SYLVIA BAHIREIRA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Her Excellency, the Vice President, for the statement. I would like to advise that as the campaign goes on, the issue of parenting should be very loud and clear because once parenting gaps are not fixed, we may never achieve much. 

On the issue of parenting, I would like to mention the aspect of the dress code, which of course, parents have to emphasise to their children. It is key that parents should tell their children, as they grow up, that the dress code is key and will prevent them from many shortcomings. If I can give an example of people who live in the Middle East and those in North Africa, who are predominantly Muslims, they wear very long clothes. Empirical data shows that their HIV/AIDS prevalence is at 0.1 per cent. I want to tell you, honourable members, that the dress code significantly contributes to the low HIV/AIDS prevalence in the Arab countries.

If our people continue to wear clothes – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mapenduzi.

MS BAHIREIRA: Honourable members, let me finish. I am protected by the Speaker. If our people continue to wear clothes which are above the knees, we should expect high teenage pregnancies and defilements. Otherwise, men are not temptation proof. The moment people continue to wear clothes which are above the knees, we may not do much. Thank you, Madam Speaker.                                                                                                                                                                               

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sylvia, we have got your issue. Your Excellency the Vice President, as you go for the campaign out there, there is an issue of parental guidance and psychological support to these children. The morals should not be broken. Why would you be putting on a mini? Otherwise, you would be enticing men and these men are very dangerous. Therefore, it is our responsibility to guide our girl child; let us make the girl child dress in a decent way. 

3.19
MR MARTIN MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking the Vice President for making a very clear statement, which has given a clear picture of what is on the ground, but also offering what should be done as a country. 

When you look at the statistics provided and reflect deeply on how the country is moving, you will realise that some of these very serious issues are linked to a number of factors. Number one, most of the areas where we have serious cases of early pregnancy and so on, are areas affected greatly by poverty. 
Secondly, I think it is also important to look at how we strengthened other institutions, for example, the cultural institutions in some areas. In Acholi Subregion, the cultural institution plays a big role in promoting ways of lives that make the community feel a sense of ownership and take responsibility in raising children.

Madam Speaker, I think it is important that Government considers working closely with cultural institutions just like with other structures of Government. I would also like to point out that I worked with the local government for a number of years. The experience that we had, while working with Gulu District Local Government - the structures we have down there, for example the Local Council structures, play very important roles. It is therefore, my hope that we will make use of these structures so that they can help in supporting the fight.

Madam Speaker, there is need to support the GBV shelters that have been established across the country such that they can function well and help rehabilitate victims of GBV. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, when the system switches you off, do not just switch on the microphone.

3.22
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Children’s Act provides for a National Children’s Authority. I would like to know from the Vice-President what happened to this authority because it is not implemented on the ground. Whatever you have spelt out in your communication is work that is supposed to be done by the National Children’s Authority. 

They are supposed to take care of the rights of the children in this country. We do not know what they are doing in the districts. It is one of the authorities in this country that is little known. Are they empowered in terms of a budget? What are they doing because they would do whatever we want to do in this campaign?

Secondly, we are talking about abuse of the girl-child. However, in the last two years, in this COVID-19 era, there are very many children who got pregnant and have become victims. We want to hear from the Government: what is the programme specifically for these children who got pregnant? Are they going to school now or after? We would like to know that such that we tell our people that Government has a programme. There are very many in the countryside. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bwanika.

3.24
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Ochero County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Vice-President for the statement. I only want to mention one or two things.

There are about five regions that have been picked by the Vice-President and I think that it is just for the sake of making her statement brief. However, let all the regions be known properly through research because other regions, which are not there such as Teso might think we are safe but we are also not safe in all this. I thank you and probably, this is just for sampling. 

The other area that I think should be addressed, especially as we are pushing this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Emigu, when you look down on the table, there is a disclaimer.

MR EMIGU: Okay, that is it but I wanted the other one also to be seen properly so that we are put at the same level. What I would like Members to note is that sometimes, it is the parents from both sides and the police should also be brought on this, especially Ministry of Internal Affairs. Several times when such issues take place, police rush and ask the parents to come into negotiations because they will also have a “take home” as the parents of the boy may also take the other side.
Vice-President and colleagues in the House, even as we push this, we need to check on the police and parents from both sides. They are the ones actually encouraging - They even tell them, “Why do you take so and so’s son to jail rather than getting something and going back home?”

Due to poverty, sometimes, people accept but we shall not compromise poverty as we break the law. (Member timed out.)

3.26
MR EVANS KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Vice-President for the statement well-made. You may find that on activities, which are going to be carried out by the Vice-President, in the district there –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not the Vice-President going to carry on the activities. It is the Vice-President leading from the Executive and you, as Members of Parliament, are involved from legislature. Therefore, the activities are inclusive of you.

MR KANYIKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may find that at the districts and municipalities, there is a department known as Probation and Social Welfare. What the probation officers are supposed to do at the district include: 


    1. To sensitise the local communities and NGOs on childcare and protection; 
    2. They offer social support and counselling. 

Therefore, you may find that the activities in this statement are mainly the work of the probation officers. Unfortunately, the probation officers are less funded – (Member timed out but allowed to continue.) 

I consulted the Probation Officer in Masaka District where I come from and he told me that on a quarterly basis, he gets Shs 550,000. In a year, he gets Shs 2,200,000. They have no car or motorcycle in the department yet they are supposed to traverse the whole district.

Therefore, it is a concern that the funding of these probation officers be increased and they should be given enough capacity building such that they can do their work better. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I want you to know this. We appreciate that we have probation officers but this is a drive that we are leading. The presumption is that we are not satisfied with what the probation officers are doing, especially because of COVID-19. Very many young girls have conceived and been married off. It is now us to raise our voices, as leaders, to make sure that this is reduced, people get information and they are encouraged and counselled. When they hear from a legislator, it is more powerful than hearing from a probation officer.


3.30
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would also like to thank the Vice-President for the statement. My issue is about customary marriage. Under customary marriages, in most cases, we are not given chance to verify the ages of the people going for this marriage. In some cultures, they even hide the brides and you cannot interface with the physical makeup of this bride to really ascertain that they have reached the marital age. This is a challenge. Members, as we go out there, we need to look into the customary marriages. 

Then, our cultures in schools; the teachers have been oriented in such a way that a pregnant student is chased out of school. We need to organise capacity building sessions for our teachers to handle the upcoming practices, for example, teaching a pregnant girl. Teachers have been asking us, how should we take these students? Should we take them as mothers/fellow women?

They need serious orientation on how to handle them. And there is a lot of stigmatisation of these students. That is why some of them even reach an extent of running away. This is because the way they are handled is really suggestive that they should go ahead with marriages. This is a challenge.

Under the three highlighted issues of failed parenting, defilement and early marriages, it is girls that are most affected. Boys – (Member timed out.)

3.32
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo county West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the Vice President. I have very important points to make, I seek your attention. 

The Vice President talked about our research, I am not quite sure research undertaken in one week – if it is research for first degree holders, it is going to take you three years, master's maybe two years and PhD, five years. 

But Madam Vice President, you are aware that the school of women and gender studies at Makerere University has a lot of research and high impact journals. You could utilise that school to give you the information and knowledge that you need to facilitate your work. 

Through you, Madam Speaker, I think the girls and the women and the mothers and daughters of this country deserve a comprehensive and particular specific plan or programme. I would call that economic inclusion, economic uplift and economic empowerment that specifically focuses on the girls and the women. 

To your attention, Madam Vice President, I think the daughters and mothers of this country will need more of the women in high ranking offices for these other upcoming girls to look up to. And I think you can have a scholarship that focuses on the women, especially those – (Member timed out.)

3.34
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Vice President, for the statement and to also say that it was much more on prevention interventions in regards to prevention of teenage pregnancies. However, she also highlighted, on page six, that we had more than 600 girls in different regions who have either given birth or are pregnant. I thought it was very important to also discuss how to manage young girls, and also think of how they can go back to school. 

In 2020, the Minister of Education and Sports embarked on a programme to revise guidelines for prevention and management of teenage pregnancy in school settings in Uganda. I would like to know how far they have reached on this because it provides a framework to support safe re-entry of girls into schools, after prisoners. 

I would like to know from the minister and also the Vice President has indicated that schools have been closed, which has also negatively affected the young girls. Schools offer social protection. I think she would have indicated that they should think of opening schools because if you open schools, you will have these children stay in school for a long time. If you revise the curriculum and include sex education so that teachers – we used to have senior women – but I think at this rate, we need to revise the curriculum so that teachers are trained to educate children. This is so that we have clear sessions in schools to teach boys and girls on how to actually get to know about – (Member timed out.)

3.36
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the Vice-President for this motion. My concern is about the reported cases of early pregnancies. For example, in Mukono, you said there were 5,535 reported cases but I want to give you information that there are other cases that are not reported, and they are a number. 

A case scenario of my district, Mukono in Ttunda Subcounty, I met about 70 early pregnancy victims. And when you go to police, only about 20 are reported. I want you to help, probably and we get an investigating team to go to those police stations and we see whether those cases are taken to court because after some time, you see these culprits moving freely.

The second point is that there is also incest. A 12-year-old girl gets impregnated by an uncle and when you go to the police, you will find that it is not even recorded. Actually, they solve these problems at the Local Council levels. we need to find out how we can get to these cases so that they are reported.

Lastly, I also would like to thank the Vice-President, when we approached the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, when I had a session – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, these figures may not be exact because there are those people that do not report what is happening. And basically, because of the stigma, people try to keep it to themselves or try to look at the culture that you cannot – they feel ashamed with whatever is happening. 

3.38
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest in appreciating the Vice-President, the entire Cabinet and the First Lady for this initiative. 

As we sit here, the situation is alarming and to me, this is a wakeup call. The effects of defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood are very high and it is affecting the population.

I propose, as we go to do our sensitisation and ensure enforcement, we should analyse the specific primary root causes of these problems. This is so that we shall be able to address them squarely. 

Secondly, what we are going to do is reinforcement. I want to thank the Government and the President of this country because we have very good laws. We have very good structures up to village level. Does it mean that we have all gone to sleep because now, we are defeated?

Madam Speaker, for a sustainable solution, let the relevant ministry be empowered to continuously provide adequate service so that our children and families can be protected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.41
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, I thank you again. This is a very popular topic and statement affecting all of us. I believe that very few of us here may not be parents. If I were an appointing authority of Her Excellency, the Vice-President, then from midnight tonight, she would be a Lieutenant General for this statement today. However, Madam Speaker, to begin on this sensitisation, we must begin with ourselves. Her statement and your statement are in line with what all of us feel and what is out there. 

Madam Speaker, are you aware of how many girls - especially under labour – how many children we, the affluent and leaders, lock up in our homes, maybe in towns here? How I wish you commissioned some inquiry and you will find out that it is actually us the leaders who are the abusers of these young people.

Lastly –(Interjections)- Yes and I insist, Madam Speaker, it is us the affluent who are locking up these young children. I know teenage begins from 13 to 19. All those numbers are teens. I want to tell you, today, if you went around the city, you would find many leaders who are locking up these young people. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Vice-President, the issue is about - what Rastaman is saying is that we should start with ourselves. Let us talk about it; let it not just stop here. Let us go out there and speak about early pregnancies and defilement. Let us speak to whoever cares to hear about it and this is the only way we can stop it.

3.44
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start by commending Her Excellency for being part and parcel of this problem by bringing this statement on the Floor of Parliament. 

Indeed, it is a big challenge for us, as a country. I remember I mentioned on this Floor that we are sitting on a time bomb. Our theme, as NRM, in the last election was “Securing the Future”. Indeed, I see no future for trees, I see no future for rivers but of human beings who are the young people - the young girls who are getting impregnated every other day.

The fundamental question for all of us leaders to ask is; what has gone wrong with parenting? Why are parents less involved in raising their children unlike our grandfathers and fathers? It could be poverty. It could be alcohol. It could be many things and those are the root factors that we must know and, as a Government, come up with positive solutions.

Madam Speaker, when you go to the country – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the question is what has gone wrong with parenting? When these children were at school, nobody felt the pinch. Now the children are at home, you are getting to know that you have to do the parenting. That is where the problem is coming from; that we have failed to play our role as parents.

3.46
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity. I thank the Vice-President for this move. My interest is to add on something, that as you are going out there to take on this campaign, I urge my colleagues that, please, let us involve all the student leaders.
If you go to schools, right from nursery, primary, A-level to institutions of higher learning, there are student leaders. You find that there are councillors, prefects and head prefects. Let us make the best use of them. If we do so, this move shall be successful.

I also urge my colleagues that, please, when you are out there, there are people who are not leaders. However, normally, when they speak, the community that they lead or live in listens to them attentively. So, as we are carrying out this campaign, let us look for such fellows and they will help us to disseminate the information effectively. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Vice-President, as we speak about the leaders who are going to lead the campaign, the teachers are very important in this aspect. Now that we are reopening schools, the teachers are the ones who can speak to these children to co-exist – a girl-child and boy-child. They need to know that they can co-exist in the same school. We cannot only have single-sex schools.

3.47
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have listened to my colleagues and got the information very well from our Vice-President, but the issue at hand is more than the way we describe it here.

For the last two years, the rate at which early marriages, defilement and incest – relatives defiling their own children - have increased. Just last week, there is a man who defiled a child of about eight years in Kapchorwa Municipality –(Interjection)- Yes.

The biggest problem we have is the police. You find that after someone like that has committed that crime, he will advance money to the police and the case dies at investigation stage. 

Members, I prefer that Parliament should come up with very tough punishments or laws that can at least scare these other people who defile young children, especially these ones who defile their own relatives. I thank you very much.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the laws under the Penal Code Act. It is just the implementation of the laws that the implementers are also not doing the right thing. If you are saying police must take action and it fails to do so, then there is a problem that must be solved. The laws are available.

3.49
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Her Excellency, the Vice-President for the statement. The issue of the girl-child is a bit complex. We are talking about the campaign. We are talking about defilement and early marriages. 

I want us to draw our attention to the dignity and issues that infringe on the dignity of the girl-child. Madam Speaker, the girl child we are talking about in the villages cannot afford reusable pads. They use leaves, boxes and banana fibres during their menstrual period – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this is a very important issue. 

DR ATWIJUKIRE: Recently, I ran a campaign for reusable pads and I would first do sensitisation. One of the girls said to me, “Honourable member, thank you very much for the reusable pads but we cannot afford knickers. So, how shall we use the reusable pads?” She described what she has been doing. She told me she puts something around her waist and puts a cloth during her menstrual period to hold - That cloth is held by another cloth up. It was a very touching story.

I would have loved to hear Her Excellency the Vice President, the entire Government and this Parliament making a commitment that as part of this campaign, we shall provide reusable pads. These reusable pads are not expensive. What makes them expensive is the procurement process that puts profit at 100 per cent and the taxes.

We are lucky we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is good at acquiring loans here. We can acquire another loan to demonstrate our commitment to these young women of this country that we are actually concerned. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President, it is an agreed position of this House that for us to be successful in this campaign, these girls need reusable pads. Some of these girls go to the boys because they want to get some money to buy these things. So, if we can pass – and it is not expensive for us to get the reusable pads for our girls.

3.49
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Vice President for the statement and I thank the Government for taking up this initiative that has been done mainly by the NGOs. 

The question of the girl child is very important to us because we came out of women. They are our mothers, sisters and daughters. Therefore, it is very important that this country and Parliament looks at the girl child. 

I come from a fishing community and you find that a girl child in the fishing community is an endangered species. The report clearly marks Busoga and it goes further to indicate Kamuli, Mayuge and Namayingo as places with rampant teenage pregnancy, defilement and early marriages. 

What can we do? We cannot bury our heads in the sand. It is time this Parliament and the Government woke up to look at the girl child. We are soon opening schools. What plans have we put in place to help those who have already produced and are saying they can no longer go for academics? Are we going to plan for skilling? What has the ministry done with the skilling programme for this girl child? 

There are those who are working in gold mines and those who are already fishing. What are we going to do with these girls who are now in the gold mines? (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President, one of the things that you need to clear is: are these girls who were at school but conceived and produced or those that are still pregnant going back to school? Can they be accommodated at school? Can they be counselled in order to reduce the stigma? 

3.55
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Vice President for her report. I would like to entirely agree with her that we need to move out and salvage the girl child. As we move towards the girl child, who stays with the girl child? Even the boy child – 

So, let us give attention to both sexes; the boys and the girls. As long as we are training our girls to be disciplined, there are what I would call “hyenas”. Therefore, we must have a two-pronged way of approaching this issue.

We have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Let us use that structure to bring to order all the cultural institutions. We should actually go a long way and leave these other workshops. Let us go to the root causes in society like clans. 

Why can’t the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development prevail upon all clans to ensure that they revive the annual clan meetings? You may find that out of this continuous talk, we shall have a society which is upright. Otherwise, when we call them to workshops, they will sign for transport refunds and it ends there. So, let it be handled from the real root causes in the society. 

I also would like to urge the Vice President that the 12 months are not even enough. We can make the campaign last 24 months such that the message goes deeper to the rural area. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.57
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the Vice President for her statement.

In the statement, the Vice President outlined the activities and the scope of this campaign, but she has not clearly come up with the resources that will be needed for it yet, when you look at the nature of the activities, they require enormous resources for the various stakeholders. It is an important aspect, which the Vice President should take keen interest in.

As my colleague has said, this campaign should be continuous. It should not only be for a period of 12 months or two years because teenage pregnancy has been in this country for long and it has worsened. This campaign should be continuous until we kick out teenage pregnancy, irresponsible parenting and the rest out of this country. So, I request that this campaign is continuous. 

One of the major causes of teenage pregnancy is poverty, which is widely spread. In the campaign, we need to cater for the poverty eradication interventions. If we empower the people economically, chances are high that teenage pregnancy will reduce. We see it practically when we look at the children of the rich and the poor – (Member timed out.)

3.59
MS ROSE CHERUKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to appreciate our Vice-President for the able statement that she has put before us. 

I rise on the matter of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). I come from that area where FGM is done. As a mother - I can see the Government Chief Whip is busy looking at me. I am also mutilated but no. (Laughter) The issue on ground actually is – (Interjections) protection, please. The issue here is that the act affects the value of the woman and the girl-child. It is done at the age of 12 to 13 years - not at 18 years - when these girls are still very young. The moment the act is done, they are looked at as marriage material. They lose their value in a way that when it comes to delivery, a scar has already been created and delivery becomes very hard. That place has to crack and this causes more pain. 

Madam Vice-President, during this campaign, I feel that Sebei Subregion should be given a special – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on. Honourable members, we need to help hon. Emma and the Sebei Region on FGM.

MS CHERUKUT: The thing is not easy; it is not nice. When you look at the Bible, the girl and the boy are supposed to enjoy that act. However when it has been done, it reduces the sensitivity of a woman. 

Tell me, it is not a business of dilly-dallying. I need all of you as honourable members to join me to sensitise my community to abandon that act. Otherwise, I appreciate you all. Let us sensitise my people so that we leave that and we have a better Sebei Subregion for better issues and education is the key. 

Secondly, we need to talk to the surgeons. They look at it as a business to earn money. They use very queer weapons; knives, which are not sterilised and you know, we are in the era of HIV/AIDS and COVID-19. What will happen? Thank you for giving that audience.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Emma. Honourable members, that is not something nice to hear. We really need to fight, as Parliament, not to allow that to happen to our girl-children. As hon. Emma has said, these children should be left to feel. (Applause) 

4.02
MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Her Excellency for the paper that she has presented. We talked about poor parenting. In my district, most of the children have been taken care of and parented by their grandparents because the parents are children. 

You will find a 15-year-old mother and a 17-year-old father, who cannot fend for themselves and they have a baby so it is the grandparents who are trying to struggle. They are old, they are struggling and they cannot catch up with the technicalities of today. These children get out of hand. 

Most of the young mothers, after producing and leaving their babies with their grandparents, remarry and so, you find these children are at large. 

Another thing we should focus on is that the men we used to know; our parents and brothers, were bread earners. In my district or in the region of West Nile, it is now the women who are fending for their families. They have very much to do and yet, the responsibility of being close to their children to teach them what to do was their responsibility. They now have to put food on the table and they do not have time to sit with the children and guide them. 

Can we encourage the men of this country to take the responsibility of being bread earners again in their families so that the mothers can have time to talk to the children, to guide them, to teach them the right things? You find the mother is in the garden, in the market in the evening, has to put food on the table and has to look for school fees. Then, the children are at large. The men are only left with the responsibility of making the women and the young girls pregnant. The women are not the ones impregnating themselves. It is the men. They have relaxed, they do not want to take responsibility, their time is only to sleep.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the young MPs; the youth MPs?

4.05
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to the voice of my colleagues to thank Her Excellency the Vice-President for the initiative of a national campaign addressing the plight of the girl-child. 

The increasing numbers of teenage pregnancies across the country is not a pleasant sight for us as leaders. I think we all agree as a nation that it is a responsibility and we all have a role to play. 

I would like to request the Vice-President that in such a campaign where you get to reach out to different girls across the country, you get to involve the youth leadership. Uganda has a National Youth Council that is well structured from village to national level. Each of these district youth councils have girls and male colleagues on them that would be very inspirational to the fellow young people that you get to meet. 

My colleague and I have done a campaign sampling across the country trying to reach out to different girls that have gotten pregnant during this pandemic. I can assure you that the effort that the two of us have put is not enough. 

Most importantly, I also want to encourage the Vice-President to strongly include the role of men in protecting the girl-child in our societies. It would be our delight to see many more male champions at the forefront of this campaign because it all begins with social responsibility. It does not take us anywhere to have many going on the campaign – (Member timed out.)

4.07
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to thank the Vice-President for the statement of the national campaign against teenage pregnancies, early marriages, failed parenthood and defilement. 

I also want to add my voice to what my colleague has submitted as a representative of the young people of Buganda Region because even here on the table that the Vice-President has presented to us, you see that Buganda is the most affected on the girl-children that have been hit with teenage pregnancies. 

Therefore, my request is that we involve the MPs for the youth in this campaign and also the National Youth Council. As my colleague has elaborated, we have structures right from village level and each level has a female representative. It would be very good for us to involve those young girls and boys who are directly affected by these problems. 

Secondly, my appeal is that as we campaign to the girl-child, we put the boy-child on the front and also the parents because the parents have forced the young girls into marriages – (Member timed out.)


4.09
MR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by joining colleagues in thanking Her Excellency, the Vice President, for her statement that seeks to launch a campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood. 

I want to begin by addressing the issue of failed parenthood. In addition, I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to what used to happen in terms of parenting way back in the 60s, 70s and much earlier. 

Parenting used not to be a preserve of only the parents but it was a community matter, whereby everybody in the village or in the community would take charge of an errant child, if they found them misbehaving. This is no more. I think we need to tap into this, that whereas now we have various laws that guard against mistreatment of children, sometimes you find that parents take such laws very far. Therefore, you hear about “why did you rebuke my child?” yet a neighbour was merely trying to give guidance to a child. I think, as we launch this campaign, we need to tap into this important aspect of the social fabric that we used to enjoy. 

Secondly- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are those who would really wish to speak but you will speak on the next topic. When we talk about failed parenting, I also want to bring this that even within here, I have complaints - Members, take charge of your children. (Applause) I am tired of counselling people. Take charge of your children that you get from out.

4.12
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the Vice President for giving a well-articulated statement, and to thank Cabinet for being mindful about our daughters. 

From the people I represent, the numbers go up to 2,000 girls, who have reported to the hospital, excluding those who are begging on the street. Over 2,000 girls have been impregnated so the matter touches me and that is why I want to thank you. 

I thank Cabinet for invoking the relevant laws; this is very good. My prayer is that the invocation happens retrospectively from the date Cabinet decided to invoke them so that the people who are responsible for impregnating these girls get the required punishment. It will teach those who are yet to do it, not to do so. 

The other thing that I request we add to the campaign is the care for the girls who are already pregnant; the medical care for these girls who are pregnant, including those who might suffer leakage because their wombs are not ready for pregnancy. 

I also wish that we add to this campaign, disciplinary action for the officers who slept on the job. These laws have been there but they have not been implemented. There are people who slept on the job; there are officers who negotiated with the parents. We have CID officers, judicial officers, prosecutors; a disciplinary measure for those who did not do their work should be included in this campaign so that it is handled holistically- (Member timed out.)
 
4.15
MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Vice President. I will restrict myself on the role of parents. I think parents have not done their work. I always ask myself; why is it that it is now when the schools are closed? Why is it that it is outrageous now? I think they have not done their work. 

I think we should be thinking of what to do with the parents who were negligent with their children. This is costing Uganda’s future. These people are supposed to be here after us. Now, there is no future for this country. We should not just sit and watch if you consider the roles of every stakeholder that they are outlining as far as a child is concerned. 

Most parents are preoccupied with work. By the way, some parents are perpetrating these early marriages. They are the initiators and it is not only in the poor families but also in the rich families. They are the ones arranging for the marriages of these young girls in expectation of gifts. 

For example, where they give cows, you find a 13 year old - I normally call it child fattening; you will find a child of 13 years being kept in the house and given milk and she becomes like someone of 20 years and then she gets married. We should do something to the parents who are negligent to the future of the girl child. 

4.17
MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the good report about the girl child by Her Excellency, the Vice President. 

As we advocate for no violence against women and girls, I will still add my voice that we sensitise our parents to put in a lot of effort in advocating for no violence against the girl child. 

Madam Speaker, some of these parents think that these children are for the Government. Therefore, I propose that we provide a full programme of sensitising our parents in the whole country, a programme of mind-set change, not only for the youth but also for parents, sensitising them that it is their rights. Yes, the Government will not come to your home and tell you that please tell your girl that this is a dangerous place and that you should not go there. If we do not do this, this violence against children or early pregnancies will increase. Let us combine efforts, go down there in our constituencies and sensitise our parents. 

However, we cannot do it if we have not realised that there is a full programme that we can put in place to sensitise our parents to realise that it is their role and they are the first role models as far as this programme is concerned. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 59(c); motion without notice. Motion for adjournment of a debate in our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate and ask the Vice President to respond, and then we move to another item. I beg to move


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? [Members: “No.”] Members, the rules talk of one hour for a debate of a minister’s statement and we have taken over one hour. We would really wish to go to the next item. Can we just have the person who was on the Floor, the Leader of the Opposition and the minister of children?

4.20
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Vice-President for this report. I would like to think that it is in good faith and intending to address the brightness of our children out there.

In the same vein, I want to draw the attention of the Vice-President and the Government, to the situation in Uganda because raising awareness without addressing the critical issues, will not solve the problem.

One man said that if you are to synchronise the status quo, you have to synchronise the quagmire we are in. The quagmire is that the children, who are going for marriage at an early age, are going there because of a problem - a push factor. The push factor is where people are wallowing in poverty and this matter must be critically addressed by Government. 

For example, in this COVID-19 situation - two years of lockdown, children of the well-to-do have not been impregnated; it is the children of the poor people who have been impregnated because the children of the rich have got access to education while the other ones are wallowing in the villages, and they have been tampered with by the wrong people.

Madam Speaker, can we have also a policy because there is a policy on free education but it – (Member timed out.)
Allow me to conclude Is it free? Madam Speaker, you are a Member of Parliament and you know what we are suffering from; the children have failed to attain even primary and secondary school education because of high prices of education. Can we address that also?
I would like to request Government to present to this Parliament how they are going to address the critical areas; where our children are becoming victims and they are prone to these conditions because of the situation we are in. If we cannot address this issue of sanitary pads and this situation where we are not helping the poor, we are not going to address - this raising of awareness is going to be a sham activity - if we do not critically address the areas of concern; the push factors that make our children prone to these conditions. 

I salute you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.23
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This statement by the Vice-President comes after we had earlier debated the issue of the girl-child. 

First and foremost, we shall never end this defilement, teenage pregnancies and early marriages, when the police that is supposed to enforce the laws, is not doing its work. We have all the necessary legislation but enforcement has been a challenge. Even where the cases are clear, they will make sure that shoddy investigations are carried out and the file that is sent to DPP is shallow and therefore, they cannot secure a conviction. We need to first deal with the law enforcers.

Secondly, different districts have come up with ordinances. In my own district, early marriages were rampant and we came up with an ordinance. We are targeting the defilers but we are forgetting that we have the parents and LCs. In my district of Tororo, we had indicated - and of course, now, with the COVID-19 lockdown, it brought other challenges. However, if a girl under 18 years is married in your village, the LC together with the parents are held responsible.

If we do not do that, we shall not end this problem. The majority of the girls that are getting married before 18 years is because of the pressure from their parents.

Lastly – (Member timed out.) Can I just conclude? I would like to appreciate Your Excellency the Vice-President for bringing up this issue of parenting. Today, I was informed of a young mother that came here with a baby of six months. The father is one of us here and he has failed to take responsibility. 
Colleagues, as we debate this matter and support this particular statement, can we be role models? -(Interjection)- No, we shall not name but I just want to inform that Member of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can I have order in the House? I am not going to allow any point of order. I am tired of counselling women here. Women come here with children and it is the Members of Parliament who impregnate these girls and they abandon them. Just imagine this girl is your daughter. Hon. Ssekikubo, you have a daughter, who is very young - and somebody irresponsibly impregnates and does not take care of her.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform that colleague of ours – I have said it on the Floor, if you know that you are not responsible, go and conduct a DNA test and free yourself. As long as you do not do that, please if you know that you are responsible for that child whose mother came here today, go and make peace and take care. Otherwise, we do not want to mention your name. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can you sit down? If you do not believe this, I will start naming them. 

4.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to give my comments on this very important subject. Hon. Opendi said that we discussed this matter at length and we made some resolutions; that various agencies were supposed to carry out some exercise and come back to Parliament with results. 

I do not know whether this is one of them because we directed the Minister of Education and Sports, to wait for the schools to open and do a better assessment on how many children are affected through these closure of schools and child pregnancy.

I am only concerned about two things:
One, I have read the document but I have not seen the cure. We are talking about sensitisation, getting the cultural leaders involved, getting political leaders sensitised, getting parents sensitised, getting all these things. 

We are all sensitised but having your daughter of 10 or 12 years pregnant - you are already sensitised. How much more information do you want? Do I need the President to talk and tell me that I must take care of my child? Do I need a Vice President to tell me that as a man, as a Member of Parliament, you should not sleep with a child? 

These are realities that we have to face as Ugandans. We must go back to our roots. Cultural leaders must take responsibility seriously. When you allow these NGOs to tell our children that if your father beats you, you go and report him for beating you up - that is wrong. We should go back to our cultural roots, and teach our children how to be good children. If our parents were reckless, we would not be representing the people of Uganda. 

I am concerned about the document. There are so many things lacking in. I would have expected action; cure is absent from here. I would like us to be informed - after you have sensitised me and I have felt the pain of pregnancy of my grandchild, what else are you going to do? 

I want the Government to tell me: these children who got pregnant at the age of 10, 12, 15, 17 years, what are you going to do with them? This is the most important thing. We are all fed up with them in our homes and communities. You find a child breastfeeding a fellow child. Can the Government come up with a practical solution to this problem? 

We are politicians and we can speak and make speeches, but it will take us nowhere. I want the Government to come up with a practical solution to this problem. I thank you.

MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Firstly, I must say – I heard a colleague talk about parents encouraging their daughters to dress decently. Madam Speaker, I am a father to a daughter. And as my little girl grows up, I will encourage her to dress decently like a lady. 

However, I think we should also encourage the men to have self-control, for heaven's sake (Applause). There should be no excuse that a man defiled a girl simply because she was dressed in a miniskirt, and so, he jumped on her. That is not acceptable.

The procedural matter I am raising is: Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for you to guide that there be regular updates to this House by the Vice President, about this campaign? Because she said it is going to run for a year. Can we have regular updates like monthly, about tangibly what is being done? 

Having a campaign is one thing. We have had so many campaigns but if there is no action taken, the campaign and the sloganeering will remain just that. Can we have regular updates like per month that so many men have been arrested for defiling girls and action has been taken? 

A regular update about the promise to provide sanitary towels because that is a promise that was made by the Government. Can we have regular updates on these things? If we do not do that, it is going to remain another sloganeering that will not bring us any results at the end of the day. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we will need a quarterly update from the Vice President on these matters. What about what hon. Cecilia Ogwal talked about girls who have already conceived and delivered? We need pre and post counselling of these girls. 

Of course, we also need to understand what is going to happen in terms of their education. Will the schools accommodate them and that kind of thing? 

We are really over-emphasising the girl child. The people misbehaving are boy children. Now, if we do not talk about the boy children, they will continue spoiling the girl children. Let us put the boy child on the frontline. Let us say things like, “Government Chief Whip, reduce your appetite” (Laughter). We need to have both of these children talked to; the girl and the boy child. I know hon. Ssekikubo is very good at it. So, we should make sure that the boy child is not alone.

4.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like you to feel proud for allowing this debate to take this long, because we do debate a lot of coarse stuff in this House of Parliament. 

Hon. Kasaija is a bit anxious because he has a loan to present. The other Members are very anxious because they have, what they think are very urgent matters to dispose of and because of these, we lose sight of matters close to us since we never afford them the time they desire. Madam Speaker, feel proud of the fact that Members have had enough time to discuss this very sensitive subject matter. 

Some of us come from extremely conservative communities, where sexuality and attendant challenges are never discussed and therefore, we lose sight. Our work here as legislators is devoid of that software that makes us human and is able to guide our legislation for posterity. 

Therefore, I will not go into a lot of detail. I will only speak about principally two issues because I believe enough justice has been afforded to the subject matter. 

Initially, I thank my friend, the Vice President, for the initiative. The initiative will bear much fruit, if followed with practical action. For instance, now that we are beginning the budget process, I am anxious to see how provision will be made, on the longest standing promise of sanitary ware for the girl child. Short of that, as a colleague observed, we would be engaged in sloganeering and that is inconsequential. It will not help the cause for which we are legislators.

In the Ninth Parliament, Dr Chris and others recall that we debated the possibility of having a committee of Parliament on post legislative scrutiny to try and understand the efficacy of the legislation that we take and the practicality of the laws that we enact as Parliament. I heard a Member complaining whether the Children's Act has actually had effect – the kind of momentum we thought to bring into the protection of our children. But we do not know actually. This arises because we have no occasion to undertake post legislative scrutiny. 

Perhaps, this Parliament should re-debate that possibility because in other jurisdiction in the Commonwealth, it is undertaking and helpful in assessing as to whether the laws we make actually work or the need to revisit them to take charge of routinely emerging issues in our communities.

We should not lose sight of the rural-urban information cemetery. The urban centres – if you look at the information provided by the Vice President, you probably have a bigger and better flow and sharing of information in the urban areas. The children in the rural areas are more affected. Information is more hidden. Connivance is more awash between security and community leaders in the rural areas. Therefore, we need to find a framework that can make information sharing feasible and urgent. We would like to see this information sharing feasible and available and of course taking charge.

Now that hon. Baryomunsi is around, one of the challenges that technology is posing to our children - our children are consuming a lot of adult information on sex and sexuality. 
One of the reasons some conservative communities and schools are opposed to sex education is because we have not provided a boundary between sexuality and sex education. We need to be very clear for us to be able to attract the desire for schools to accommodate this.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we had waited for the Ministry of Education and Sports to avail to the country a safe school reopening framework, which we are yet to get. Part of it would be to explain how Government is planning to deal with the children who are pregnant. I do not know how many colleagues here would candidly say that they will send their own children to a class to share a desk or seat with a pregnant girl. 

If it is not possible, can we discuss, as leaders, how we are going to deal with this? Are we dealing with pre-natal or post-natal education of these children, Madam Speaker? I think we are just talking about this without providing the practical solution to it – (Member rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when your Leader of the Opposition is speaking, it is final. You do not give information to a Leader of the Opposition. 

MR MPUUGA: I invite the Minister of Education and Sports to share with the country a framework under which these pronouncements - or they will go back to school pregnant. Are we providing for how we are going to deal with the trauma of a pregnancy? Are the schools being oriented to receive pregnant children? Have the teachers been oriented to deal with children who have been recruited into adulthood and look like them?

Madam Speaker, I know this is a very dicey matter but I am inviting an honest discussion about these possibilities so that as political leaders – Like I said earlier, we do not have space for lamentation. That is not our space; our space is practical solutions to these challenges.

Allow me to conclude this because we can speak until the cows come home about this subject. A senior is insistent; I will yield a second, Madam Speaker, with your indulgence – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. On the issue of pregnant girls being admitted back in school, I think this is a matter, which we can deal with. I want to inform you that some years back, Parliament would not allow pregnant women in the House. It was considered a taboo for a woman to appear in the House pregnant but today, it is a sign of pride.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which House? Parliament?

MS OGWAL: I am saying, in the past, it was not easy for a pregnant woman to be a Member of Parliament. However, today, it is pride for women to be pregnant; you actually want to be seen that you are pregnant.

I think it is important that we educate our communities to accept that a child who is pregnant should also feel comfortable to be pregnant, just as I or any woman would feel comfortable to be pregnant in Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we have a daycare centre here in Parliament that looks after the children of our Members of Parliament and staff. I have never known Parliament to deny ladies who are pregnant to be in the House. It is their constitutional right. Anyway, we cannot blame Imat Cecilia. You know she stopped producing some 30 years ago and so, we cannot blame her. (Laughter)

MS MPUUGA: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker, by inviting honourable colleagues to go to their districts and establish whether they have juvenile and children courts that are capable of dealing with child-related defilement cases. 

Dealing with defilement is very complex in law and in courts. The Children’s Act is very clear on the fact that every district shall have a juvenile and children’s court. Find out and if they are not there, the Ministry of Finance is here; they should be able to establish whether they are facilitated under the JLOS financing framework. If not, it is a wake-up call. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Can we have the minister in charge of children? We want to know what you have done to the perpetrators of the law. It is a constitutional right for the children and it is also under the Penal Code Act on defilement. 

We have had a number of people defiling and then the aspect of incest - Can we know how many have been brought to book in this respect?

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Nyirabashitsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the Vice-President for the statement and for the issues that the Members have raised here.

Madam Speaker, on 20 November, we were celebrating the International Children’s Day and the theme was very clear; “Investing in our Future Means Investing in our Children” – (Interjection) - I am not making a statement.

It is very clear, Madam Speaker, that for whatever we are debating here, whatever development plans that we have, if we do not address the issues of our children, we may not go very far.
I will talk about three things only: firstly, on the issue of parenting and it all starts with us. As Members of Parliament, just make a flashback and see what time you go to see your children. How many hours do you spend with your children? You leave all the responsibility with the women. At times, the women also go to work and so, it all starts with us.

I disagree with a Member who said that the well-to-do children do not face these problems. I have been having such cases where you find one of the partners is a lawyer, another one is a doctor and the child is impregnated by a shamba boy. Do not look at the well-to-do; all the children face the same challenges. 

Madam Speaker, you have talked about counselling and I still repeat that we should make a reflection, as Members of Parliament, so that tomorrow, when you are going out there, they know that you can talk for the children. If you are the one who is doing this, how will you begin to talk in your constituencies? All this starts with the mindset. 

If you see a lady and say, “This is my daughter, this is my girl”, I think something can change. It all starts with the mindset. Someone said putting on long clothes- it is just a mindset. When you see somebody putting on a mini skirt and it comes in your head, that is what happens. I believe that we can change this. The Minister of Ethics is there; she will also improve on the morals and values of our society that have been eroded.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues that we have the National Children’s Authority, which is functional. What confused people is that at first, it was called the National Council for Children when the Children’s Amendment Act was made. We later changed it to the National Children’s Authority. 

I can inform you that they are doing good work. They do the issue of monitoring and coordination on issues to do with children’s rights. At times, they address the problems the children face, especially defilement cases if they are reported. So, I want to inform you that it is functional.

Lastly, I would like to inform my colleagues that when we were celebrating the International Children’s Day, UNICEF agreed that all Members of Parliament should go back to their constituencies and listen to these children. They are willing to facilitate you. We request the Members who are interested to go and listen to those children. You know what they are going through.

I heard whatever you raised here about issues to do with police, probation and Community Development Officers. As we begin this campaign, please have time and go and listen to the children in your constituencies. You will debate better and make better policies after listening to them. 

I request any Member of Parliament who feels he/she would like to listen to the children in their constituencies, to register with the Office of the Government Chief Whip to enable us to plan accordingly so that we listen to our children. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to stop there. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, it is not anybody who wishes to; it is all Members of Parliament. All Members of Parliament must take a lead on this. We must go and talk to the local leaders on what is happening to the children out there before schools start. These children need to be talked to because they have lost hope. So, you need to give them hope so that they are able to leave the life that they have been living.

Your Excellency the Vice President, can you conclude with this? Imat Cecilia Atim wants to share information, but her information is always obsolete. It is as old as her. (Laughter) 

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, before the Vice President comes in, I thought it is important to give you information based on your plea that we must listen to these children and probably learn more. 

I took the trouble to mobilise two subcounties and I called all those girls to come alone so that I could talk to them. I was so devastated. As an old woman, I cried tears because of what I saw. A 14-year-old girl came while carrying a child and she is pregnant again. That is what I saw. What do I do now?

These girls tell me that they are facing two disasters. One, the boys always deny – they disappear. They always move away from the village. So, it is difficult to trace the boy because he does not want to land into trouble. Secondly, their parents also chase them away from home. So, they do not know what to do. 

These are how they get into more trouble from one pregnancy to another because you now do not have resources to feed the child that you already have. Because you want to live, you now give yourself to some boda boda or any willing man who can give you a meal for the day.

We are willing to go back but I want Members to understand – When we go, we should have a programme. The Speaker was able to set up some kind of arrangement where some of those girls could undergo training in tailoring and something like that. We have to go with solutions. It is not just enough to listen to them and hear their frustration. It hurts you more, particularly if you are a woman.

Of course we need to also talk to these boys. When they are behaving like men, they stop thinking. They start thinking when they realise they have made a disaster. That is the problem. So, we have to sensitise the men starting from here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We got the information from Miss Uganda. I think that is how Mr Ogwal saw you.

Your Excellency the Vice President, just summarise. 

4.54
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, 32 Members of Parliament have made contributions, but you will allow me to just make a statement to summarise the responses and not to go on a case by case basis. For instance, I appreciate the fact that all the contributions are in the spirit of owning and having collective responsibility on this very pertinent matter.

Also, I have liked the way colleagues have demonstrated the fact that the matter before us is not about accusations and counter accusations, but it is a matter that requires solutions from all of us. 

I would now like to make small responses to a few issues which cut across according to the way you presented them. Firstly, we are going to do this campaign in a timeframe of one year. That does not mean that when we finish one year, we will stop there. We will review the rigorous one year that we are going to undertake. We will then share those achievements, challenges and the grey areas which would still be outstanding so that we can continue with the process in a guided matter.

It is not true that after one year, we will stop. We will continue. The one year will have a programme, which you will all receive in Kololo on 03 December 2021 when the First Lady and the Minister of Education and Sports, Mama Janet Museveni, launches the programme. You will get a clear programme and some other details, which may not have been presented here in the interest of time.

We will take interest in Sebei Subregion and some parts of Karamoja, which still participate in Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). I thank the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Youth and Children Affairs) for responding to issues of children’s authority and the interventions that her ministry is making in light of handling the challenges of children, especially child labour. 

There was a very pertinent question about when schools will open. Schools will open on 10 January 2022. We are all encouraged to go and drum up support for all children to return to school. All Universal Primary Education schools and Universal Secondary Education schools will open on that day under the policy, which we are all conversant with. 

We are encouraged to tell parents whose children are pregnant, but also those who have given birth and yet they are school going age to take them to school for further advice from teachers. I want to thank a Member who raised the issue of teachers being stakeholders in this campaign. 

So, all the pregnant children and those who gave birth but are carrying children and they are of school going age, must also report to school. They will be managed. We are all parents. The situation is before us. It is our responsibility to handle it.

Madam Speaker, allow me now to say that I have taken note of all the issues which Members of Parliament raised. They have enriched my statement and we shall capture all of them in a detailed programme and concept, which we shall all receive in Kololo on Friday, 03 December 2021. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Good luck.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Vice-President. I am happy the Government approach is aimed at integrating the collaboration efforts with various departments and agencies of Government to achieve the unity of the efforts towards the shared goal, especially on a girl-child. 

The involvement of the three arms of Government; Judiciary, Executive and Legislature is very important. Remember, you are the voice of the voiceless; you should be able to go and speak to the children down there. Let us all support this campaign - it is a national campaign - whenever we are called upon. 

I thank the Vice-President for the presentation; I wish you luck in this campaign. However, when you go into this campaign, put in mind the economic inclusion and empowerment of these girl-children, either by skilling, training or whichever. We need an inclusion.

Also, involvement of the teachers as core in the campaign to make these children co-exist. Then inclusion of the girl-child, pregnant or not pregnant or somebody who has given birth in education. 

As Members of parliament, we must speak about this campaign. Let it not just remain here in the debate. Please, speak about it to whoever cares to hear; on defilement, the girl-child and on what we should do as a country to ensure that we reduce on the early pregnancies for our girls. 

We must go back to parenting. You leave home very early in the morning, what time do you go back? Do you ever talk to your children? Do you ever have time for them? The children are in the hands of house girls. It is these same house girls that at the end of the day spoil our children - or house boys, whichever. Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE WORLD AIDS DAY TODAY, 01 DECEMBER 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Government Chief Whip? 

5.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I request your indulgence that you give us another time to present the statement because right now, the ministers in charge are commemorating World AIDS Day with His Excellency the President in Kololo and other guests. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will do a post-mortem debate. It will be overtaken by events as the Vice-President said. Honourable members, allow me to amend the Order Paper. Can we look at item six?


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 65.6 MILLION SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS [EQUIVALENT $ 90 MILLION] FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE UGANDA SECONDARY SCHOOL EDUCATION EXPANSION PROJECT

5.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move that a resolution of Parliament to authorise the Government to borrow 65.6 million Special Drawing Rights, which is equivalent to $90 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Secondary School Education Expansion Programme. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of ICT - all the ministers have seconded the motion. I have hon. Isaac, hon. Lillian and hon. Abigaba. It is seconded by the whole side, including hon. Attan and even the Leader of the Opposition. 
Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable Minister?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, when you authorise this loan, it will enable Government to finance various activities in the Ministry of Education to expand the projects, which stalled, in order to improve the quality of education and also to make the life - both of the learners and the teachers - more comfortable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a report to that effect. Can we get the report from the chairperson of the committee?

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Bosco Ikojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to present this report. It has been uploaded on our iPads over the last 21 days. 

Before I present the report to the House, I want to beg that you allow me lay some documents, that is, the report to the committee, the minutes of the committee and other relevant documents as per the Rules of Procedure of Parliament Rule 155(5) and 155(7). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay.
MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on a proposal to borrow 65.6 million Special Drawing Rights equivalent to – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister and the chairperson for the presentation they have started. However, since we have the report on the iPad, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable chairperson to just summarise for us and bring out the key highlights so that we discuss and agree. I beg your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the chairperson is going to summarise the report.

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, I think my honourable colleague had read my mind. I am not going to read the report in detail. Since this report has been with the Members for the last two weeks or more, I will just go through a few pages but you will allow me to go through the introduction briefly and the background to the project. For other areas, I will just go through them in brief.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go ahead. 

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, on the 22nd Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament, held on 1 September 2021, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development presented to this House a request by the Government to borrow 65.6 million Special Drawing Rights equivalent to $90 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Programme. 

You recall that you referred this loan request to the Committee of National Economy and the relevant sector committee; which is the Committee of Education and Sports in line with rule 155(2) of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament draws its authority from Article 159 of the Constitution. In addition, section 36 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, authorises the ministry to raise funds by loan and issue guarantees for and on behalf of the Government. 

We are also guided by our Public Debt Management Framework 2018, which outlines the principles for acquisition and utilisation of public debt for the Financial Years 2018/2019, 2022/2023. In line with that, this very framework provides the guidelines for external and domestic borrowing, and one of the guiding principles is that if the Government is to borrow, it shall continue to pursue concessional borrowing as a means of meeting its external financing requirements. 

One of the guidelines is that social services projects shall be financed at concessional terms and I believe that this loan is brought on concessional basis. 

Madam Speaker, further, I want to say that our public debt strategy adopted in 2020/2021 gives preference mostly for external funding to be on concessional terms. 

The background to this project 
Uganda has the second youngest population and among the most rapidly growing populations in the world. It has a population of approximately 42 million and an annual population growth rate of 3.3 per cent with nearly half of our population below the age of 15. This subsequently means that our school going age (6-18 years) is growing at a very high rate. 

The Government has, over time, actively prioritised education reforms as an anchor for socioeconomic transformation and development in Uganda, as demonstrated through various policies, legal and planning instruments. One among them is the UPE and USE programme, which have exponentially led to an increase in enrolment. This has led to an increased demand for secondary education services by learners who successfully complete primary education, which necessitates the Government to expand facilities and other resources to cater for the increasing demand for these critical services. 

In addition, the continued influx of refugees into our country, estimated by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees as at May 2021, puts the refugee number to 1.4 million refugees of which, 58 per cent, are aged between zero and 17 years. Approximately, 94 per cent, of these refugees live in settlement camps while the rest live in the urban areas. This has put further strain to our education-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can you go to the recommendations? We have read your document. 

MR IKOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me go to the recommendations on assumption that Members have read the report;

The committee made some observations and recommendations. During the scrutiny of the loan request, and the oversight of the field visit, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:


    1. The debt sustainability of the country 
The committee observed that in the recent past, the tax to GDP ratio has stagnated around 12 per cent, while total domestic revenue has stagnated around 13 per cent. On the other hand, the ratio of public debt to GDP has increased from 35.6 per cent in June 2019, to 49.8 per cent, as at June 2021, in the space of three financial years. 

The growth in debt is largely because of extra borrowing to cover both revenue shortfalls and the COVID-19 containment related expenditure. 

Further, as the Government continues to support economic recovery, through provision of economic stimulus packages to various sectors and implement it as stipulated in NDP III, debt is projected to increase further over the medium term. 

In addition, the committee noted that the Government in the budget for financial year 2021/2022 devised a number of measures to reduce the debt pressures that include:
    a)  Operationalisation of the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy, aimed at increasing domestic revenue by 0.5 per cent of GDP each year ;
    b) Enhance efforts towards export promotion and import substitution to increase foreign currency inflows and reduce the outflows; 
    c) Sequencing projects with the priority given to those giving a bigger growth dividend. In addition, the Government will also continue to enhance project execution by fully implementing the reforms under the public investment management strategy for timely realisation of their benefits and subsequently, their impact on the economy;
    d) Limiting domestic borrowing to not more than 1 per cent of GDP in the medium term. 

Madam Speaker, whereas the Government commits itself to increase domestic revenue annually by 0.5 per cent, it has remained a challenge. For instance, the NDP I and II had the same target of increasing domestic revenue annually by 0.5 per cent of the GDP, which was not achieved. This underperformance of revenue growth has been largely attributed to tax exemptions, that is holidays and unlimited tax base, since large sections of the economy is informal. 


The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, revise the tax exemptions and tax holiday polices as well as explore other means of enhancing domestic revenue mobilisation.

In addition, the Government should continue to review its operations with a view of eliminating any wasteful or inefficient expenditure so as to reduce its spending pressures. 

Counterpart funding during implementation
The committee noted that the Government has committed US$ 21.6 million for the Universal Secondary Education Expansion Project, which is expected to start from the third year of the project implementation. The Government of Uganda fund will be used for recruiting, training in the new curriculum, paying teachers’ salaries to a sufficient number of qualified teachers as well as financing recurring operations and maintenance budgets of the new schools. 

The committee noted with concern that the Government has, over the years, been slow to fulfil its commitments to pay counterpart funding to most of the externally funded projects. This is attributed to inadequate planning at the initial stage of the projects. Sometimes, funders are forced to suspend the activities thus causing a sluggish implementation of the project, which can lead to withdrawal from the project. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that the Ministry of Education and Sports is availed with the required counterpart funding to ensure smooth implementation of the project. 

In addition, the Government should develop a sustainability strategy to enable effective operation of the new schools even after the project completion.

Lotting of bids as a method of procurement
The committee noted that the contracts under the proposed USEEP will be through lotting as the case was under the UGIFT programme where one contractor was given three to five sites of seed schools within the same cluster of the districts in the same subregion. Similarly, the procurement plan for the USEEP Project indicates that a contractor will be awarded between four to five sites.

The committee, however, noted with concern that under the UGIFT programme phase one, contractors were awarded without assessing the capacity of the contractors to manage and complete the projects in time. Shoddy works and failures to complete the sites in time was mostly attributed to lotting of many sites to one contractor who, in most cases, has limited financial or human resource thus making – 

For instance, the physical performance of Kihanga Seed School in Ntungamo District, which was supposed to be completed in January 2021, has stalled at 20 per cent as of October 2021 against the financial performance of 75 per cent. Maaji Seed School in Adjumani District, which started in 2019 stands at 61 per cent physical performance against the 85 per cent financial performance as at October 2021.

The committee was concerned whether the two among the many poorly performing schools will be completed, given that the contractors have already been paid over and above the project physical performance, as referred in Annex 1.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should assess the performance of project contractors and recommend to PPDA to blacklist the non performing contractors. 

In addition, the Ministry of Education and Sports, in collaboration with anti-corruption state actors, should investigate the poor performing projects with the view of bringing culprits to book. Given the experience in the UGIFT project, the ministry should reduce the number of sites in a lot to two or three to ensure timely implementation of the project and avoid recurrence of problems of the same nature in the proposed UGIFT project.

The selection criteria of the project
The committee noted that one of the criteria for a subcounty to benefit from USEEP under the non-refugee hosting districts is that the subcounty should have been operational by 2016, without a Government Senior Secondary School and must have at least seven feeder primary schools. 

The committee however observed that despite the Government policy that requires each parish to have a primary school, a number of parishes in the country do not have any such schools. Moreover, with the creation of new administrative units, the size of some subcounties have reduced, implying that some schools have a huge population size compared to others.

The committee further noted that there are subcounties that do not meet the criteria of seven feeder secondary schools. However, the few available schools are densely populated and can satisfy the need for a new seed secondary school.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports revises the requirement of seven schools per subcounty to at least three.

Inadequate planning - Honourable members, I am under pressure to conclude the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ikojo, you are not under any pressure to conclude the report.

MR IKOJO: So, can I proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one who said in your preamble that we have been having this report for two weeks. We have read the report and we know what is there. Whether you continue reading or not, it is going to be a loan approved period.

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, I do not want to go against your ruling. Let me conclude.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ikojo, there is one Speaker in this House. Do not listen to hon. Ssekikubo.

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, briefly, I wanted to look at the selection criteria so that Members could actually –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not disrupt the Member, let the Chair finish.

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, inadequate planning of the project

The committee was informed that most of the designs for the school projects are implemented without the involvement of local governments during the planning level. Subsequently, the designs end up being defective. In the bills of quantities and designs of the UGIFT project, there were a number of omissions of important items:
    1. The schools were designed without provision for water in the VIP latrines, which is a critical factor to keep the girls at school…


    2. There was no provision for fencing of the school. Therefore, an omission of a fence and security around the school poses a security risk to a school, making the equipment susceptible to malicious damage, vandalism, trespass and theft. 

The schools constructed will be equipped with ICT and computers, the libraries, science laboratories and new furniture. 

Schools were designed to have only one sports football field, and yet there are several sports that require development. There are no provisions made for a school kitchen and there was no provision for the head teacher’s residence. 

There was no budget for the individual site feasibility and environmental studies that were to be done by the districts. 

As a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Education and Sports should secure these constructed schools by way of erecting fences around them. 

In the USAID project, the Minister of Education and Sports should address the following:
    1. Facilitation of local governments to carry out their expected responsibilities.
    2. Make provisions for climate smart kitchens, and ensure that there is a head teacher’s residence.
    3. On the other side, they should include other grounds for different sports disciplines. I remember last week, we debated and were applauding the national netball team but in the provision of the new schools, such other sports facilities are not provided for.

Madam Speaker, allow me conclude; the proposed loan is concessional in nature, thus consistent with the medium-term debt strategy for Financial Year 2020/2021, which prioritises external financing over domestic financing with preference to concessional borrowing. 

It is also consistent with the external debt principle that requires borrowing for the social sector to be on concessional terms. 

This project is also economically viable, given the merits that will accrue from the enhanced access to lower secondary education by focusing on underserved populations in targeted areas, as well as the improvement in the education system and policies in places for quality teaching and learning. 

The committee recommends that the proposal by Government to borrow 65.6 million Special Drawing Rights equivalent to US$90 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda secondary education expansion project be approved, subject to the recommendations here in. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. The issue is about borrowing money to improve the schools now that our children are going back to schools. Improve on the sports facilities, the expansion of the schools. Do not debate because you just want to say a word.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the elaborate report. And truly it has been with us for a while and it is acceptable. May I ask, Madam Speaker, through you, that the chairperson and the committee were able to appreciate – because I expected a comment on the status of our SDR because this SDR is not cash, it is the equivalent of our gold reserves with the Bretton Woods Institutions – did you have time to evaluate the status of our SDR initially?

Secondly, a quick check: At the time the report was made, one SDR, the equivalent of US$1.4 translating into US$91.882 million meaning that when you do even a simple abacus, you have a balance of Shs 6.7 billion equivalent of Uganda shillings. 

Do you see that? Who wants to pocket that balance? Did you make the calculation? Before we even debate, can we get that basic fact out of the picture so that we debate aware that the figures were properly reconciled? That we would not say we borrowed 90 when actually it is 91.88, the equivalent of Uganda shillings 6.7 billion. That we would know the basics and then we move on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, but also LOP, what we are borrowing is US$65.6 million. The equivalent that will come from Uganda; you cannot determine now. It is no longer the 90. It can even be less or more. So, you will use our rate as of today. That will be available but what we are borrowing is in dollars.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, US$65.6 million is the equivalent of Shs 91.8. And a single SDR is 1.400. If you take that computation, you have a balance. If you take a quick calculation, was it considered or do we work backwards?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, just respond to that.

MR IJOKO: Madam Speaker, at the time when we were processing this loan, the special drawing right was considered, that is why we came with the equivalent of US$90 million.

Currently, I may not be very thorough to say the exact rate of an SDR in relation to the dollar but once we – at the time of processing the loan, it was equivalent to US$90 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is talking in terms of estimates. Please continue.

MR IJOKO: I believe that our figures are right, based on the rates at that time.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be in position to give us the right figure of the SDR as of now.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Mr Chairperson. I would equate Special Drawing Rights to the exchange rate - (Interjections) - Yes, please. I know what I am talking about. 

Now, today, the exchange rate between the US dollar and Uganda shillings is 3625. A few months ago, it was almost 3700. You can see a change within six months but the good thing is that at the time of disbursement, we shall apply the prevailing rate then. It might be favourable, it might be unfavourable. That is the nature of the game, there is nothing we can do. We pray that by the time we start drawing that money, the rate will have come down. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is about the prevailing exchange rate at the time.

5.38
MR FERIGO KAMBALE (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and chairperson for what they presented to us about the borrowing.

I also support that we endorse the borrowing for some obvious reasons. Literacy levels will increase, cost of education will reduce because we shall have many Government facilities. I support that we endorse the borrowing.

However, Madam Speaker, in the report, there were some recommendations and I want to emphasise on some of these. One of the recommendations and observations was looking at the GDP to debt ratio. According to the International Monetary Fund standard, when we go beyond 50 per cent GDP to debt ratio, as a country, we are rated as credit risky.

When we borrow - which we endorse - we should be conscious that already as a country, we are going to be rated as credit risky because our GDP to debt ratio will have gone beyond 50 per cent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ferigo, I want to refer to you to the conclusion, where the chairman said this loan is consistent with Medium-Term Debt Strategy of 2020/2021, meaning that we are within the borrowing limit.

MR KAMBALE: Madam Speaker, with due respect, he had indicated, that according to the report, we are already at 49 per cent currently before the borrowing. When we add this loan, we are going to shoot beyond 50 per cent.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, the loan is not stagnant. Others are being paid and the loan reduces.

MR KAMBALE: Madam Speaker, secondly, it is about our running budget. Right now, our budget of around Shs 45 trillion has a provision of Shs 15 trillion when it comes to loan repayment. I am saying that we are going to borrow but we should also be aware that this borrowing, when it comes to loan repayment, there is a way it is going to stress our budget further. I am saying as we are borrowing, let us be conscious about that.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, it is about our history of mismanagement of loan-borrowed funds. We need, as Parliament, to be very serious this time round. We have a scenario of Lubowa International Hospital, where Shs 1.4 trillion was injected in the project. When you go down there, there is no value for money.

This time round as we borrow this money, we should have clear and stringent measures in implementing the expenditure of this money, so that there is real value for money. I want to make this one clear to Members that we should be – as we clear the borrowing, let us follow up on how to get value for money.

Finally, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us limit our debate to borrowing for the schools that are attached as an annex. This is education, boss. - I am speaking. Let us limit the debate to borrowing for the schools, not for health. We asked for a report for Lubowa. We are now saying, “Let us borrow.” You are the same people who want our children to go back to school and we want them to really go back to school. So, the project – 

I am looking at what the committee is saying. It is a viable – The project is also economically viable, given the merits that will accrue from the enhanced access to lower secondary education by focusing on underserved population which is being targeted. Let us not divert ourselves from what is in the report to Lubowa. We know very well that everybody is dissatisfied with Lubowa but let us give a trial to the education sector.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek a procedural guidance. From the committee’s report as per June 2021, our debt portfolio had risen to 49.9 per cent of our GDP ratio. Now, once you factor in this loan alone, the simple calculation from the $90 million, even without going to the $92 million but just take it at $90 million, we shoot up to around Shs 340,200,000,000. 

If we had clocked the 49.9 per cent and now you add this, there is no way you can say we have not reached the threshold of 50 per cent. We have already reached it. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you have known the culture of committee reports. We had famous chairpersons, like hon. Syda Bbumba, amongst others. They raised all the concerns and all the landmines but the conclusion does not reflect the body of the report.

The conclusion is contrary; it must have been superimposed. The conclusion is not flowing from the body of the report. You want to escape by saying “subject to the recommendations”. If we cannot factor in the recommendations at this stage and we order “Aye”, then at what stage will those anomalies be corrected?

So, are we procedurally right to proceed on a matter where we have no concrete examples and concrete figures? Then, we agree to ourselves. Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we find out from the Minister on the percentage of the loan, whether we are still within the ceiling or outside?

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me inform this House that this loan is part and parcel of our already debt numbers. So, by acquiring it –(Interjection)- Just hold on. The very moment we go to Cabinet and eventually come to Parliament, we include that loan in our debt figure. 

So, the ratio, as we speak now, is 49 per cent. This loan is already taken care of. I thought I should give that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the $65.6 million SDR loan is included in the 49.9 per cent.

MR KASAIJA: Precisely, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I want to be with you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do you include it before it is approved?

MR KASAIJA: I have not captured your point well, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, what the Members are saying is that you are saying this loan is part of the 49.9 per cent and you included it in your report. 

MR KASAIJA: Exactly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is: how would you include it in the report, before it is approved by the Cabinet and Parliament? Is it a planning process? 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I have told you that when we go to Cabinet, we eventually come to Parliament. The loan we are discussing now is already embedded in our debt figure. I do not know whether I am clear. It is not something where we are saying, “If you approve this loan, then we shall add it on and then we go -”. (Interjections)- Can I maybe suggest?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you continue, honourable minister? 

MR KASAIJA: Hon. Ssekikubo is saying it is not true. I would be very happy if he could introduce his own figures here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the minister is very clear and sincere that – 

MR IKOJO: Madam Speaker, can I give some information? 

Honourable members, this project forms part of the Government Public Investment Plan 2021/2022. It also forms part of the budget that was approved in the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

This Parliament actually approved the budget where this loan is involved. I really do not know whether we can approve our budget and the same Parliament refuses to finance the same project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said the budget was approved by this Parliament yet now you are borrowing money to fund that project. Not so? 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification whether we have not yet approved this loan. Today, we are here to debate it and yet you have already included the loan in the budget. Are we not being a rubber stamp Parliament? What is the use of Parliament debating now to approve the loan? Why should we do it? I just need that information. Thank you.

MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to give information to the House that at the time when we were processing the budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 in the Committee on Education and Sports, Parliament allocated Shs 2,015,000,000 in preparation for Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project (USEEP). It was observed that the Government did not have funds to proceed with the provision for the 315 Seed Schools in the country, where there was great need for our children to get shelter for education.

When we were looking at this loan before we took our report to the Committee on National Economy, we observed and recommended that it is important for the Government to get this money as a support fund so that those schools are constructed. So, the additional information I want to give is that if we do not approve this budget, we will nail ourselves. I propose and recommend that we proceed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, this is a budget support loan. It was budgeted for and we are now just borrowing to support it.   I do not see why we have a lot of debate. 

5.52
MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): The cross boarder trader is saying that – This is a budget support loan. Moreover schools are reopening, yet the country’s education has been in limbo for two years. I see no reason why we should rotate around when education is the backbone of our country. I, therefore, move that we approve this loan so that our Ugandan children can have classrooms to study from. Thank you. (Applause)

5.54
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clear that this loan is going to help us bridge the gap in those subcounties that do not have secondary schools and in those subcounties that may have schools, but they are in a completely dilapidated state. On that note, I move under rule 59 – (Interjections) – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stop making noise, honourable members. I am the Speaker here. Hon. Ssekikubo, can you sit down?

MS OPENDI: I move under rule 59 that we suspend debate and you put the question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by hon. Tayebwa, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and hon. Abigaba. 

Members, much as this motion has been supported, I am going to accept one statement from only one person and that is from the Leader of the Opposition. 

5.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. First of all, we need to accept our responsibility to our country as political leaders. I am not aware of any political leader in this House or outside the House who does not want to see schools in their community. 

The duty of legislation cannot be done under duress. If a Member has not read a document before Parliament, the Member has a right not to participate in a debate. This should be on record. I thank you, for your indulgence, in allowing us to give input because this is borrowing. We are actually borrowing on behalf of generations.  Therefore, we should not avoid the duty because we have not read or because we want to show - You know, all of us want these schools, but we must be careful on how we borrow. That is why we have laws. 

I have two points. Unless the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will clarify, my understanding of how the Government has been working on the loans since we passed the budget is that the 49 per cent, that is being reflected in the report excludes the $1 billion budget support that was approved by the IMF’s board on 28 June 2021. I will be corrected by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

When we include that figure, the debt to GDP ratio will be 53.6 per cent, as presented by the Government in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. If Members have not read the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which was presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this House. I do not know why Members do not read and want to come here and get confused. 

The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility that is before the Committee on Budget talks about 53 per cent. So, how can somebody, in the same Parliament, come and present a different figure, when we have a figure presented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to this House? Therefore, the Minister of Finance will have to advise the House on whether what was presented to Parliament in the charter of fiscal responsibility was a fat lie and therefore, this report is capturing the right information so that it can go on record.

Secondly, I want to invite Members to appreciate why we need this facility but properly processed. One of the challenges is that Uganda, in the Sub-Saharan Region, ranks lowest in financing education as a percentage of GDP. We have no peers and the records are there. The lowest is 2.4.2 in the last six years.

Uganda ranks lowest despite the fact that our sector is largely financed by donors. This is information available for every Member who cares. Therefore, let us be alive to these facts so that when we want to borrow for the sake of lifting this sector, we are also alive to the obligation and attendant future challenges and obligations. It is very important when we are leaders. 

Lastly, I would like to get commitment from Government because in the third year of the project, Government is supposed to offer counter funding; the equivalent of Shs 76 billion. The Ministers of Education and Sports and that of Finance should confirm to Parliament that this money has been put in the MTEF, first of all, and that it will be tabled in the Budget Framework Paper later this month. 

It is very important to secure this financing, especially now and we capture it so that we even have a report about it regularly until the year of financing. The danger, if not captured, is we must prepare for a supplementary, which is a sad way of conducting Government business. 

Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be alive to these obligations, have them captured in the MTEF and the BFP so that we have a report on them until the third year of financing to avoid provisions later in the third year of supplementaries because they are not in need. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. When I look at this loan, Minister of Finance, it should be a developmental loan for the construction of schools, not for training of teachers; strictly developmental and not recurrent. This must be taken into account.

We will need to do accountability for this loan that we are giving out. We approve on condition that it is a developmental loan not a recurrent one. 

6.01
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It seems the way we are ending the debate is somehow leaving a bitter taste. I want to clarify a few issues. 

Although the loan amount that we are talking about is Shs 90 million, what we are actually borrowing is Shs 43 million. Shs 52.1 million is a grant.

The other thing that is very interesting about this loan is that it has no interest rate; the interest rate is zero. 

The other thing that is also very interesting about this loan is that it is from the International Development Association. This is part of the World Bank Group for assisting poorly developed countries or less developed countries. Access to them is very competitive and is based on strict eligibility criteria. Actually, we should be lucky that we can access it. 

I have seen worse loans, as previously a member of the Committee on National Economy. We would borrow loans of five per cent. This one is completely zero.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you respond to what was raised by the Leader of the Opposition?

MR KIWANUKA: The last point I wanted to raise, Madam Speaker – (Interjections) – I am on procedure, sir. The only concern that should be there is about Government preparedness to implement the project. That is where we normally get problems. 

This loan has a commitment fee. Commitment fee means that money is being set aside and if you do not use it, the commitment fee goes up. What is very important is that Government should assure us that they are prepared to start on the project because the commitment fee will go up. I therefore appeal to the Members to approve this loan without any hesitation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Bayigga, being an old Member of Parliament, I thought you do not put somebody on procedure to order. You do not switch on a microphone and start saying, “Order.” He is on procedure.

MR KIWANUKA: I conclude, Madam Speaker. In view of what we have been going through in the past, this is something, which is very straightforward and should not attract much debate. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you look at the report on table seven, the IDA loan is 66 and the grant is 44. I want the Minister to respond to what the Leader of the Opposition asked. 

MR KASAIJA: Before I respond to what the Leader of the Opposition said, let me throw more light on the benefits of this loan. 

First of all, we are now presenting to you the borrowing but there is a grant, which is almost US$ 60 million as opposed to US$ 90 million, which is a loan. This facility - let me call it that - is meant to build 116 secondary schools in subcounties that do not have a secondary school as we speak. 34 of those 116 schools are supposed to be built in the refugee posting areas. 

There is even more. I do not know whether the committee - maybe because some of us might have not read the report in detail. This loan is there to cater for people with special needs, including their equipment and materials. 

Also, this loan and grant are meant to enhance policy development within the sector but more significantly, it is also supposed to enhance capacity building of staff both at the ministry and even in the schools. 

Therefore, I thought I should give this background information - (Interjection) - can I finish please? Let me finish so that when you are debating, you will debate with something and you will realise the value. 

Of course, if we do not take the loan - my technical officers were telling me - I am not threatening; please do not misunderstand me. Do not say the Minister is now trying to threaten us - no, then the loan together with the grant, will be withdrawn. 

We must take a decision by end of January. I have been trying to write, I have written a letter - (Interjection) - Oh, I see. Well, I am glad; they are saying that the decision has already been taken. I am very happy about that one; I have no quarrel that is what I came here to get from you so that we can - (Interruption)

DR BATUWA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am looking at the World Bank data on the balance of payment. I clearly see that right from the 1980s, Uganda has been having a negative balance of payment, only that of recent it is extremely negative to the extent of negative 2.4 billion; this is close to 10 trillion. Now, balance of payment will affect our exchange rates and definitely - [Hon. Macho rose_]

DR BATUWA: I am on clarification

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not understand your clarification. There is a point of order.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am very proud of your guidance of this House. Before I submit, I request for your protection from hon. Ssekikubo who is my mentor. He taught me good manners in the 10th Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, we have actually been at peace while you were away. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo is my mentor. He taught me how to organise and disorganise but he is now disorganising his student. Madam Speaker, yesterday, you guided the House very well and today that during our submission, we should not rely a lot on social media information. 

Madam Speaker, an honourable minister of health in the shadow cabinet has stood before the august House submitting information from what you advised us against. Therefore, is my good friend the shadow minister of health in order to submit information from social media?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that a motion for resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow 65.6 million Special Drawing Rights equivalent to $90 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Secondary School Education Expansion Projects be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have a report on HIV/AIDS from Parliament that we need to give to the country. Commissioner - 

6.12
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli Coumtry Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker-
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please, listen to the Commissioner.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I stand on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission to present the World AIDS Day message from Parliament. 

Today, we remember our loved ones and those who have lost the battle - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The International AIDS Day of 1st December every year is a well-known international day, which we observe as a country. Madam Speaker, throughout all the years of this House, such a matter can only be presented on behalf of Government by a minister. 

Number two, we even have our own Forum on HIV/AIDS. However, on this specific one, it is a matter that touches Government, the people of Uganda - unless Government has abdicated its role and duty today; it can only be advanced by Government. 

Is the honourable Commissioner, therefore, procedurally right to present a statement on HIV on an International AIDS Day, when we know that this is a duty and the responsibility of Government?  In addition, he takes it up as a statement from Parliament. This cannot be a statement from Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, we are acting as per rule 54(1). We expected the Minister for Presidency to come and make a statement on International AIDS Day but the minister did not come. Therefore, we are making our statement as Parliament. Why would you refuse a Commissioner to make a statement? This is our statement as the leadership of Parliament. Can you go ahead? Remember, there are three arms of Government; the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Today, we remember our loved ones and those we have lost in the battle and send our encouragement to those who continue to care for their sick. 

We also remember those who have set the pace for the fight against the scourge of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. Those who have openly fought stigma and through positive living impacted the lives of their communities. 

We recognise the special efforts of Government led by His Excellency Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta, Museveni, in the fight against HIV/AIDS in this country. 

We salute our frontline workers, who always go beyond their call of duty to ensure that there is a service despite the challenges.
 
Madam Speaker, the COVID-19 pandemic has brought about its complications like affecting access to antiretroviral therapy, increased the pressure on our health systems where many people are now seeking access to health services in different hospitals and in one way or another, challenged us to do better to attend to the health needs of our people in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, Parliament is committed to ensuring that we increase efforts in creating awareness and fighting stigma in our communities against HIV/AIDS. We have to look into improving the budgeting and this is because we are the custodians of the budgeting as Parliament of Uganda, and deliberately invest in technology that supports responses to HIV/AIDS. As a country, we must not lose our gains in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

We have to shoulder on with the fight to end inequalities. Through this, we shall end the thalamic and above all, achieve the global goal of ending HIV/AIDS by 2030. On behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, the statement is signed by hon. Anita Annet Among, the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner, and hon. Ssekikubo, for being part of Parliament. Members, I adjourn the House to two o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 02 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)





