

Wednesday, 12 December 2018

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few areas of communication. First of all, I would like to remind the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that he is expected to lay on the Table the Budget Framework Paper this week; that is what the Public Finance Management Act says. I am just reminding you because the Third Meeting will be entirely on the budget.

I also want to appeal to the committees that have Bills before them, to work expeditiously so that we can finish them during this Second Meeting. In the Third Meeting, we shall concentrate on the budget, which will start after our recess. 

Yesterday, I indicated that we shall not have matters of public importance today because we want to move expeditiously on the items on the Order Paper so that we can complete as much as possible. You will be able to raise them in the subsequent sittings.

2.59
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, in respect to your communication on the issue of the budget, I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will take it seriously. Last year, they just brought a draft and at the end when we were meeting, they brought other copies. That complicates the work of the committees. 

I hope the minister will take this seriously this time such that next week, he lays on the Table the original document that will not disturb us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: He has heard. Bring the real Budget Frame Work Paper, which you would want us to consider and not a draft. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE 96 SITTING TENANTS OF BUGANDA ROAD FLATS AGAINST THE REFUSAL BY NATIONAL HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LTD (NHCCL) TO EFFECT THE SALE OF BUGANDA ROAD FLATS TO THE 96 SITTING TENANTS

3.00
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, this petition is moved under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

To the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda -

The humble petition of the 96 sitting tenants of Buganda Road Flats against the refusal by the National Housing and Construction Company Limited here in referred to as NHCCL, a company charged with the mandate to encourage Ugandans to own homes in an organised environment, to effect the sale of Buganda Road Flats to the 96 sitting tenants represented by I, Muwanga Kivumbi, the Member of Parliament for Butambala.

THE SPEAKER: Just read the prayers.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: NOW THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray that: 

    1. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development intervenes in their plight by ensuring that the NHCCL –

    a. Issues out sales letters to the unit cost of Shs 51 million to all the 96 sitting tenants in accordance with the Government Pool House Sale Policy.
    b. Effects the transfer of ownership of the residential units to those petitioners who have paid Shs 51 million, for the residential units.
    c. Refunds to some of the petitioners who, due to eviction threats by the NHCCL paid in excess of Shs 51 million.
    d. Deposits the title certificates in the petitioner’s names with Housing Finance Bank Limited, on the basis of which the petitioners will open accounts and obtain housing mortgage loans and pay for their units.

Your humble petitioners, as hereby duty bound, will forever pray. 

I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the petition.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an old matter. This House took a decision on that issue in the Seventh Parliament but for some reason, the National Housing and Construction Company Limited (NHCCL) is reluctant to do what they did in Bugolobi, Naguru, Wandegeya and Bukoto. It is only the Buganda Road Flats where they do not want the sitting tenants to benefit from the Government policy.

I would like to direct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to handle this matter and give us a report on Wednesday. Otherwise, money was appropriated and so, I do not understand why they are not taking action. Therefore, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should come back to us on Wednesday, with an answer to this petition. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE STATUS OF THE RESETTLEMENT OF LANDSLIDE VICTIMS IN THE ELGON SUB-REGION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we said we were going to extract the recommendations so that we can take a vote.  Clerk, have you uploaded them on the iPads? I now invite the chairperson to present the resolutions.

Honourable members, I wanted us to take a vote on each of the resolutions. Is the vice chairperson present? Let us stand over it and go to item five. 

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. WAMALA FLORENCE NAMBOOZO, ON THE OUTSTANDING PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE TO ESTABLISH THE PROF. DAN NABUDERE MEMORIAL TECHNICAL INSTITUTE IN SIRONKO DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports, could you respond on the Nabudere Memorial Technical Institute? They are not here. 

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. OCEN JULIUS ON THE ALLEGATIONS THAT THE BOARD OF THE UGANDA CANCER INSTITUTE IMPOSED A FEE ON CANCER PATIENTS AT MULAGO HOSPITAL

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is not here.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. MIGADDE ROBERT, ON INTERVENTIONS BY GOVERNMENT TO ADDRESS THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF HEALTH FACILITIES IN BUVUMA ISLANDS AND INADEQUACY OF HEALTH CENTRE IVS IN RESPONDING TO EMERGENCIES.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is not there. 

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. THEODORE SSEKIKUBO ON ALLEGATIONS THAT THE MINISTER OF SECURITY, GEN. ELLY TUMWINE UNDERMINED COURT JUDGMENTS THAT FAVORED MR GEOFFREY MAKUMBI IN RESPECT OF A LAND DISPUTE THAT THE LATTER AND MR MOSES MUSHABE WERE INVOLVED IN AND ORDERED THE ARREST AND DETENTION OF DR ELLY MUHUMUZA, THE LC IV CHAIRPERSON OF SEMBABULE DISTRICT, AT JINJA ROAD POLICE STATION ON ACCOUNT OF BREACH OF A QUARANTINE

THE SPEAKER: On this item, I received a letter from Gen. Tumwine saying that he is unable to attend the House today but stated that he will be available next week. That is the letter I have.
	
MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For purposes of helping the people concerned to follow up since they have been visiting Parliament in lieu of the matter, when exactly is hon. Elly Tumwine coming next week?

THE SPEAKER: On Tuesday, next week.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I hope he understands that he is dealing with serious matters and it is not up to him.

THE SPEAKER: I have told him to take it seriously. I will put him on the Order Paper for Tuesday.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS RAISED BY HON. PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO INCREASE ROAD RESERVES FROM 15 TO 40 METRES

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is not here. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY AND EMBLEM USE AND PROTECTION BILL, 2018”

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Ministers are supposed to make immediate responses on the issues of national importance that colleagues have raised, under our rules. They did not do that. You allowed them an opportunity to come and make the responses later but they are not here.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether these are still matters of national importance or they are now being treated as questions for oral answer.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the responsible ministers are coming. It is unfortunate that we have come in late but I can now see the Minister of Health is here, ready to answer the questions. We are also calling others who are supposed to answer to come in; so we are ready, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, there was an issue on the cost of treatment at the Uganda Cancer Institute and the status of health facilities in Buvuma islands.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologise for coming in late. I was delayed and when I looked at the Order Paper, I thought I would be coming after some other substantive items.

However, I note that at the 16th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Third Session of this Parliament, specifically Wednesday, 5 December 2018, hon. Robert Migadde Ndugwa, MP Buvuma Islands raised concerns over the deplorable state of health facilities in his district specifically, the inadequacy of the health centre IVs in responding to health issues in his area.

Buvuma District, as all of you know, is an island district and this poses challenges in health service delivery. We have, however, tried our best to ensure that basic health services are available to the population in this district.

I visited Buvuma islands in April this year with the Member of Parliament. We even travelled to islands where I am told no senior Government official or minister had visited. At that place, we constructed staff houses which were just two units. Unfortunately, what I found there was really appalling; that we have health workers who are committed but living in shacks.

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that due to inadequate resources, we were unable to build staff houses. However, while meeting the district leaders, I made a commitment that we will continue to prioritise Buvuma and other island districts as well as the mountainous districts in the country.

As we speak, we note that this financial year, we did not allocate any resources for elevating health centre IIs to health centre IIIs in Buvuma. While there, I pledged that in the next financial year, we will prioritise and give them resources to ensure that we construct health centre IIIs in the islands where they do not have.

Last financial year, we completed construction of a maternity ward and operating theatre, which are functional at Buvuma Health Centre IV. The health centre IV was one of the beneficiaries of the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project. Under this project, the health centre IV received an anaesthesia unit, seven patient beds and one delivery bed to enhance service delivery at this facility.

The health centre IV fortunately has two doctors. One clinical officer on site who provides comprehensive primary health care as well as emergency and obstetric services, assisted of course by other health workers.

However, we acknowledge the need for elevating some health centre IIs to health centre IVs and this will be done in Financial Year 2018/2019. The Ministry of Health will also address the challenge of blood storage in this facility in the next financial year. They have the refrigerators but the challenge is power. 

Therefore, we plan to install solar panels in order to provide power to the blood fridges. The challenge of the ambulance boat and land ambulances will also be considered in the next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, do you have a supplementary question?

3.14
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for the timely response. What prompted this specific request to the minister was an accident which happened, where we lost eight people and had to keep their bodies in the ward because the health centre IV lacks a mortuary.

We kept these bodies in the same ward where we also had patients. In the minister’s response, I have not heard how they plan to cater for the mortuary as well for this specific health facility.

THE SPEAKER: Your question was about health services; I do not think you talked about a mortuary.

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, health services are inclusive; a mortuary, medicine, ambulance and other facilities are what comprise good health facilities especially at that level.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Buvuma Health Centre is a health centre IV. Being a unique island district, we will try to ensure that it is complete because you really cannot have dead bodies in the wards with patients.

As I said, our priority is to the island districts. We will definitely prioritise it. Our challenge is resources; otherwise all the island districts should be complete with general hospitals so that they can be able to provide the services. We shall be able to address that additional challenge and others in a phased manner.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Committee on Health to isolate the island districts and mountainous areas and report on them separately so that we can check whether they have really been given the necessary budget and the facilities. They should not come under the general things.

All the islands and mountainous areas should come separately because they have the same issues. So, Committee on Health and Committee on Budget, we should have a separate paragraph on those special areas.

Minister of Health, there was an issue on cancer.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, it was hon. Julius Ochen, Member of Parliament for Kapelebyong, who raised an issue of concern regarding the fees that have been imposed at the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

You are all aware that the Uganda Cancer Institute is now an autonomous institution -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter and seek your indulgence and guidance. As I sat here, I wondered whether you could give further directives because it is traumatising to mention in passing that in this country, dead bodies are kept in wards.

I would like your Office, Madam Speaker, to give a detailed directive so that they can make some temporary provisions like containers. It is not a nice experience and as we wait for the next financial year to begin next year within the next six months, dead bodies are being kept in the ward. This is the national Parliament and a Court of last resort for the people we represent. 

Therefore, if you could direct further, we could get some containers from the Office of the Prime Minister or some cold room. It is not a nice experience. I seek your directive to the minister on that matter. I would not want to be in a health centre where I am going to be lodged together with dead bodies and I do not think any Ugandan would want that.

Madam Speaker, if you could direct the minister to come out with specific measures to give respect to the dead tailored for these two to three months as we wait for the bigger budgetary framework. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde says that was the main reason he brought the issue although he talked about health services in general. However, if you are going to put bodies in the ward, where will the people who are alive stay? Is there a mortuary? Are there mortuaries?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, normally the health centre IVs prioritise and find a room where they can keep a dead body for one or two days. Hon. Migadde is aware of this. However, that was just an emergency because of the catastrophe -(Interruption)

MR SEGGONA: Madam Speaker, what the honourable member has put before the House is that there is no place in this health centre where they put dead bodies. It is specific and not general to say that hon. Migadde knows that health centres normally prioritise. It is a fact that there is no place for dead bodies.

Is the minister, therefore in order to avoid answering the specific question put?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Migadde, is there a mortuary at Buvuma Health Centre IV or anywhere on that Island?

MR MIGADDE: Madam Speaker, there is no mortuary; the minister said that I know that we normally find where to put the dead bodies but I do not work with the funeral services so, I don’t know. There is no mortuary.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, let me be specific. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Allow the minister to answer.

MS OPENDI: The design of the health centre IIIs and IVs countrywide are clear and we don’t expect bodies to be kept therefore, if somebody dies, because they are within the community, the body is normally taken a way.

However, specifically to what hon. Migadde raised, allow me to state that we are going to follow up this matter to ensure that as we build the other health facilities in the next financial year, we also cater for the other missing facilities. It may not only be the mortuary but others; we will cater for all the other missing facilities not only in Buvuma but in all the island districts and mountainous areas.

THE SPEAKER: That is what we need to focus on in the budget to ensure that those areas are handled. It is your responsibility to now monitor during the budget preparation and to ensure that they are part of our reports and proposals.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I had begun my statement by indicating that through an Act of Parliament, the Uganda Cancer Institute became autonomous in 2016 with a mandate to undertake and coordinate the management of cancer and cancer related diseases in Uganda.

This mandate will now extend to the entire East African region following a decision that was made at the East African Community level to turn our Cancer Institute into a centre of excellence for the treatment of oncology, training of the oncologists and research in cancer.

Uganda has very high cancer morbidity and mortality due to a number of factors which include increased life expectancy which now stands at 64 years - this implies an aging population - the HIV epidemic and other viral diseases like Hepatitis B.

Cancer cases have gone up by 25 per cent in the last three years. We have been reporting an increment; for instance in financial years 2015/2016 we had 53,800 cases, 2016/2017 we had 62,392 cases, 2017/2018 75,824 cases. Therefore, this is a reflection of the huge overall cancer burden in the country and it is estimated that cancer patients presenting at the Uganda Cancer Institute represent just 4 per cent of the cases in the country. Eighty five per cent of the patients present late and this is the challenge that we have as a country.

The high patient burden, therefore, places major strains on the institute as the sole cancer centre in Uganda in terms of requirements for infrastructure, equipment and human resource for managing a very difficult and expensive disease to treat.

Madam Speaker, while I talk about the cases in Uganda, we should note that we get cancer patients from DRC, Rwanda, Tanzania and South Sudan. The budget for the Uganda Cancer Institute for the Financial Year 2018/2019 is Shs 52 billion, which according to the Uganda Cancer Institute strategic plan constitutes just a third of the optimal annual operational budget that the institute needs.

The institute is expected to raise 20 per cent of this revenue locally. For the last three financial years, although the institute was expected to raise up to Shs 1.8 billion in non-tax revenue, it has consistently raised less than a half of this amount.

In Financial Year 2018/2019, the Uganda Cancer Institute is expected to collect Shs 1.6 billion from services the institute provides to the public –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to come to Parliament in curtain like material?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable Government Chief Whip is dressed in an African dress and I see the Leader of the Opposition is also dressed in an African dress. Let us proceed. - (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, in Financial Year 2018/2019, the Uganda Cancer institute is expected to collect Shs 1.6 billion from services that the institute provides to the public, the private and the non-Ugandan patients as appropriated by Parliament in that budget. 

With the limited resources, the Uganda Cancer Institute is unable to undertake some of its planned activities and meet its targets. The impact of this is felt mainly in the areas of the human resources where the current staffing level is at 60 per cent. The gap left is filled by contract staff who are paid through Non-Tax Revenue and that is the money that is collected at the institute.

Up to 80 staff at the Uganda Cancer Institute are paid using the Non-Tax Revenue and yet some of these include critical cadres such as the radiation physicists running the radiotherapy operations.

Although the Government of Uganda has initiated a major investment in infrastructure and equipment at the Uganda Cancer Institute, additional revenues are needed for operations, maintenance and sustainability of the services. This is well illustrated by the recent breakdown of the radiotherapy machine which, thankfully, has been restored and additional new machines installation is underway. However, there is need to ensure that the running and maintenance cost for these are in place. We have to fly in these experts to service these machines. 

It is with this background and based on the provision of Entities and Agencies to raise Non-Tax Revenue to supplement their budget allocations from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Board analysed the old rates, which had been in place since 2010 and based on the consideration listed below, approved the new payment policy effective 01 November 2018. 

The new payment process was informed by the internal benchmarking within the country such as the Government health facilities, Mulago National Referral Hospital, Uganda Heart Institute, regional referral hospitals, Women and Neonatal Specialised Hospital as well as the private facilities around.

The decision was also informed by the regional benchmarking within the East Africa region for cancer services, specifically Tanzania and Kenya, whose charges are far higher for cancer services for both private and general patients. We also have an influx of international patients taking undue advantage of the low or no charges at the cancer institute currently. 

The new payment policy is further intended to address the following;

Maintenance and service of equipment since we have highly specialised investigations that require specialised equipment and need timely service to curtail the unregulated and under-table payments. You are aware that most of these patients that go there have been paying money under the table instead of paying it to the institute. 

Lastly, to redress the issues of the influx of foreign patients benefiting from no payment of services offered at the Uganda Cancer Institute, the Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI) has categorised the patients receiving services into three: 

    1. General Patients
    2. Private Patients
    3. International/Foreigner patients.

The current pay policy at UCI for the various categories of patients is as follows;
    1. General Patients receive care and treatment such as anti-cancer drugs free of charge for both inpatients and out patients. General patients are, however, required to pay for special procedures such as endoscopy, special investigations such as CT scan, MRI, Ultra-sound and other services.
 
    2. Private Patients do not pay for the drugs. However, they are required to pay for care, in-patient services, out-patient reviews, special procedures such as endoscopy and special investigations, as I mentioned before.
 
    3. Foreigners/International Patients receive care and treatment such as anti-cancer drugs free of charge. However, they are also required to pay for the special procedures such as endoscopy, special investigations using CT scan, MRI, Ultra-sound and Digital X-Ray. 

However, to ensure equitable access without discrimination to all patients, there is a waiver policy and it is as follows;

    a) Automatic Waiver; this applies to severely sick patients and emergency patients that have been brought in from upcountry or wherever and poor patients arriving from upcountry or rural parts of the country. The patients that come to the cancer institute normally come with referral letters from wherever they come from. Those who have come say from Kamuli Hospital, Jinja Regional Referral Hospital or Mbale come with the letters.

    b) Case by Case Waiver. This applies to children, poor patients and public servants.

All the waivers are done against invoices and this is the position. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochen, do you have any supplementary question?

3.33
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister a supplementary question in respect to –

THE SPEAKER: They should arise from the answer not new items.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, while the minister has ably made an attempt to respond to these concerns, she has not been in position to give the country the criteria that would clearly isolate the very poor Ugandans who are victims of cancer. A letter from a referral hospital anywhere in the country is not adequate enough to show criteria that can assist the very poor people to be identified and their case be taken on board.

I gave this House an example from my constituency where poor people sold all the land and at the end, they buried the wife because they could not afford treatment yet they were given a letter. People tried contributing in the village. That now gives a clear picture; the letters of reference from the health facilities across the country are not adequate enough like the minister has said. More people are dying today because of this.

Madam Speaker, my concern is – and I would like to beg you, as our chairperson in this House that we need to review this Non-Tax Revenue policy until we accommodate the poor. If the situation of this sickness and given the poverty levels in the country cannot warrant for our people not to be levied at this cancer institute - I beg on behalf of the people of Uganda that we exempt the poor from - some of these strange diseases are claiming life in the country at a very high rate –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate hon. Ochen for giving way. Whenever we travel upcountry, we bring patients to Mulago. I carried more than 10 cancer patients from my district to Mulago. Whenever they arrive at Mulago with that referral letter, they are charged highly. What the honourable minister said is not true; whenever they come to Mulago with a referral letter from Gulu Hospital or Lacor, they are asked to pay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not very satisfied with the qualifications for the poor. When you say that all waivers are done against invoices, I think that someone says, “I come from Lubaizi in Kamuli, I am a poor person so treat me.” 

Now this invoice; at which stage does the invoice come? I think you may have to work out a more equitable system of identifying the poor because the invoice - maybe you can explain, I do not know what this invoice is.

3.37
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister - I support a patient at the Uganda Cancer Institute but it is unfortunate that the conditions under which they live are perturbing. If you are poor like that lady from Kasilo - she sleeps on the veranda and when it rains - they are not the only ones, they are so many. What is the ministry doing to address this issue?

It is very pathetic; Madam Speaker, I want you to take time off one day and visit the Uganda Cancer Institute. You will be surprised, disappointed and shocked at the pathetic life these patients are going through. I think since we are about to start the budgeting process, we need to provide money such that accommodation - whether a dormitory or anything - can be provided.

The Prime Minister’s Office is also here. I think we can also call upon them in the meantime to provide tents for these people. Otherwise, it is a very pathetic situation at the Cancer Institute.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister answer so that we can do some other things.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me first to respond on the issues raised about the invoice. 

As I said, there have been under-the-table payments at the Uganda Cancer Institute. If some of you saw or maybe read in the papers about a month ago, I went and visited the Uganda Cancer Institute because I had gotten calls that patients were paying for the radiotherapy machine in order for them to be included  on the list for the day.

Madam Speaker, the invoice is intended for accountability to ensure that the patient was seen and has gone through the system, an invoice was raised and has been cancelled or waived off. Therefore, that will clear this; otherwise short of that, we shall still have people manipulating the system and collecting money from the patients. That is the reason I am talking about that.

Secondly, the issue of the letters from the regional referral hospitals, we need to understand the health policy in this country. We are talking about free health care services but free to what extent? Primary health care services are free. Tertiary care is not wholly free.

I have patients from my district and when they come and are supposed to go for a CT scan; we have to pay for that. I have had to pay myself. When you go to the Uganda Heart Institute, you pay. Therefore, tertiary care is expensive and this is why these Non Communicable Diseases (NCDs) should be prevented. 

Our focus should be to ensure that we actually prevent these NCDs. We have always talked about over consumption of alcohol; I want to thank this Parliament for passing the Tobacco Control Act, the physical excise - most of the Members here engage in that. Therefore, these preventive measures need to be looked at.

The regional referral hospitals send patients to the Uganda Cancer Institute and when they come with referral letters, the other services that I talked about are supposed to be paid for, for instance if you are going to do an MRI or CT scan and so on. However, where patients cannot do this, this is what this policy is addressing. 

Where patients have come from up country and they are poor, there will be that waiver; that they do not have to pay for these services. Some are critically ill and as I said, most of the patients that come to this facility are already in advanced stages - the cancer is at 80 per cent and nothing much can be done other than giving them the morphine or provide palliative care.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is new; give us time to work closely with the Uganda Cancer Institute so that we can address whatever gaps there are. Otherwise, this is really intended to benefit Ugandans and to improve the systems at the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

In addition, hon. Elijah Okupa talked about the conditions but I was informed about the many patients that sleep outside the Uganda Cancer Institute. Madam Speaker, when I visited the Cancer Institute - that tour that I had about a month ago - I interacted with most of these people.

I found some under trees - there are families under trees discharged maybe a month or two ago and she tells you that their challenge is that they come from Kitgum - there are those I met from Kitgum - I actually met another from Napak. I even called the Woman Member of Parliament over that case. They are discharged when they are okay and told to maybe come back after two weeks but because of the long distance, they prefer to stay within until they complete their dose. Therefore, those are the patients that you meet sleeping outside.

Madam Speaker, we are aware of the situation; I just would like to inform this House that very soon by end of December, we hope the Mulago Specialised Hospital is going to be complete and we hope to commission it, if not this month then early next month. 

We shall have more space because we hope that some of the patients even in the current Cancer Institute will be moved to these new wards that would have been constructed and we will have some more space where we can, in the meantime, have these people live. That is the position, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, we have got the answer for that issue. However, honourable minister, I know we do not have money but if we had screening facilities at many of the hospitals - maybe to also teach people the culture to check because they come here when they are really in extremely difficult stages. I think we need to find a way of sensitising them and also providing the facilities at the hospitals for screening.

Honourable members, in the gallery, join me in welcoming a delegation from Kyadondo East represented by hon. Seninde and hon. Kyagulanyi. You are welcome. (Applause)

I saw the Minister of Education -

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, there is one issue she has not answered - the issue of the women hospital, which I raised that day when the cancer issue was raised. The honourable minister was supposed to answer two questions.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not have it. She said - what did you say about the women hospital?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, maybe I can repeat the concern. The concern which I found in Mulago - this is from the doctors because you are supposed to pay but then we did not provide for the start-up budget - so, they are finding a challenge in addressing this issue.

I asked why Government can’t provide a supplementary at least for the start up because in the end, we are going to have this Non-Tax Revenue to address the matter. Therefore, how do you expect them to operate?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, what hon. Elijah Okupa has raised is correct. However, you are aware that at the time that hospital was being constructed, it was under the Mulago National Referral Hospital and the budget for the Mulago National Referral Hospital is available, only that it is not adequate to address the challenge.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have handled that matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that should not be a problem. We discussed that and it is something that is being worked on by the ministry of finance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item 5(a) Ministry of Education and Sports on the Wadada Nabudere Technical Institute.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is our response on the issue raised by hon. Nambozo on the establishment of the Dan Nabudere Memorial Technical Institute in Sironko District. 

It is true in the financial year 2018/2019 budget, Prof. Dan Nabudere Memorial Technical Institute was allocated Shs 751,980,418 which was meant to construct an administration block, two classroom blocks, two workshops and sanitary facilities.

Madam Speaker, stakeholders’ consultations were then made to determine the priority courses of the study for the institute, which would in turn determine the design of the workshops. Sironko District Local Government was asked to identify land for the institute. The district is now in the process of surveying and has identified the land; they are now opening up boundaries and are in the process of getting the title for the same. 

In quarter one of this financial year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released Shs 150,396,088, which money has not been utilised yet because we are waiting for the finalisation of the land documentation by Sironko District Local Government. 

In the meantime, the ministry is concluding drawings and bills of quantities for the project. This is because our policy requires us to put up Government institutions on land that has very clear ownership details. 

I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Florence Nambozo is not here. I think we shall pass on the answer to her. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO INCREASE ROAD RESERVES FROM 15 TO 40 METRES

3.48
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Madam Speaker, I got a letter from the Clerk today asking me to make a statement on the issue of road reserves. This is an issue that is in a Bill before Parliament, which is in the House now. We shall discuss it when the committee brings it for debate. 

THE SPEAKER: So, will this matter abide the presentation of the Road Bill? We shall wait for the report of the committee. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED “THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY AND EMBLEM USE AND PROTECTION BILL, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will also be amending the Order Paper to allow presentation on the exercise I sent out on the issue of Lusanja. 

3.50
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I wish to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private members’ Bill entitled, “The Uganda Red Cross Society and Emblem Use and Protection Bill, 2018.”  This is moved under Articles 79, 94 (1) and (4) (b) of the 1995 Constitution as well as rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of this august House. 

WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order and development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) and (4) (b) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 120 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda and the procedure under which a member of Parliament has the right to move a private member’s Bill; 

AWARE THAT the Uganda Red Cross Society was established by an Act of Parliament way back in 1964 via the Red Cross Act, cap 57, with the mandate generally to mitigate suffering throughout the world without any discrimination based on sex, race, nationality, religion or faith, political opinions or any other similar criteria; 

FURTHER AWARE that the Uganda Red Cross Society was specifically recognised as a voluntary aid society and an auxiliary to public authorities in exercising their obligations by virtue of the 1949 Geneva Convention for the amelioration of the condition of the wounded, sick, ship-wrecked members of the armed forces at sea, the treatment of prisoners at war and the protection of civilians in time of war;

COGNISANT THAT the Uganda Red Cross Society, being the leading humanitarian organisation in Uganda, has over the years significantly expanded its auxiliary role in the humanitarian field since 1964 to the extent that the existing Act does not reflect the current scope of action in both rich and nature; 

AND FURTHER COGNISANT that since 1964 when the Uganda Red Cross Society was established and recognised, there have been several economic, social, institutional and technological developments as well as changes in the humanitarian response field both in Uganda and internationally that impact directly and heavily on the delivery of humanitarian services by the society; 

AND CONCERNED that the Uganda Red Cross Act Cap 57 neither adequately reflects the auxiliary role of the Uganda Red Cross Society, which has since 1964, grown stronger and wider in reach and nature nor does it sufficiently support the objectives of the society in the provisions of humanitarian services to persons that require them; 

AND FURTHER CONCERNED that the Red Cross Act Cap 57 does not take into account the transformation and methods of disaster response both in Uganda and internationally and contains obsolete provisions that have been superseded by the legal, economic and social development in Uganda; 

CONVINCED THAT there is an urgent need to have comprehensive review of the Red Cross Act cap 57, which will not only strengthen the capacity of the Uganda Red Cross Society to effectively achieve its humanitarian mandate and objectives but will also ensure a greater outreach to the most vulnerable; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 
    1. This House grants me leave to introduce a private members’ Bill for an Act entitled, “The Uganda Red Cross Society and Emblem Use and Protection Bill, 2018”, a draft of which is hereby attached. 
    2. This House do order publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. 

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I accordingly lay on the Table the documents. 

3.56
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second this motion, which our colleague has read, about initiating a Bill to amend the 1964 Act of the Red Cross Society. 

I would like to begin by noting that the population of Uganda has grown from the time it was then in the 1960s, when the Red Cross Society came into existence. It therefore means that there are new scopes. The scope of Red Cross has increased because as we know, the Red Cross Society is mandated to carry out response on the injured. At that time, it was limited to those injured during war but now we see that the Red Cross Society is engaged in many other diverse activities on response, which include disaster response like dealing with those injured in war but largely due to natural disasters like the case has been in Bududa. 

The disaster that the Red Cross Society are addressing today have transcended in dimension and occurrence. We now largely talk of climate change disasters which was not the case before. There are also disasters relating to technological advancement. 

As we saw recently, we had a boat accident on our waters and here we needed the Red Cross Society to come in a big way and offer a hand but as the case is now, until we amend this law, it is still limited in mandate. A review of the Red Cross Society Cap. 57 will go further in augmenting the society’s new tasks including sporadic response, developing new response capacity including introduction of incident command systems to manage scenes of disasters for a coordinated response.

The other issue that needs to be emphasised is that the need to review the law will clearly bring out the independence of the Red Cross Society. You will note that there is a lot of mix up of tasks but we want the independence of the Red Cross Society to come out clearly.

Lastly, at the time in the 1960s, it was not necessary for the Red Cross Society to engage in investment programmes because it was limited in scope but right now – (interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not supposed to go into the merits.

MR WOBOYA: Thank you. I, therefore, would like to second this motion on the basis that the scope of the Uganda Red Cross Society has now increased. The mandate has increased. It is necessary that we amend the law so that we give them more pronouncement so that they can offer better services to Ugandans as well as enable them engage in investment activities to raise extra income to support the badly needed response. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a request to allow the Members to bring a Private Members’ Bill so that we can discuss in detail. 

Therefore, I put the question that this House do give leave to the honourable members to introduce a private Members’ Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, we had a lengthy discussion on the issue of the evicted people in Lusanja and I had tasked a small group of people to work out the prayers because the motion as it came yesterday was bordering on offending Article 93. So, I wanted them to draft something that will achieve the results without offending the said Article. Hon. Mpuuga please present the motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO REHABILITATE AND COMPENSATE VICTIMS OF THE LUSANJA VICTIMS IN WAKISO DISTRICT

4.01
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your indulgence, yesterday, my colleagues and I were tasked to refine the motion I moved yesterday to fit within the acceptable parameters of our laws. 

It is moved under rules 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS in October 2018 the residents of Lusanja Parish, Ssekanyonyi Zone in Nangabo Sub County, Wakiso District were evicted under an order issued by the Chief Magistrate’s Court vide Civil Case No. 7 of 2017, Kiconco Merdad v. Opendo Patrick and 16 others;

AND WHEREAS the eviction which was carried out at night under the supervision of the Uganda Police Force resulted in the displacement of over 70 families, a destruction of over 350 houses, a destruction of water sources and other social amenities and affected over 550 people;

AWARE THAT the Attorney-General on 11 December 2018 admitted to the House that-

    1. the eviction order was issued by a magistrate who lacked jurisdiction to handle such a matter, did not visit the locus and did not ensure service of court process upon the residents who were affected by the order; 
    2. the execution of the court order was exercised by a registrar who did not exercise due diligence by examining the effect the execution order would have on the residence of Lusanja; 
    3. therefore, the eviction was irregular;

NOTING that the judiciary has also commenced investigations and disciplinary proceedings against SGC officers involved in this matter;

CONCERNED that despite the illegal eviction of the people, Government has not aided the victims in their plight and the people have continued to face untold suffering arising from the destruction of their homes, property, businesses and their entire livelihood;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the State is obliged under Articles 24, 26 and 39 of the Constitution to protect the people of Uganda from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, deprivation of property, ensure that the right to privacy of person, home and other property and to a clean environment;

FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGING that the continued subsistence of the appalling conditions in which the people of Lusanja are currently living shall result in loss of life and property due to sanitation related disease outbreaks like cholera;

COGNISANT OF the fact that this Parliament has hitherto severally pronounced itself on matters of the recurring illegal land evictions in the country;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

    1. Government expedites investigations into the conduct of all the judicial officers, police officers, and other individuals involved in the illegal eviction of the residents of Lusanja and bring to book those found culpable.

    2. Government is urged to urgently- 
    a) rehabilitate the victims of the illegal eviction and provide them with temporary shelter, food, water, building materials, medical care, sanitation facilities and other social amenities; and 
    b) consider the compensation of the victims of the illegal eviction for the damage they have suffered and continue to suffer to date.

    3. Government reports to the House in the 1st Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of this Parliament on the implementation of the resolutions contained in number 2 above.

    4. Government complies with the commands of the Constitution to ensure that the rights and freedoms of the people of Lusanja and other Ugandans are guaranteed therein and not abused henceforth. 

5. 	Government conducts an investigation into the reoccurring illegal land evictions in the entire country.

6. 	Government rolls out sensitisation and awareness raising campaigns on the land law and polices in the country. 

I so move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member and the subcommittee. I think, I am now satisfied in the language that we are considering the – that is where, I was worried that we would offend Article 93 but I think, we are asking the Government to consider.

Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you will report in the Third Session of the Third Meeting.     

4.08
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, I thank the Member for couching the motion in more palatable terms. I would like to confirm to this House, that I will inform Government of the guidance from Parliament. I will also undertake to recommend to the Cabinet the orders that have been sought.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, in case, the funds are not there, you can look at the contingency fund. There is a source. Let us go back to item 4. We are going to run through the recommendations quickly and we vote on them. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE STATUS OF THE RESETTLEMENT OF LANDSLIDE VICTIMS IN THE ELGON SUB REGION

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My apologies for not being around. When you first called us, we were for a committee meeting. Our first recommendation is that Parliament interests itself in the operations of the land registry in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the summary? The Clerk should give you a summary.

MS ABABIKU: No, I do not. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can you give her the extract to simplify her work.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On terms of reference (4), these were our recommendations. The committee recommends that:  

i. 	The transaction involving contract No. OPM/SPLS/1314/00100 be cancelled. 
 
ii. 	The Permanent Secretary for OPM, Ms Gertrude Guwattude Kintu be held responsible for causing financial loss to the Government and untold suffering to the landslide victims and many still at risk.  

iii. 	The acting Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness (OPM) at the time of this transaction, Ms Rose Nakabugo be held liable for causing financial loss to the Government and untold suffering to the landslide victims and many still at risk.  

iv. 	Ms Beatrice Gimono M, the Executive Director Simu Oil Company Ltd and Ms Jacinta Nafuna be jointly prosecuted for fraud since they acted on behalf of a company without powers of attorney.   

v. 	Members of the Contracts Committee that included Mr Albert Byamugisha, Mr Kazungu, Mr Mayanja Gonzaga, Ms Olivia Nantumu and Mr Ahabwe, be held accountable for their incompetence in evaluation and failure to detect that they were dealing with Simu Oil Company Ltd without required instrument that resulted into financial loss to the Government.  

vi. 	Charges of fraud be preferred against hon. Mudimi Wamukuyu for unfulfilled commitments with third party claimants on a piece of land he had no instrument mandating him to transact resulting into financial loss to Government.  

vii. 	Hon. Mudimi Wamukuyu, Fr Godfrey Manana, Fr Andrew Mutubusi and Fr Patrick Watikha, be jointly prosecuted on criminal charges and have Shs 2.754 billion recovered and refunded to the Government of Uganda.
  
viii. 	Hon. Mudimi Wamukuyu be prosecuted for abuse of office. 
 
ix. 	Mr George Wilson Ochwo be prosecuted on criminal charges and have Shs 1 billion be recovered and refunded to Government of Uganda.  

x. 	Ministry of lands desists from making blanket disclaimers, which may not be reflective of the actual status of land under search, to avoid misleading stakeholders. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now going to vote on each recommendation that you have listed. The first one is on the cancellation of the transactions. I put the question that that recommendation be approved. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: The second one is on the actions of the permanent secretary for causing financial loss to the Government. I put the question that that recommendation be approved. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: The next, the acting Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees (OPM), Ms Rose Nakabugo, be held liable for causing financial loss to the Government. 

(Question put and negatived.)
 
THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Ms Gimono Beatrice, the Executive Director Simu Oil Company Ltd, be prosecuted for acting on behalf of a company without powers of attorney. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that members of the contracts committee be held accountable for their incompetence in evaluation and failure to detect that they were dealing with Simu Oil Company Ltd without authority.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that charges of fraud be preferred against hon. Wamukuyu Mudimi – (Members: “No.”)- Honourable members, I have to put the question so that the vote is taken and recorded. Therefore, do not vote before I ask you.

I put the question that charges of fraud be preferred against hon. Wamukuyu Mudimi for unfulfilled commitments with third party claimants on that piece of land and that he had no instrument mandating him to transact.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that hon. Wamukuyu Mudimi, Fr Godfrey Manana, Fr Andrew Mutubusi and Fr Patrick Watikha be jointly prosecuted on criminal charges and have Shs 2.754 billion be recovered and refunded to Government of Uganda. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that hon. Wamukuyu be prosecuted for abuse of office. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Mr George Wilson Ochwo be prosecuted on criminal charges and have Shs 1.026 billion recovered and refunded to Government of Uganda.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development desists from making blanket disclaimers, which may not be reflective of the actual status of land under search, to avoid misleading stakeholders. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under our term of reference No.5, the committee recommends that Shs 8 billion to cater for the resettlement activities under OPM is re-instated through a supplementary request and have this allocation ring-fenced in the medium term.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that, that recommendation be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, under term of reference No.6, the committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister in conjunction with the Local Government shifts the distribution centres to the affected sub counties, including Bukalasi, Buwali and Bubita. 

The concerned authorities should explore using other means of identification such as involving the local leaders, especially the LC1 chairpersons, in identifying locals so as to streamline distribution of food and other relief items other than the national identification cards.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those two recommendations be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, under any other matters incidental thereto, the committee recommends that the Transaction Adviser, Mr Richard Masereje be held accountable for submitting transaction advice that caused financial loss to Government of Uganda and untold suffering to the intended beneficiaries.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that that recommendation be approved.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the following public officials be held liable for misinforming Government in the capacities they were holding then resulting into a financial loss and untold suffering to the intended beneficiaries: 

    1. Mr Geoffrey Wambi Khaukha 
    2. Mr Vicent Nalanya 
    3. Mr Tom Mayeku 
    4. Mr Calvin Mukholi 
    5. Mr Edward Wabudi 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that that recommendation be approved.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, under role of political leadership in OPM, the committee recommends that the political leadership, including the minister of state and the Cabinet minister in the Office of the Prime Minister related to the subject matter, take responsibility for causing financial loss of Shs 8 billion to Government.

The committee recommends that investigations be carried out on Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Directorate of Land Matters in State House and the Inspector –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Under which rule?

MR SSEMUJJU: I am going to state the rule. Madam Speaker, we are voting in the presence of people whose names have been read. I am being intimidated and I cannot vote. Even they themselves are voting.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please complete your proposal.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee recommends that investigations be carried out on Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Directorate of Land Matters in State House and the Inspector General of Government for failure to intervene in the botched procurement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two recommendations. I put the question that the recommendation on political leaders be approved.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on the role of other institutions in the procurement process be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, under term of reference No.8, the committee recommends that Shs 8 billion be provided to the Office of the Prime Minister in the supplementary request and have their MTEF ceiling re-instated to enable them undertake activities relating to the resettlement of IDPs and restore the plight of these suffering Ugandans.

The committee recommends that Office of the Prime Minister should explore all media avenues available like local FM radios and use of lower local governments to convey the messages.

Due diligence for future procurements

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should desist from relying on such statements in isolation but rather do the due diligence in the actual location and involve all the stakeholders in opening of boundaries.

The committee recommends that the local governments in the Elgon sub-region should lead by example and take the initiative of spearheading the tree planting campaign in order to control soil erosion and further rolling of the rocks from the mountains. There should be massive sensitisation to the people about the advantages of reforestation. The Central Government should explore avenues of gazzetting the areas that are prone to landslides after relocation.

Land identified for resettlement of persons at risk of landslides 

The committee recommends that Government interests itself in Plot 101 and other suitable pieces of land in the country, applies for the necessary waivers in the procurement process to speed up the process of resettling the landslide victims.
	
The committee recommends that Government should interest itself on existing vacant land in the country and priorities using it for resettlement of IDPs.

The committee recommends that Government steps up interventions in developing the necessary infrastructure in Kiryadongo to improve on their livelihood.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that programmes intended by the Office of the Prime Minister for the resettled victims in Kiryandongo be mainstreamed in the local government structures for ease of implementation and sustainability.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the recommendation on the supplementary request and have their MTEF re-instated be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on dissemination of information be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation of future procurements be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on massive planting of trees be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on the Plot 101 and other suitable pieces of land in the country be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on the use of other Government land in the country be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation on improving livelihood and infrastructure in Kiryadongo be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the chairperson, the committee and Members for their contributions. However, I would like to remind you that there was a lot of tension around this report.

I would like to remind Members that scrutiny is a constitutional obligation of Parliament. People should not think that it is designed for particular people; it is here in the Constitution and it is the work that our committees do. Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here to request you, to allow the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017, to be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by members of the Cabinet and the backbench. Can you justify for the second reading?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Civil Aviation Act was put in place but overtime, it has been found lacking. That is why it was brought before this House.

The objective of the amendment is to harmonise the law with the Chicago Convention and its annexes, in order to comply with the international standards and recommended practices.

The second objective is to enhance safety and security of the civil aviation operations in Uganda. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite the chairperson of our committee to present the report.

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Ssekitoleko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table a file with the following documents:

    1.  A report of the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Civil Aviation Authority Bill, with a minority report attached hereto.
    2. The minutes of the meetings that considered the Bill.
    3. A number of documents from the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda which includes - 
    a) the Convention of International Civil Aviation;
    b) the summary of International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), annexes 1-18;
    c) ICAO Annex 19, on safety management;
    d) the final report on the ICAO coordinated validation mission in Uganda from 11th to 17th June, 2014;
    e) a final report on the safety oversight audit of the civil aviation system of Uganda between 17th to 24th November, 008. I beg to lay. 


Madam Speaker, the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017, was read for the first time on 8 June 2017, and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in consonance with Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee considered the Bill and hereby reports.

Honourable members, the report is uploaded on your iPads including the minority report for you to easily follow since I may not read verbatim. 

On the issues of the object of the Bill, among the very many is to improve Uganda’s compliancy with the Chicago Convention, in which Uganda is a signatory. It is envisaged that the Bill will meet the requirements of Uganda’s compliancy with the standards and recommended practices set by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

Regarding our methodology while considering this Bill, we met with and elicited views from a number of people, organisations and agencies as listed in point No.4 of our report. 

Observations and Recommendations 

Compliance with ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices 

The committee observed that the thrust of the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017 is to enhance compliance with ICAO standards and recommended practices. Five out of six paragraphs of the memorandum of the Bill highlight matters of compliance with ICAO standards and the 23 clauses of the Bill address various aspects of regulation and operation of aviation.

On the next page, we have a table showing a comparative summary of audit performance of selected East African countries in the 2014 ICAO audit. It shows the details. Members may be interested in the analysis. 

Separation of the Operation from Regulatory Functions in Aviation 

It is noteworthy that a good regulatory environment is an essential foundation for high performing nations that promotes efficiency, effectiveness, accountability and transparency. High performing regulators are a key lever to encourage innovation across the economy and foster productivity and growth through timely approval processes, flexible approaches to new issues and a service focus.

In line with that, in its current state, the Civil Aviation Authority combines both regulation and operation. The same body operates airports and aerodromes and at the same time regulates them. This obscures autonomy and objectivity. 

It was noted by the committee, for instance, that while CAA is a customer of the meteorological services of the Uganda National Meteorological Authority, it is also a certifier of the same services. In addition, CAA continues to provide air navigation services while at the same time regulates the very service - a perpetuation of conflict of interest.

At a consultation meeting with the Attorney-General on 25 May 2018, the committee learnt that indeed the structural delineation of the regulatory and operational functions in aviation is an international best practice, which had initially been proposed in the initial drafting stages of this very Bill. 

However, the Civil Aviation Authority argued, both with the Attorney-General's office and the committee, that Uganda's aviation sector was still nascent, characterised by low flight volumes and attendant dismal revenue, incapable of supporting the creation and operationalisation of a parallel airports authority to man the operations function independent of the regulator - CAA.

The committee, however, notes that legislation ought to be done for posterity. Besides, the growth of Uganda's aviation industry can only happen if the appropriate institutional arrangements that can nurture them are instituted.

Regional Best Practices in Aviation Management 

The committee studied the institutional arrangements governing the aviation sector in the East African Region and found out that Kenya, Ethiopia, Tanzania and Rwanda, which have vibrant aviation sectors, have structurally delineated the regulation and operation functions. Details of what happens in Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda are in the subsequent paragraphs for Members to internalise.

Creation of a Separate Uganda Airports Authority 

The committee is of the considered opinion that the Civil Aviation Authority, as it exists, be stripped of the role of operations and confined to a regulatory watchdog. A separate body should be created as an airports authority with the role of running all airports and aerodromes in Uganda and providing the attendant services required of an operator. This will further stimulate the growth and development of the aviation sector.

Recommendation 

The committee therefore recommends that the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be withdrawn –(Interjection)– yes - and the process of reforming the aviation policy, legal and institutional framework immediately initiated, to separate the regulatory from the operational function.

I beg to move.

However, Madam Speaker, as I stated at the beginning, three Members of the committee wrote a minority report, which I attached to the main report. I, therefore, pray that they be given a chance at least to mention their points of departure. I have been advised that hon. Margaret Mbeiza, supplemented by hon. Waluswaka and hon. Musoke, will take the lead. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Can I invite the movers of the minority report. 

4.45
MS MARGARET MBEIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to read the minority report, which is premised on rule 202 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The major point of departure or deviation from the majority report is the objection to the recommendation to structurally separate the regulatory from the operational functions in the aviation sector. The majority report recommends the creation of a Uganda airports authority as a distinct entity in charge of operation and maintenance of aerodromes and airports and stripping the current Civil Aviation Authority of that role, limiting the Civil Aviation Authority to only a regulatory role.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is our considered opinion that while delineation of roles and responsibilities is prudent in regulatory practice, separation need not necessarily be structural. In its current state, Civil Aviation Authority can realign its internal organisational setup to functionally delineate the regulatory and operation functions.

Besides, the proposed creation of a separate organisation to operate airports and aerodromes will exacerbate the already bloated public administration set up in Uganda with its attendant costs and defeat the spirit of rationalisation of MDAs for more efficient and effective public service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, I have attached the minority report to the major report which the chairperson has already laid on the Table. These are some of the points Members can read further. 
I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Are there two people presenting. Okay, there is minority No.1 and No.2.

4.47
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank my colleagues. 

We came out with a minority report in the interest of this country. You are aware, honourable members, that Government has been paying huge sums of money to departments which could be merged. If you create another authority when the Prime Minister and Government are talking of merging, it will be very bad. That is a main point of departure. 

Members may not be aware, but most of these managing directors get up to Shs 50 million and the economy is affected. If we do this, we shall be against the issue of merging the agencies. I will give you an example. In the Ministry of Water and Environment, there is a department for development, a department for regulation and water resources management. Therefore, instead of creating an authority with a view to give –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear; once a report has been presented and debate is on, a member of the committee, more so one who participated in writing the report, cannot debate the same report. A debate comes in the form of justifying the reason why you came up with your position. This minority report has already been presented, and the majority report was also presented. I believe there are also Members who would wish to add a few things to the majority report.

Is my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, who is a member of the committee and who signed the report, proceeding well by now coming up to justify and lead the debate on the report which he signed and which has been presented on the Floor of the House? Is he proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a document here which purports to be the minority report and there is another area of observations. I thought that was what the hon. Waluswaka was addressing.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, what my colleague is presenting is not what is in the observations section.

THE SPEAKER: Can he then address the observations? Please, let us not waste time; address the observations.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1. 	Extension of the scope of application of the act to all aerodromes and service providers within aerodromes: Due to time constraints and since Members have this report, I would just like to say that we concur with this provision of the Bill. It will enable the Civil Aviation Authority to effectively regulate the aviation sector, including privately operated aerodromes and aircrafts. 

2. 	Amendment of the interpretation of the definitions of accident, Director-General, acts of unlawful interference, cargo, convention, investigator, remotely piloted aircraft system, safety and security: We are generally in agreement with the proposed amendments to the interpretation clauses.

3. 	Changing the organisational name “Civil Aviation Authority” to “Uganda Civil Aviation Authority”: We have no objection to this proposed amendment, considering that indeed most members of ICAO have particularised the naming of their national aviation regulatory organisations to their countries. The civil aviation authority of Nigeria, for example, is called the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority; that of South Africa is called the South African Civil Aviation Authority; and that of Jamaica is the Jamaica Civil Aviation Authority.

4. 	Substitution of the title “Managing Director” with “Director-General”: We have no objection to this proposal since it is aimed at alignment with international best practices. In any case, some other civil aviation authorities’ administrative heads in ICAO member countries like Kenya, the Philippines, Nigeria and Malaysia are called directors-general.

5. 	Provision of new functions of the authority: We note that these proposed functions of the authority will grossly strengthen its regulatory role in aviation.

6. 	Provision of more powers to the authority: We recommend the further amendment of section 7 of the parent Act to include a provision that mandates CAA to liaise with the National Council for Higher Education to harmonise aviation training certificates with other higher education certifications.

7. 	Functions of the board: We note that this is prudent corporate governance; we, therefore, have no objection to the proposed functions of the board.

8. 	Delegation of powers by the Director-General: In view of the foregoing, we recommend that the Director-General should not only be able to delegate to the Deputy Director-General but also to any employee of the authority whom the Director-General feels would be most appropriate to undertake the delegated function. This delegation must be in writing.

9. 	Amendment of section 28 of the principal Act: We recommend that the duty to develop strategic plans for the authority should be stated among the duties of the Director-General listed under section 15 of the Act. Under section 11 of the Act, the Board of CAA should not only approve business plans but the strategic plans as well.

10. 	Replacement of section 38 of the principal Act. 

11. 	Composition of the accident and incident investigation unit: We recommend that the Bill retains the use of the words “accidents and incidents” in the title of the officers because not all incidents involving aircrafts are accidents.

12. 	Appointment of the chief investigator and the deputy chief investigator. 

Recommendation

Madam Speaker, our considered view is that the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the minority report team. Both reports have been signed. 

Honourable members, there are just two positions: the main report is proposing the total withdrawal of the Bill while the minority report is saying that we should proceed with the Bill but make some amendments. That is what we have to debate. You are free to debate now. During the course of the debate, you will make your views known and then we shall vote.

4.56
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, since this is a general debate, can I debate?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the authors of both reports - the chairperson and my colleagues who authored the minority report.

When we were formulating the principles of this Bill, I think that was around 2014/15, this issue of separation was put into consideration. It is a practice everywhere but when we added the figures, they did not add up because of the volume of the traffic of passengers at Entebbe International Airport and the number of aerodromes, airstrips and airports we have in this country. We had to drop that principle. 

Imagine having another authority in place where the executive director is going to demand for Shs 30 million per month. In the whole structure, including operations of the very authority, we are looking at not less than Shs 500 million per month. This is a colossal sum of money that can go into the development of the infrastructure and even maintaining the airstrips. 

We considered the possibility that there could be an independent department within the Civil Aviation Authority with the powers to regulate –(Interjections)– No, it would be independent because it would make independent decisions, which have an effect on the operations sector. 

As we look at this Bill, first and foremost we are time-barred, because this is more or less an international law driven by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and we should have amended it yesterday. It is part of the reasons Air Uganda was grounded. We never had a sufficient law in place. We do not want to see another scenario where Uganda Airlines starts and all of a sudden ICAO comes in and says that we do not have this law in place, therefore we will not fly. It can be very expensive and disastrous to the country. 

Therefore, my appeal is that this is a small organisation, which is still earning little money; we cannot, therefore, separate the two because we cannot maintain them and we cannot pay. In future, it can be done when the numbers add up, but as we talk today, they cannot. It is better for us to maintain a lean organisation but with a specific department, which will do the regulatory part and another to do the operations part.

I appeal to Members that we continue with the debate and we pass the Bill into law. I beg to move.

5.05
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the majority report. My support is based on the following principles: There are two sectors in the world, which are heavily regulated - nuclear energy and aviation. The purpose of separating the two is safety rather than economy. You have to create sufficient safety in order to operate other than looking at the economy.

This Act was initially formulated, I think, in 1992. When they were formulating it, they looked at the status quo and advised that for the first 10 years, we could operate without separation. After then, we should have moved to separate the two services because of the inherent problem of safety.

If you are dealing with safety and you are an operator, some of the services you are operating lead to unsafe aircraft or unsafe flying. You cannot effectively regulate that service, which you are operating. The basis of money in this case in the two industries does not count because when it happens, all the money you are talking about completely disappears, the record of the country is completely erased and the aviation you are trying to start collapses. 

Some of you have travelled by air. If anything is wrong and you are up there, forget about living because you are in a state where even oxygen is not enough. Even if you had a way, you would eventually die. 

Therefore, I do support the position of the majority because this is the way to go and this is the way aviation can develop. For how long are you going to say that because of money we cannot do the right thing? In aviation, you must do the right thing and you cannot improvise. This is just improvisation. It is time to correct what has been going wrong. 

I worked in an airline and I know what has been happening in CAA because it was regulating airlines. The collapse of some of these airlines is a result of not separating the two. The airlines, which have collapsed, were not being properly regulated. 

First of all, a regulatory body is supposed to be very lean, with very few people, not as it is today. You do not even need more than 35 people to do regulation in Uganda. The other authority, which is bigger, is the operations. They already do that; what is wrong with that? 

In addition, when you add up the numbers, the difference is not much –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. It is good for a country to have a vibrant airline, civil aviation authority or any management concerned with aviation. However, at the moment, we need to understand that the whole world is changing the way public administration is done. They do business using cost-benefit analysis. It is no longer just public administration. You have to know what you are going to lose and what you are going to gain.

In this case, Uganda does not have a lot of airline traffic and we still have a chance to amend the law. If we have the Civil Aviation Authority and a separate authority to regulate it - At the moment, Uganda’s debt is actually alarming and I have a feeling that at a certain point, we shall even have to rethink the law. 

Therefore, I appeal to my colleagues to support the minority report. Let us have one civil aviation authority and make sure that it is efficient. The Executive should make sure that the ministry in charge of that authority is doing a good job. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minority report because it has been a pronouncement of this House and Government that we need to cut down our expenditure without compromising quality.

Looking at the object of the Bill and the objective behind the creation of CAA, what we need to do as Parliament is to see how best we can strengthen CAA. It is majorly the same operators but with different functions, which we can accord them using the law. We can cut down costs in this way. 

These days, there is a big question about the mandate of parent ministries in managing these agencies we are creating. We have seen situations where we have created agencies and almost emptied the parent ministries. We have in a way de-motivated the staff there and almost all power –(Interjection)– You are a member of the committee, please let me do my submission; I have read your report.

Hon. Sabiiti, who has experience in that sector, talked about the Atomic Energy Council regulation. This is quite different; these are two different areas. However, the Atomic Energy Council is also housed in the ministry in charge of energy. We must strengthen the grip of the parent ministries on these agencies. 

I would, therefore, think that in the law, we could strengthen the role of a directorate in charge of managing accidents and safety, and separate it from the one regulating, but all under the same docket. Thank you.

5.10
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the majority report. I have listened very carefully to the minority report and I have read it. I have looked at their reasons of departure and they are not convincing at all.

They are saying you can continue having one authority that takes care of regulation as well as operational matters. Colleagues, you cannot regulate yourself when you are in charge of operations. You must emphasise principles of conflict of interest, principles of transparency - I really do not see how it will work.

Secondly, they are arguing that we need timely review of legislation in view of the need to re-establish the national carrier. That is an interesting argument. Yes, we need to move a bit fast, but use speed with caution because we saw what happened to those people in the boat cruise. Panel beating can lead to dangerous results. If there is a serious problem, let us face it and let us address it properly. We can expedite the law reforms, without causing a problem. 

Their third argument is on rationalisation of MDAs to reduce the cost of public administration. I find this argument self-defeating because I have read their report and they are also upholding the establishment of Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. I thought they were going to talk about mainstreaming it into the ministry. Therefore, what are you talking about?

Madam Speaker, lastly, the key argument in the main report, which I totally buy into, is this question of the audit carried out in relation to the performance of Uganda vis-à-vis other countries. We are doing very badly in terms of legislation, operations, licensing, airworthiness; this is a sector which needs serious reforms. Let us sit down, instead of rushing to have changes here and there - changing titles from “managing director” to “director-general” simply because it is done in South Africa, or CAA to UCA. This is not serious! 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my view is, let us go with the majority report and task the minister to re-examine this sector and bring appropriate legislation that will bring the reforms. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know that when we talk about airports, it means airports. Kenya Ports Authority has airports at Embakasi, Mombasa, Kisumu, and Wilson Airport - airports. You are talking about Entebbe - one airport.

5.13
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to support the committee report because at the end of the day, I believe that we need to separate regulation and operations. 

Just like hon. Magyezi said, we need reforms and we do not have to go backwards. I will just give examples. We have micro-finance operations but we also have a regulator. I also believe that we need a regulator in this sector. Now that we are going to get a national carrier, we need an operator to oversee the operations.

I do not know whether the minority report can be adjusted to accommodate this, but my main point is that we need reforms. The regulator can have a lean structure but should be in place to oversee the operations. Thank you.

5.14
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the point of escalating costs, I was almost convinced by the minority report but I need some clarifications. I think tomorrow or the other day, we are bringing a motion here on ethics and integrity in this country, something we believe is very scarce and has really gone down.

On the issue of conflict of interest, I would like to ask the minister to come out clearly and tell us this: Is there a possibility of conflict of interest when operating and regulating? If yes, what is the opportunity cost?

On the issue of the costs involved, Government is moving into merging some agencies and placing them under their mother ministries, including agencies like Uganda National Roads Authority. Therefore, I am wondering whether consideration was taken in having a regulator under the ministry and the operator under an authority. Was this ever considered, so that we do not escalate the cost through the roof? If those options were considered, then I think it would be right for us to take minimum risk other than having this conflict of interest. Thank you.

5.15
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for a very good report and I would like to support the majority report for these simple reasons: 

One, we cannot afford to gamble with safety. Gambling with safety would be irresponsible of us, as Members of Parliament. Therefore, we should have a regulator. 

Two, we cannot have the regulator being the same body as the operator. That is a conflict because you cannot regulate yourself. It is just obvious.

Three, I have listened to the reasons advanced by the mover of the minority report and they are very cosmetic. You cannot dismiss the majority report simply because of a name – changing from managing director to director-general. Is that a reason to cause a minority report? – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you have seen the memorandum of the Bill. It is the minister who came up with the proposal to change the name to Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. It is the same minister who said they should change the managing director name to director-general; it is not the movers. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when the minority report was read, I wish we had listened; they did not disagree because of the name. Take a look at the report; there was no divergence on the views regarding the name. I just wanted to make that correction.

MR BITANGARO: Thank you for the information, hon. Okupa. However, I was still continuing. If at a certain point we forgot or it was ignored –(Interruption) 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Bitangaro. The information I would like to give you is that the only things that this Bill seeks to change are basically the following: 

i. 	Establish an independent accident and investigations unit;
ii. 	Change the title from managing director to director-general; 
iii. 	Have unhindered access to aerodromes; 
iv. 	Rename Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) Uganda Civil Aviation Authority (UCAA); and
v. 	Improve compliance. 

Those are the things that the Bill seeks to provide. There is nothing more. So I agree with what you are saying but I just wanted to give that information. 

MR BITANGARO: Thank you very much for the information. In conclusion, if at the time the earlier Bill was drafted and the elements of regulation were incorporated with operations, then that was a mistake. It is about time we corrected that mistake and separated the two roles. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I am probably not very educated on this; can’t the same functions be put in the same Bill? Can’t you provide for them in the same Bill?  

MR BITANGARO: They can be in the same Bill, Madam Speaker, but separate their allocations.

THE SPEAKER: The reason I am asking is because the majority said they want this Bill withdrawn completely. Honourable members, this is what the report said. When they finished presenting it, I told you that the majority said that we should withdraw it but the minority said we should proceed with it and make amendments. 

5.20
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the minority report that we should proceed with this Bill. 

Much as the world is global, we cannot just follow suit but we have to tailor the needs of this law to our current situation. I worked at the airport and most of the work is at operational level. However, many times a lot of resources are concentrated at the top and are wasted, and this suffocates the operational level. I hold the view that if the right people are put in the right places, there will be no conflict of interest. Let us have the right people in the right place and they will do a fine job. 

The aviation industry is going to grow incrementally. This can be provided for depending on the returns that this industry will bring to the country. Right now, I think it is not viable to go full suit to follow what the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) has set and other standards that developed countries have in place. Thank you. 

5.22
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I have keenly listened to the majority and the minority reports. Apart from the departure in their respective conclusions, on the details, there seem to be very minor divergences. In my opinion, these can be handled in the conclusion of the minority report.  

I beg to submit that as a Parliament, we should support the minority report and proceed with the Bill with the view of introducing amendments where necessary. I say this, Madam Speaker, because we are aware that there is also a plan for the revival of our defunct Uganda Airlines.

As a country, we are aware that we have been in an air transport limbo for some time. Therefore, total withdrawal of this Bill will still take us back to a law that may not match the time we are planning to revamp our national carrier. 

In addition to supporting the minority report, it is also my humble appeal through your Chair - Our rules have some aspect to do with the relevance of the issue one raises, and this issue is relevant to this Bill. This Parliament has never been briefed on the plan by the Government of the Republic of Uganda to revive Uganda Airlines.

We are seeing pictures of planes being worked on and they look brand new. However, as a Parliament, may we request that we are officially briefed and have a debate? We need to know whether, as a country, we have taken precautionary measures on what transpired when –(Interruption) 

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The challenge we have in this House is speaking with experience regardless of our fields. There are times when we have listened to agriculturalists and respected them. I am also in favour of the minority report. The information I would like to give this House is that the failure of CAA is not because of their weakness. It is because of the powers that I indicated in the Act. CAA has no power to implement anything. That is why you see the closure of Air Uganda was done by the minister. 

The CAA has no power to fire or hire; they are crippled. The flying school is not licensed. The airport is not licensed. The law is silent about what they are supposed to do. It is a law that was set in place and it is very shallow. They cannot implement anything.

Madam Speaker, with due respect, if we throw away –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is that information?

MR PAUL MUSOKE: This is information, Madam Speaker. If we throw away this Bill, then we are going to cripple a lot of things. Even CAA technical team are not authorised to license the upcoming airline. So, it is a critical moment. We have one airport. How can you set up another Authority to run one airport, honestly? Even the running airport is crippled. 

When we are paying taxes as aviators, we pay straight to URA. We do not pay to CAA, apart from some few revenues that are collected at the airport. Unless you are saying that we should not pay revenue and we pay it to CAA.

Madam Speaker, this law is hurried. I am proposing we discuss it instead of suspending it because it is a time bomb as we speak. The Authority that has been appointed to run the national carrier is earning salaries on loan.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will be able to address us  on the issue of – you know, I have also been seeing pictures of people inspecting planes in Canada, recruitments in newspapers. No one has come to tell us. Where did you get the money to buy the planes? Did we budget for it here?

MR OBUA: Thank you very much. In regard to that information - what I can say is that that is the more reason we need to debate this Bill. If the CAA currently is not empowered by law, we make sure they are empowered through the amendment to this Bill so that they perform their roles and responsibilities that will make all of us satisfied.

Madam Speaker, my final point before I was interrupted with a point of information was to request the Ministry of Works and Transport to brief Parliament on the plan for the revival of Uganda Airlines. I beg to submit.

5.27
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to air out some very important points. We are elected to legislate not to throw away the proposals that have been brought to the House. You organised a very good orientation during which you said we are not supposed to legislate in this House about tribalism and killing people. 

The majority report is telling us we must kill CAA. By saying we should withdraw the Bill, it means you are saying, “You slaughter.” Therefore, my view is that that report is kind of an indictment to the progress Uganda is trying to make –(Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Madam Speaker, I rise to put my brother to order. When we make a proposal in this House, regardless of whatever direction, it is passed into legislation. Where in this report, I have read it, nowhere is it saying, “Do away or kill CAA.” There is a law in existence. 

Therefore, is hon. Abala in order to insinuate that the majority report wants to do away with CAA yet in actual sense, the majority report wants to reform and improve the performance of CAA, improve the performance of air safety in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is just worried that if we do nothing, we are killing the airline. So, he is in order.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. (Laughter) The minority report is the future of what we are talking about. In that regard, I would like to say, I support the minority report 100 per cent - no running away from reality.

Secondly, if there were mistakes in CAA, those mistakes came as a result of the weaknesses in management like appointing even teachers to the board; appointing people who are not professionals. If you do not appoint professionals like my colleague has just indicated to us, it means we are going to have a big challenge. That is why, in my view, that weakness should not be the reason for withdrawing the Bill.

One thing that is critical, even in this House, we have what we call the Administration of Parliament Act, which establishes the part of administration headed by the Clerk. Then we have the one that deals with the policy matters; the Commission, headed by the Speaker of Parliament. In my opinion, the two can co-exist. That is why I believe there is no way to remove the head from the neck and you continue surviving. 

My view is that since at the moment we have only one airport, Entebbe which has its own challenges, we should be able to build this. If we had started Soroti Airport in Soroti Flying School, then one in Gulu, one in Arua and another in Western, then I would buy the idea of separating the two. At the moment, let us have one managing all the matters to deal with aviation operations in this country. Thank you.

5:33
MR DAVID KARUBANGA (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for giving us both the majority and minority reports. It is true in aviation, safety is very important and that means regulations. However, it is also true that these regulations must follow international standards as per ICAU. So, the ultimate goal of achieving safety is through regulations and following the ICAU standards. 

We have heard from our colleagues that CAA is not empowered enough. From the point of Ministry of Public Service, we are looking at rationalising agencies and indeed, this matter will come to the Floor of Parliament. We want to reduce on administrative costs but maintaining the functional aspects. Therefore, as we look at rationalising agencies, let us look at empowering CAA because even now, they have a department responsible for safety and regulations. It is only that they are tied somehow. 

As we wait because the door is not closed until the rationalisation process is over and also taking into consideration the fact that businesses – because I have seen the report says, airports and aerodromes, we have only one airport, Entebbe International Airport. Yes, Hoima Airport is coming on board but it will not be for these commercial flights; it will be for oil and gas operations.

Therefore, as we wait for the business to shoulder the costs is when we can say, “Let us have different bodies - one responsible for regulation and the other for operations.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg the House to consider the minority –(Member timed out.)

5.37
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Looking around the House, I see one concern; all of us are concerned about safety in the operations of CAA. In any organisation, when you are responsible to oversee the operations of any undertaking, you are charged with the responsibility of appraising the performance of that organisation.

I think it is on that basis that the ministry felt it necessary that they should come up with changes to ensure that improvement is seen in the operations of the CAA. I am in support of the minority report because it is through that report that we will have an opportunity to improve the operations of CAA. 

If we are to go with the majority report, we are not going to have that opportunity because it is recommending that the report should be thrown away and only advising that a new policy be brought on board.

Therefore, I support the minority report that we proceed with the next step so that we keep amending areas where CAA can be strengthened.

5.38
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Currently, we are very busy expanding the airport and we approved a loan here. There are many activities going on. We are doing this to better the aviation industry. 

Regionally, country is disadvantaged because of being landlocked. The only advantage we have to compete favourably in the region is the airport. The big question between the two reports cannot be solved by withdrawing this Bill.

What I am saying is that if the current structure in the aviation has challenges, can we dig deeper to see how best we can reorganise it? For example, if we are talking about having the right technical people, doing the right job and in the right places, then there is no need for us to separate the regulation despite the requirements of International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). 

We are still a small country and we are talking about Entebbe International Airport. Which other airport do we have in Uganda to create another Authority? Do we have the resources and capacity? These are some of the pertinent issues; we need to question ourselves about, as legislators for the betterment of this country. 

Ideally, what we need to do is to get into the nitty-gritties. How do we empower CAA? We have challenges, for example, in terms of routes. We are regulating but we do not have our own airline. We are only talking about bringing it here. However, even Parliament is not aware about this - (Interruption)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane   who has been holding the Floor asked about any other airport we have? 
The information I would like to give is that this House passed a loan for the Kabale International Airport, in Hoima District. I think that will be our second airport and we need safety for users of these airports. Thank you.

MR EITUNGANANE: Madam Speaker, we are just clearing the fields for Hoima proposed airport for the oil fields. As a country, whatever the case is, that is the main reason we created that. However, the resource envelope with a lot of demands around - I go with the minority report and let us maintain it and make the necessary changes. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.41
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the minority report. The main reason - I am going to address myself to the issue of safety. Honourable colleagues are worried but I would like to remind you that aviation issues must comply with the international standards. They comply with international standards and there is no aviation that does not comply with international standards. Our coordination regional office for Africa is in Nairobi.

We learnt a lot from the regional office supported by Intergovernmental Authority on Development. When we were benchmarking on Metrology Act, as Committee on Natural Resources in the Seventh Parliament, we did a lot of work with the regional office in Nairobi.

That is when we got to realise that safety issues are squarely handled at that level because any aircraft that leaves Entebbe International Airport, it is not only for Ugandans but for the whole World. To add on, the Chairperson failed to convince the House and to give the justification for withdrawing the Bill. He did not tell us even that they are going to amend clauses like more than three quarters; he did not mention that.

Therefore, there is no enough justification for him to withdraw. The House needs to scrutinise the Bill, see how to tighten the safety issues within that Bill to strengthen the aviation. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the Bills that have been withdrawn from this House take ages to return. Honourable colleagues do not accept that any Bill that is withdrawn never sees the face of this House -(Interruption)

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to provide to this House is that the convention that Uganda signed is an International Convention. The laws that we are putting in place are complying with the international laws. The moment we comply with the laws, lift them and approve them in our country, then it means safety wise, we comply worldwide.

On the accident statistics, Madam Speaker, we have got two accidents only in the last five years. Can we constitute a body to look after the accidents?

5.44
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report on which they committed a lot of time but at the end of it, they insulted the aggregate wisdom of this House by proposing to withdraw it. On that basis, I would like to support the minority report wholeheartedly.

When you reflect on observation 5.2, there are three flimsy reasons they give for the separation of roles. In my opinion, the separation of roles does not require the establishment of parallel authorities but a substantive directorate or department that can handle the operational requirements of the aviation industry.

Madam Speaker, conflict of interest is something that can be handled through clear regulations and clear code of ethical conduct in any institution. It does not require a separate entity to deal with this. They also talked about specialisation and efficiency but this can be based on proper human resource configuration and not an establishment of an entity or authority of its own to handle a simple function, which can be regulated by a human resource department. They also talked about accountability but which should be a norm in all Government entities. 

On the issue of safety that my brother, hon. Sabiiti has been raising - which Authority regulates the army in this country? Do we have a separate Authority that regulates the army in –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some 15 Members have contributed and I thought we should go to Committee Stage. However, maybe, I should put this on record. Last financial year, when we were reading the budget, I was forced to do something completely unusual, to allow the first reading of a Bill. It had never happened but that was because I was informed that we were in danger of failing on our compliance standards. 

Therefore, I allowed that unusual thing to take place so that this House could consider this Bill. It may have some problems. The industry may have some problems but I think let us first settle this and address the shortcomings later. The minister is here and she has heard. Cabinet is also here and they have heard the concerns of the Members. 

Therefore, let us do our work for now. We cannot have a new airline when we do not have compliance standards. I appeal to Members that we allow the Bill to proceed. Let us identify the areas of deficiencies and they should be addressed by the ministry.

Therefore, I now put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is an amendment Bill. I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, I have a procedural concern. I do not know whether after the committee chairperson proposing to withdraw, he is ready to proceed clause by clause. I suggest that he buys time to put his House in order and harmonise with his colleagues so that we proceed at once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Harmonise what? He is still the chairperson of the committee.

MS KOMUHANGI: I know but I do not know whether, after recommending a withdrawal, he is still ready.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson -

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Fortunately, the minority members in their report also attached the proposed amendments clause by clause, which I internalised as the chairperson and I can ably guide the House in this process. Therefore, I concede to their report and we should be able to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, honourable committee chairperson.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, we may want to hurry through this and make mistakes. My concern is, the committee chairperson has now said that he will proceed with the amendments as proposed in the minority report but are we sure that we want to carry all the amendments in the minority report as they are? Are there no proposed amendments from the main report that could have been incorporated with those in the minority report so that we have a quality product at the end of it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the majority report did not propose anything. They wanted a withdrawal. Therefore, let us proceed with the Bill and when it comes to the amendments, we will put the question on the proposed amendments from the minority report.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, committees always do work on behalf of the House. Once the work is completed in the committee and it comes to the House and the House adopts a position, then the position of the committee becomes subordinate to the position of this House. 

Therefore, I do not see any reason we would challenge the chairperson because, first of all, the amendments from the minority report are not for every bit of the Bill. There is that part of that Bill that was never amended and the House has decided that we proceed with the Bill. 

Therefore, what would be the problem when the chairperson decides to proceed with it? That is the position of the House. Personally, I would think that he is actually the right person to proceed with the Bill. If there is anything for us to debate in the minority amendment, we shall amend it at that stage. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The committee chairperson has conceded to the minority report. Therefore, when we come to the amendments, he can take the lead.

We are on clause 2 and I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us leave clause 3 for now because there are some amendments in the interpretation. Let us do clause 4 instead.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to propose that clause 6 be amended by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (j) to read as follows: “To liaise with the National Council for Higher Education to harmonise aviation training certificates with other higher education certificates.” 

The justification is that this will empower CAA to regulate aviation training and leverage the competiveness of aviation training certificates relative to other academic certifications.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, that addition is irrelevant and redundant because these training standards are formulated by ICAO and they are only enforced by the civil aviation organisations of different countries. Even if you say, go to National Council for Higher Education, it is not international.
	
It is redundant and I appeal to the chairperson to withdraw it.

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to guide the honourable minister that as we speak, Kenya University is offering a Masters course in Aviation Management. It is basically harmonising the qualification within the two institutions. 

It is useless for the Government to inject big sums of money to run the flying school yet the qualifications are not considered. Government is spending money on scholarships for the students that are trained in the institutions but their qualifications are not recognised.

Lastly, of late, the civil service has just recruited the technical team; the so-called lecturers in universities to train these students but their transcripts are not recognised. All those big sums of money injected in that school - it is all about harmonising the two institutions. CAA and the National Council for Higher Education can benchmark with Nairobi University, which is already handling that course.

MR ABALA: Before my senior colleague comes, this House passed a law; The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. That Act empowers National Council for Higher Education to manage all matters related with higher education. I am sure this course will actually be managed along those levels. That is the reason some people had problems.

Sometime back, after going through CAA, which is not recognised by National Council for Higher Education - when they went to National Council for Higher Education to equate their papers to Ugandan standard, it became a problem. My view is that what the chairperson inserted is appropriate; it will be in line with that law because at the end of the day, National Council for Higher Education will go and check the facilities and the quality of the staff. Otherwise, we might leave some of these places to be managed by wrong people and that might become a problem. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think both the minister and the committee are right but only using different approaches. The input of this is to address how to equate - if one has qualified from Soroti Flying School - You remember we had colleagues who were challenged in court. They said their certificates needed to be equated so that they could qualify as flight captains but it could not be done to either A Level or university. I think that is the input of this amendment.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We concur with the proposal made by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 8 is amended in paragraph (2) (a) of section 11 by inserting the words “consider and” before the word “review” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph (a).

The justification is to subject strategic plans to board approval as a managerial control tool.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 10 is amended in paragraph (b) by inserting a new paragraph, immediately after paragraph (k), to read as follows: “Propose and implement the strategic plan of the Authority.” 

The justification is to empower the managing director to develop and implement the Authority’s strategic plan.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended, as proposed -

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, the main objective of this Bill was to change the title from “managing director” to “director general.” So, are we talking about the managing director or the director general? It should be clarified because the chairperson is talking about the managing director yet the Bill is talking about director general.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not dealt with the interpretation section. I do not know whether that is where they had put the new proposals. Henceforth, use the word “director general” because that is what the minister had proposed in his Bill.

I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR SSEKITOLEKO: We propose that clause 11 is amended in the proposed new section 15B by substituting for subsection (1), the following:

“15B. Delegation of powers of the director general
    (1) The director general may delegate in writing, to the deputy director general or any other senior employee of the Authority, either generally or otherwise, as provided by the instrument of delegation, any of his or her powers exercised by him or her other than the power of delegation.” 

The justification is to ensure that the director general delegates his or her powers in writing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I just want to move that we do not use the word “in writing” to come immediately after the word “may” so that it reads: “The director general may in writing delegate” I propose that the word “in writing” moves next to the word “may.”

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Most obliged. 

MR OKUPA: I would like to seek some clarification on this issue of delegation. If the director general has the deputy director general, I do not see why we have to go further to say, “any other person” unless we are saying that in the absence of deputy director general. Otherwise, if the deputy is there, then automatically it would be the deputy. The director general cannot go even if they have differences.  That needs to be clarified properly. I think we need to rephrase that amendment properly to cater for that.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much. I would like to get clarification from the chairperson. When an organisation is constituted and the structures are there, we expect employees to work under, for example, the Director General. 

There is an implied delegation that somebody who has been employed and given terms of service is working under the instructions of the director general. Are we saying that every time somebody has to do something, the director general will have to write to a certain officer somewhere and say now I have authorised you to do this? Is it so? Is it what you are implying by “in writing delegate?” By doing their work, it is actually delegated authority. Thank you.

MR ABALA: On the same issue, I imagine a scenario: like in this House, you can give us your thorough experience because you have a deputy. We are in the world of information technology. In my view, I did not want us to go to the administrative areas to direct the director general that you must always do this or that because it is something implied. In management, that is automatic. When a boss is not there, the deputy takes charge. In my opinion, we should actually ignore that amendment.

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. According to the rules and guidelines of aviation, the only person authorised to delegate is the general manager that we apparently have, who we are transforming into a director general. When it comes to inspection of aircrafts – that is the process of certification – it is the director general responsible to assign a specific surveyor and has a specific role assigned to a particular assignment and records kept in case of any eventuality, to know whom to implicate.

So, these are not general assignments. Everybody has his roles and responsibility as an employee but the specific roles for the director are assigning responsibility from across Uganda and assigning inspection responsibilities to members. That is why it cuts across to surveyors who are inspectors.

MR OKUPA: I think you are mixing the words. Assignment and delegation are two different things. What are we talking about? Are we talking about delegation or assignment?

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Regarding assignments - the responsibilities of an employee are the roles of that employee. Delegation refers to assignments given by the overall head for a specific period of time. They are not permanent.

On delegation, Madam Chairperson, we cannot change anything because it is the director general to delegate his responsibility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are not talking about the ordinary work of the aviation authority. We are talking about the area of safety and inspection. This law is empowering the director general to board a plane, detain or recall it if it is in the air and search for serious safety and security concerns if they are identified. So, they are not about management. It is about overseeing the safety of aircrafts.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, this is the reason the movers of the minority report, which the House has adopted, wanted it to be in writing. We do not want this issue where someone just comes in - we saw how – I am sorry to bring this up. These things are happening in COSASE – where Ms Justine Bagyenda signed some documents when the Governor was not aware.  That is why we are saying it has to be in writing. These are the cases.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the error is in the framing because other than the words “in writing”, the rest comes from the Bill. This is what the minister had proposed. So, what they needed to add were the words “in writing”. The rest is what was proposed in the Bill. 
Let us just add the words “in writing” otherwise, the proposal is what the minister had done under Section 15B. So, let us add the word “in writing.”

Honourable members, I put the question that Section 15B be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR SEKITOLEKO: We propose that clause 15 is amended as follows:

    (a) Section 38 (3) by:
    1) Deleting the word “accident” appearing in line two of the provision; and 
    2) Inserting the words “and incidents” immediately after the word “accident” appearing in line three.
    (b) Section 38 (4), by deleting the word “directly” appearing in line one.

The justification is to ensure consistency with the entire provision and also the word “directly” is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to amend clause 16 in the proposed new section 38A as follows: 

    (i) By substituting for paragraph (f) the following:
	“(f) to collect, analyse and disseminate data on aviation safety;”
    (ii) Paragraph (g), by inserting the word “publish” immediately after the word “analyse” appearing in line one of the paragraph; and 
    (iii) Paragraph (i), by inserting the words “and incidents” immediately after the word “accidents” appearing in line two of the paragraph.

The justification is for consistency but to also mandate the Accident and Incident Investigation Unit to disseminate aviation safety information and also mandate it to compile incident reports as well, on top of the accident reports.

    (a) Clause 16 is amended in the proposed new Section 38(c) as follows: 
    (i) By inserting the words “deputy chief investigator” immediately after the words “chief investigator” appearing in the headnote and line one of subsection (1); and
    (ii) By substituting for subsection (1) (a), the following: “(a) the right of entry at all accident and incident sites, to investigate and inspect aircraft accidents and incidents.”

The justification is to include the deputy chief investigator in the headnote and subsection (1) for consistence but also to expand the scope of investigation in the incident sites as well as consistence.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at (f) and (g), there is some repetition there because (f) talks about to collect and analyse data on the aviation safety yet (g) on the original Bill says to gather, record and analyse relevant information.

If the committee is saying we have to amend (f) by saying “to collect, analyse and disseminate data on aviation safety,” it means there is repetition unless we delete (g) completely. However, if (g) is standing, then there is some repetition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think (f) is about data on aviation safety in general. Then (g) is to gather record and analyse relevant information of any accidents or incidents. The other one is about data and this one is about if there has been an accident, you collect the data. That is under (g).

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

The title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CIVIL AVIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 2017” to be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2018.”

THE SPEAKER:  Titled settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Where is our chairperson? I wanted to know whether the chairperson is here because after you move for it to be read the second time, she should report. - Okay, let us got to item eight.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SECURITY INTEREST IN MOVEABLE PROPERTY BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Justice here? Okay, hon. Bitangaro.

6.21
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was here and we discussed this Bill. He was not ready to proceed because the Act we are supposed to repeal has not been commenced. He promised to have it commenced before we repeal it.

However, I would like to go on record, Madam Speaker, that our committee has taken note of the concerns that we delay Bills. I want to say that we are now ready to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. The honourable vice chairperson briefed us about a legal complication relating to this Bill and its predecessor. There is an area that was not addressed by the minister and so, it was going to hinder our work. We shall allow them to report when that huddle is sorted out. We shall allow them to report next week.

We were supposed to have item 10 but I do not see the Energy, Education, Water and Health ministers. Honourable members, we have majorly done many of the things. As you have been informed, “The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018” will probably be ready next week. On the KCCA Bill, the chairperson will come and report and these other items 10 and 11 will be handled next week.

We shall ask the Clerk to move up a number of the reports of the accountability committees to the Order Paper. So, since there is no ready business, House is adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

