Tuesday, 16 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will be making a communication in relation to the 38th Anniversary Commemoration of the death of the Late Archbishop Janan Luwum, who is now a Saint; St Janan Luwum. The commemoration will be taking place on the 16 February, 2015. But I will make further communication towards the end of the sitting. 

Honourable members, we have business that we should finish because tomorrow the Speaker will be taking over up to the end of this particular meeting of Parliament, before we go for the Christmas break. So, today, we should be able to conclude the business on the Order Paper. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO.54 OF 2014 
THE TRANSFER OF POWERS AND DUTIES ORDER, 2014

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table Statutory Instrument No. 54 of 2014, regarding the Transfer of Powers and Duties Order, 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, for your information, these are powers given to the President to transfer some powers that he finds not able to exercise by himself; he delegates through this instrument. This is also one of the instruments - this particular one is under Section 2 of the Diplomatic Privileges Act and it relates to the issuance of statutory instruments in relation to some organisations. This is the power he delegates to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The records have captured that, and that is for the information of the members. Those who want to look at it can do so and study what the implications are. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 31/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
2.12
Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): to ask the Minister of Health the following:

“(i) Would the minister explain to the House whether or not it is a government policy to levy parking fees in government hospitals?
(ii)If yes, what is the rational for such a policy?”


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This relates to the Minister of Health. You have a short statement? It should be very short, honourable minister.

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, there was a question from hon. Dr Bitekyerezo about whether we have a policy on levying parking fees in government hospitals.

I want to state, Mr Speaker, that as government, we do not have a policy on parking fees in our hospitals. Actually when you go across the country, many government hospitals do not charge any parking fees from patients and other people who visit those hospitals.

However, management in some of the hospitals especially the national referral hospital and some of the regional referral hospitals, on their own and in ability to raise non-tax revenue, do sometimes levy parking fees not only for raising revenue, but also to reduce on congestion; to reduce on the tendency for people who might want to go and park unnecessarily in some of those hospital premises. Otherwise, as a government, we really do not have a policy on levying parking fees. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. Whereas I appreciate the charging of fees, there is where it is becoming exorbitant, Mr Speaker.  Nsambya Hospital charges each vehicle Shs 500, which is okay because they guard those cars. But when you go to Mulago, which is the National Referral Hospital, the charges are Shs 2,000. Now if someone comes from Makindye and spends Shs 2,000 by taxi and the vehicle also pays Shs 2,000, then that is a contradictory business run by the hospital.

I think what you need to do, honourable minister, is to revisit the procedure. Otherwise, the amount of money charged, though the safety of our vehicles is also necessary, is too much.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I want to thank hon. Joseph Ssewungu, for raising that issue. Maybe, Mr Speaker, what we shall do is really to work with the boards of management in those hospitals to ensure fees are commensurate with the incomes of people who visit those hospitals. But later we will come back here with a policy on parking fees. Otherwise, it would be like micro-management of those hospitals by the minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Maybe let me now go to the next question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they have to ask you first. These are questions for oral answers and the rules are clear about how we handle them.

QUESTION 56 /1 / 09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
2.15
Hon. Dr. Michael Bayigga Lulume (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): To ask the Minister of Health the following:

“(i)Would the minister explain to the House the extent of the disease burden of Tuberculosis (TB) in Uganda?
(ii)What specific efforts has the ministry made in response to the stock outs and shortages of TB drugs in health facilities?
(iii)What strategies has government developed to step up community awareness and the capacity of health workers for effective treatment/management of the disease?”
2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): The second question, Mr Speaker, came from the Shadow Minister of Health, hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga. He wanted to know the magnitude of TB in the country, the reported stock outs of TB drugs and what we are doing, at community level, to increase awareness.

I must say that we do not have accurate figures of the number of people that have TB in the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the rules require you have that response in writing. Yes, it is a question for oral answers, but the answers are written and you supply a copy to the member who has asked the question and copies to the members so that they can ask supplementary questions. That is the rule.

So, if you do not have a written response to this oral question, you cannot proceed with this matter; we will give you some time to prepare a written response before presenting it to the House as an answer to that question. Thank you. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to suggest that we defer the statements and instead handle some matters that relate to ratifications, which were deferred. My sense is that we finish with those, then we come back to deal with these statements. If that is agreeable with the House, we will proceed that way. So, please hold onto item No. 7.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE RATIFICATION OF THE PROTOCOL FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN MONETARY UNION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall this motion was moved and spoken to.  We had some limited debate and it was upon the request of the members that we move with it to a later date to allow members go through so that we can have a good debate on it. The debate is now open. 

The Motion is for Ratification of the Protocol for the Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union. I propose the question for your debate. Debate starts now. If there is no debate, I put the question.

2.19
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I think you can see that both sides of the House are being whipped by you today because of the level of our preparedness. Some of us prepared our notes but we thought we would follow the business as it appeared on the Order Paper. But the way you are proceeding, Mr Speaker, some of us may have to run back and look for our notes for this particular one.

It would be absolutely unfair for you to move that we adopt the protocol before we make a contribution, Mr Speaker. I just want to apologise on behalf of my side of the House but I feel that we need time to at least have a look and make a contribution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No there was debate on this matter, then the rest of the members said they would want to look at it but since they have looked at it, and I see there in no need for debate, I put the question to the motion. The Motion for the Resolution of Parliament on the Ratification of the Protocol for Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union; I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON 
THE RATIFICATION OF THE MUTUAL DEFENCE PACT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you would like to move the motion? This matter was referred to the committee so we will first receive the report of the committee on the subject.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, just want to know how we can proceed with this matter? Last week you ruled that the motions be split into two: the defence pact and the one on security. We had already done the main report and written a minority report too. What I know is this debate is on a matter of principle because we will not touch the actual gist because we cannot change anything. We were only begging for your indulgence that when it comes to our side to present we do it in such a manner that we only lay down the principles that touch both defence and security. 

So, the ministers can go ahead to present their statement. We will also receive the one of defence so we can debate them together because we are debating the fundamentals. I beg for your indulgence.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree because these matters were received together and they were referred to the committee together; committee handled them together. 

So, it would be proper that we debate them together but the only issue that we need to deal with is - because these motions were not substantially spoken to by the ministers, this would be the time for the ministers to debate them. When the matter is called, for example, item number 9, the minister will substantially speak to the motion before we ask the committee to report. We will debate them together because they touch same subject. So right now it is the Minister of Defence to speak.

2.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago we moved this motion and as you have just stated, it was sent to the committee for deeper analysis. The motion is that I stand to justify, in relationship to our request to Parliament, that we ratify a Mutual Defence Pact that was signed by H.E President Yoweri Museveni together with his colleagues: H.E Uhuru Kenyatta of Kenya and H.E Paul Kagame of Rwanda. This is in respect of us going into an arrangement where we can have collective defence for our sub region.

In signing this Pact, the President closely followed our Constitution because under Article 123 (1), the President has the authority to enter into this kind of agreement. 

However, Parliament did also by law direct that when such an agreement relates to peace and security, it requires ratification by Parliament for it to take effect. 

Honourable members, as we all know, our African continent faces serious problems mainly in the areas of development and security and it has been the vision of our leaders on the continent that in order for Africa to move fast, we should use our sub regional and regional blocs to work together to cause development and to achieve a state of collective defence. 

It is in this respect that the East African Community was revised. And under the East African Community, we have made reasonable progress towards undertaking common development efforts and making common arrangements for common defence and security.

In the treaty that governs the East African Community our leaders again foresaw that much as we want to move together, at times we may not be ready to do so. In that regard, they made a provision on a general direction like in this case; the direction on common defence though they also indicated that those states that would be readier than others can go ahead and the others would join them.

In this respect, Mr Speaker, under Article 7 (1) of the Treaty for the East African Community, it is provided that we shall follow the principle of Variable Geometry and it states thus: “…the principle that shall govern the practical achievement of the objectives of the Community shall include, the principle of Variable Geometry, which allows for progression in cooperation among groups within the Community for wider integration schemes in various fields and at different speed.”

Following that principle, Mr Speaker, the three states within the community, the states of Kenya, Uganda and that of the Republic Rwanda are undertaking, at a faster rate, a number of projects, for example in the railway, in electric power supply, the oil sector and in this case, the defence arrangement. 

So the Motion of the Ratification of the Mutual Defence Pact that we are moving is part of a package of other initiatives that are being undertaken by the three states in our sub region. 

Mr Speaker, matters of defence are very critical and if we are going to have sustainable progress in development, it is important that we make arrangements to have collective defence.
Once we ratify this agreement, we together with Kenya and Rwanda, are going to consolidate our common defence arrangements so that should any of our states have a threat, we can work together. This is not only cheaper; it is also more cost effective.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

DR KIYONGA: It means, Mr Speaker, that we have to make special arrangements in order to realise this. So, the benefits are there that we have this common defence though there are obligations too. 
We need to have a standing post so that in case of any bad security situation and we are called upon to help with our colleagues in the other states we should be there to meet our obligations.

Mr Speaker, we have gone through the calculations, implications. We have also shared this with our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance and we think that given the benefits that will accrue, the new obligation will be sustainable.
 
In the interest of time, Mr Speaker, as you have directed, I would like to conclude by appealing to my colleagues that this is a historic opportunity being offered to the Ninth Parliament; that we can go down in history to be the only august House that has moved in a strategic way to ensure our defence mechanism is anchored and moved to a regional level rather than remaining at the national level.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? 

2.30 
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with the Treaty of the East Africa Community and the new arrangements of Northern Corridor Integration Project, fast tracking strengthens strategic matters of East African Community. An arrangement was reached to sign the Mutual Defence Pact. We subsequently summited it but it was referred back for ratification.
 
Mr Speaker, the pact is very important and is coming alongside the strategy of consolidating not only national security but also regional and continental security. 
Sometime ago in 2004 around Durban, AU took a decision to come up with the African standby force but it was supposed to be based on a defence mechanism based on the regions.

We have a defence mechanism based in South Africa around SADC, one in West Africa based on the ECOWAS and the ECAS in Central Africa and now this based on the East African Community. 

This arrangement has to also ensure that the pact is fast-tracked into a defence pact. Sharing a defence pact will give us multinational capabilities for capacity to anticipate security related issues.
 
The world is facing challenges, just a night a go a lonely gunman took over a café, a drinking coffee place in Sweden and it shocked the nation. Sometime ago, a lonely man attacked the Parliament of Canada and you can go on and on. The point is that these challenges will take responsibilities of a number of countries to come together to anticipate the likely security issues for them to gain the capacity to deal with them. It will also give them the capacity to respond. 
The capacity of responsiveness is so important because given the nature of the threats that we experience, no single country has the capacity to deal with them, for example, terrorism that knows no borders and race. The capacity to deal with multinational crimes and the capacity of resilience - you cannot go to Somalia, Congo and Southern Sudan and stay there lonely without other nations in the region joining.

Sometime ago a doctrine emerged that instead of African countries sitting and waiting for the UN intervention - a decision was taken that regional militaries should lead the way with the support of the UN. It has given us benefits in Somalia, Burundi - (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, we plead with colleagues that we ratify this in order to give us a solid foundation for ensuring that our future is guaranteed and that the infrastructure trade and free movement of people can take place in a secure, peaceful and stable environment.

So, the ratification of this pact would be very important and will consolidate the future of the East African Community and our national security. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that we ratify this very important strategy of a framework. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is for a Resolution of Parliament on the Ratification of the Mutual Defence Pacts. When this motion was first brought, it was referred to the committee. The ministers have moved substantially. So, I will now ask the chair of the committee to report what their view is on this subject. I am meant to understand that there are some other views on this matter but those will be accommodated at the right time. Please proceed.  

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I present the report by the committee on defence allow me to lay on Table, a copy of the same report and minutes of the committee meetings on this subject. I beg to lay.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Ratification of the Mutual Defence Pacts.

Introduction

Mr Speaker, the Northern Corridor Mutual Defence Pacts amongst the partner states of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda was presented to Parliament for ratification and were referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in accordance with Rule 118, of our Rules of Procedure for scrutiny and subsequent reporting to the House. 

The Pacts is part of the wider framework of the partner states in the Northern Corridor Integration Project covering the following areas:
a) Infrastructure
b) Defence and security and
c) Economic project like Customs Union.

I hereby present the report of the committee on the Mutual Defence Pacts for consideration, adoption and ratification of the pacts by this House.
Mr Speaker, in a way of a background, the Mutual Defence Pacts was concluded amongst the partner states of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda on 20 February, 2014 and required ratification by the respective parliaments of the partner states pursuant to the respective constitutions and laws of the three countries.

Mr Speaker, Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states on execution of treaties, conventions and agreements as follows:
“1) The president or a person authorized by the President may make treaties... agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter.  
2) Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this article.”

And Section 2(9) (b) of the Ratification of the Treaties Act states as follows: “All treaties shall be ratified as follows:
i) By the Cabinet in the case of any treaty other than a treaty referred to in paragraph (b) of this section or by Parliament by resolution; ii) Where the treaty relates to armistice, neutrality or peace; and/or (iii) In the case of a treaty in respect of which the Attorney General has certified in writing that its implementation in Uganda would require an amendment of the Constitution.”

Methodology

Mr Speaker, I beg that I don’t read out the methodology. I request that members read through in a bid to save time. 

The purpose of this report is to enable Parliament make an informed decision on the process of ratification of the said pacts. That was the scope. But we also looked at the conceptual and legal framework pertaining to the Pacts before considering the Pacts.  

Conceptual and legal issues pertaining to the pacts
This part deals with the conceptual and legal issues related to the regionalised defence pacts in the context of the East African Community and particularly to the Northern Corridor arrangement.

According to the African Union Common Defence and Security Policy Framework, the changes in the international security arena, at the start of the 1990s, sharply defined the need for the current collective defence and security notion in Africa. 

Africa has the most brutal and numerous conflicts in the world. A conflict is the single most critical factor that has contributed to the retardation of development, and caused untold misery and suffering to the large numbers of the population and yet there seems to be no end to this spiral conflict on the continent.

Furthermore, the topology of the conflict thereto is transitional and asymmetrical or non-traditional, requiring more sophisticated and collective response and action. In this regard, defence is no longer a singular matter, but collective if a nation and her people are to survive and prosper. 

This also means that each African country’s defence is inextricably linked to that of another African country. This is well exemplified in the case of Uganda, Rwanda, DR Congo, Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia. The effect of war in one country affects others. 

Intra-state conflicts such as those in South Sudan and trans-national conflicts such as that of Uganda’s LRA are now a common feature. This is not to mention the challenges related to the organised crimes such as human and drug trafficking, money laundering, proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons as well as terrorism. 

The key objectives of any collective defence mechanism should include, among others, collective response, elimination of mutual suspicion and rivalry through promotion of mutual trust and confidence building and through clear co-operation in defence.
The 10th EAC Extra-Ordinary Summit meeting held on 28 April 2012 approved and signed the EAC Protocol on Co-operation in Defence, whose ratification by partner states is still underway. Multiple membership in different blocs, especially SADC where one of the EAC partner states is a member, maintain constitutive provisions restricting participation of their members in other blocs such as the EAC.

Operational principles in the Treaty

Mr Speaker, Article 7 of the EAC Treaty spells out the principles regarded as operational seen as vital while facilitating integration though they provide some degree of flexibility. 

It sets out four principles that are essential in determining the success or failure of the group dynamics in EAC integration process. These are: the principle of asymmetry, variable geometry, subsidiarity and that of complementarity; the principle of asymmetry, status of variances in the implementation of measures in integration while that of variable geometry permits progression in co-operation among a sub group – say the three – among the larger group – say the five; and the principle of complementarity defines the extent to which variables support each other, while that of subsidiarity focuses on multi-level participation on a range of activity. 

These provisions were found important in permitting some degree of flexibility as long as they did not jeopardise the provisions of the treaty. The flexibility clauses mean that relatively lowly-developed partners may implement agreed provisions slower than another because of their restricted capacities.

In fact, Uganda, Tanzania and Burundi did implement agreed provisions when they found that they were slower than Kenya and Rwanda. In 2005, following the Customs Union Protocol, two principles were invoked when import taxes were removed from Tanzania and Uganda on imports into Kenya, while goods from Kenya into Uganda and Tanzania were taxed. 

At that time, Uganda was also allowed to import certain raw materials duty-free although Kenya was paying duty-free on the same. It will also be recalled that the arrangement phased out taxes on the goods from Kenya into Uganda from 10 per cent in 2005 to zero per cent in 2010.  

In another incident, Kenya lifted passport and work permits required for Rwandan youth as a reciprocal gesture when Rwanda did the same well ahead of other partner states when the Common Markets had rolled out, but under the flexible principles under Article 7. 

Therefore, the committee did not agree with the argument that the Northern Corridor Implementation Projects, including the defence, were offending Article 8(c); that they were jeopardising the Treaty provision, were superfluous and unattainable. 

The fact is that the Northern Corridor Projects were enabling the deepening and broadening of the EAC Treaty provisions. They need to be seen as congruous and not discordant to the established objectives and other provisions of the EAC Treaty.

The objectives of the Defence Pact and areas of co-operation

The objectives are contained in Article 2 of the Pact. They include the following - Madam Speaker, I would request to skip these now that the mover of the motion has already gone over the objectives of the pact so that I can go to the areas of co-operation, which include the following: conflict prevention, management and resolution; prevention of genocide; combatting terrorism; combatting and suppressing piracy; peace support operations; disaster risk reductions, management and crisis response; control and proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons; combatting transnational and cross-border crimes; addressing and combatting cattle rustling; combatting organised crime; and collect and share intelligence on emerging and existing threat.

Findings on the Defence Pact

The Mutual Defence Pact is a collective defence mechanism concluded and signed by the heads of state and governments of the Republic of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda at the Fourth Northern Corridor Implementation Projects Summit held at Kampala on 20 February 2014. 

The Pact is consistent with the provisions of Article 7 of the Protocol on Co-operation in Defence by the three countries pursuit to the Kigali Communiqué on Security Co-operation and in compliance with Article 8 of the Memorandum of Understanding on the fast-tracking of the East African Community integration. Under Article 15 of the Pact, other members of the EAC join as and when they are ready.

The pacts aim at bringing close co-operation among the partner states’ armed forces for collective defence and preservation of peace and stability.

The summit of heads of state directed the partner states to ratify the pacts to give them meaningful effect. Cabinet has approved the Cabinet Memo for the ratification of the pacts and all relevant documents for ratification by Parliament are currently with the committee. 

The pacts are consistent with the Memorandum of Understanding on co-operation in defence sector of the EAC, which was concluded. The defence and security protocol of the EAC, which is on-going, as well as Article 7(e) of the Operational Principles of the Treaty for the establishment of the EAC, which provides for the principles of variable geometry, which allow for progression in cooperation among groups within the community for the wider integration in various fields and at different speed. 

The pacts are consistent with the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the Protocol establishing the Peace and Security Council of the AU. 

Further, the Pact is consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and contains 20 articles that were mutually agreed upon by the heads of state of partner states of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda covering the following areas: definition of terms; conflict resolution; military preparedness; consultations; mutual defence; defence co-ordination and co-operation; supplementary legal instruments; funding; confidentiality; settlement of dispute; withdrawals; saving provisions; signature provision; and accession provision.
The other areas include: provision on amendments; review of the pacts; implementation; and entry into force of the pact.

The pact provides an elaborate framework for the implementation including: policy making organs; the chair and the rapporteur; structures; the training policy; terrorism, violent extremism and genocide; standardised force and peace support operations; disaster risk reduction, management and crisis response; settlement of disputes and conflict resolution; conflict analysis and early warning; and exchange of information and sharing of intelligence.
The others are: research development and military industries; cross-cutting and final provisions; amendments; and entry into force.

The Implementation framework
In order to realise the objectives of this pact, partner states shall individually and collectively, by means of continuous co-ordination and co-operation, maintain and develop their individual and collective defence capabilities. It is in this regard that partner states adequately financed the activities of the organs, structures and operations. This is catered for under Articles 4 and 9 of the Pact. Among them are the following: the establishment of a standby force ready to deploy within 14 days; the joint military deployment; and the joint military exercises.

The area of defence co-ordination and cooperation, which entails military training, developing and co-ordination, common defence strategies, policies, mission of forces, doctrines and readiness and information coordination, research, development and production of military equipment and services and military operation.

A Mutual Defence Pact implementation Framework Matrix, prioritising areas of action for implementation has been developed and is ready for implementation. Ministry of Finance has advised on the source of funding for the implementation of the Mutual Defence Pact in the medium term and subsequently. 

The committee notes thus mechanisms have been worked out:

    a) to accommodate non-members into the Mutual Defence Pact;
    b) for establishment of a dispute resolution mechanism; and
    c) for the rule of procedure for conflict resolution, accession, withdrawal, and depository of documents. 

There is now need for partner states to expedite the ratification of the Mutual Defence Pacts, which the committee is recommending. The Mutual Defence Pacts and all instruments there under are to be registered with EAC, AU Commission on Peace and Security and AU Secretariat so they may be recognised under international law.

Observation on the Mutual Defence Pacts 

Having studied and internalised the Northern Corridor Mutual Defence Pact, the committee makes the following observations and recommendations:

    a) By the three heads of state signing into force the Northern Corridor Defence Pact, this will provide an excellent mechanism for promoting peace, security and stability, in and among the partner states. This will go a long way in guaranteeing protection for all persons and property. It will also include the country’s state of preparedness to mitigate internal and external security threat,

    b) The actualisation of the Mutual Defence Pacts will strengthen the EAC and Eastern African Region against internal and external security threat. 

    c) Article 7(e)of the Treaty for the establishment of the EAC provides for the principle of variable geometry, which allows for progression in cooperation amongst groups within the community for the wider integration in various field and different speed. 

Mr Speaker, there is an amendment clause in the Pacts and the committee went ahead to note - after the three years, which are recommended to amend, the following can be put into consideration:

    a) In the definition clause needs to be extended to include the definition of ‘summit’ as it is not included in the pact.

    b) In Article 6 of the Mutual Defence Pact, there is need to restructure 63 on reporting, which should start with EAC, the AU and finally the UN.


    c) In Article 9 on funding, a more elaborate and equitable framework of funding needs to be spelt out including joint funding for various staff support operation amongst the partner states - this should be indicated.

Conclusion

The Mutual Defence Pacts are consistent with the provision of the treaty for the establishment of the EAC, AU and the UN charter and protocols.

The Pacts are in conformity with the letter and the spirit of the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community.

The Mutual Defence Pacts shall enhance peace, security and stability, not only amongst the three partner states of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda, but also across the entire EAC and Eastern African Sub-Region.

The Pacts shall enhance the partnership states readiness to meet internal and external security threats as they say prevention is better than cure.

The Pacts shall enhance the partner states stability to guard the protection of life and property of their people as well as the territorial integrity of the partner state.

The committee’s observations on the Pacts be taken into consideration when opportunity arises in future for further fine-tuning of the provision of the Pacts.

We also conclude that there is need to develop a link with less developed countries that have concluded Mutual Defence Pacts at different time in the past for their benefits as witnessed under NATO, EU and SADAC, among others.

Recommendations

The committee recommends for the adoption of the report on the Ratification of the Mutual Defence Pacts by the House since it aims at enhancing the promotion of the territorial integrity and the protection of lives and property of the people in the partner states and region.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Do you wish to confirm there was a minority view that was brought to your attention on this subject? 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry about that omission. I wish to inform the House that there is a minority report attached to the main report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now ask the member who raised the minority view to address the House.

2.54
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that at the very start, the minority report had been signed by two members but later on more members signed this minority report and so the total number that has signed it is five. These are: hon. Ssemujju Nganda, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Kaps Fungaroo, hon. Chrispus Omodoi, and hon. Theodore Ssekikubo.

Mr Speaker, the East African Community is an inter-government organisation of five countries: Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The vision of the EAC is to attain a prosperous, competitive, secure stable and politically a united East Africa.

The mission is to widen and deepen economic, political, social and cultural integration in order to improve the quality of lives of the people of East Africa through increased competitiveness, value added production, trade and investment.

The East African Community Treaty provides for the structure, which partner states must respect. The East African Community Treaty is the foundation of the rule of law in the Community. It is the legal framework within which the Community operates with clearly laid down guiding objectives and principles.

Membership of the East Africa Community as per Article 3, provides that partner states shall be the Republic of Uganda, the Republic of Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and any other country granted membership to the Community under this Article. Rwanda and Burundi were granted membership. 

Dissent from the committee’s opinion, under Rule 95(1):

Mr Speaker, I beg that I go straight to the objectives in order to save time. 

Article 5 of the East African Community Treaty lays down the objectives of the Community.

It states thus: “The objectives of the Community shall be to develop policy and programme aimed at widening and deepening cooperation among member states in political, economic, social and cultural field, research and technology, defence, security, legal, judicial affairs for the mutual benefit.”
For all actions, they must be aimed at widening and deepening the cooperation –	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To widen and deepen? (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I hope you do not give it the other meaning, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall be completing his explanation for future readers of the Hansard.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the first objective of the community as set out in this treaty is that member states must strive at all times - the word used here is, “shall” to undertake only a programme that will finally lead to the widening and deepening of the cooperation. Any other effort will be detrimental to the realisation of this vision.
 
Therefore, the Pacts before this Parliament offend this objective. It is just a part of the three out of the five. No reasons have been provided whatsoever why Burundi and Tanzania did not sign the Pacts. That is why we are saying that in realising this objective number one is being offended. 

We are also having a scenario whereby the East African ministers of defence –(Interjections) - hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, I have attached that protocol - have already signed a Peace and Security Cooperation Defence Affairs Protocol. The Minister of Information went ahead to inform the nation Uganda that we had ratified it. This was signed by the five. 

Why on earth do the three want to do a side dish when the main course is there for you to eat? You are properly married into the Community and you find five out of five have signed. We would have expected that those protocols be the ones to be laid before this Parliament and not the one of the three Ks of His Excellency Paul Kagame, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni - both generals - and His Excellency Kenyatta Uhuru. 

Mr Speaker, I have attached those protocols. We would like the Minister of Defence to be an honest person and inform this Parliament so that we move with full information. What has happened to those treaties that you signed and announced them to the country in March and April this year?

You take us for a ride into some side arrangement of the three heads of state while the main thing is there. We cannot build a Community in that way. I would beg you to do the needful. 

But also, Mr Speaker, you may have to recall that Article 7 variously quoted about variable geometry and reads as follows: “The principle of variable geometry which allows for progression in cooperation among groups within the community for wider integration schemes in various fields and at different pay.” 

Partner states under this article cannot be referred to as ‘groups’. This principle refers to groups within the Community like the manufacturers’ associations and the trade union associations. But, I looked at the definition clause and realised that they do not say that partner states shall anywhere be referred to as groups. Therefore, it is wrongly anchored within the Community and you cannot justify it within this piece of legislation. It is an invention of the committee to create a sub group of the three. It is not anywhere articulated within this Community. 

The framers of this Community were very careful in general undertakings as to its implementation. This is what they said in sub-section (c) Article 8, “Every member states shall abstain from any measure likely to jeopardise the achievement of those objectives or the implementation of the provisions of this treaty.”

There is a bar on what members that are signatory to this can do. Now for this cooperation moreover on matters of defence and security of three partner states, they are constrained to abstain. So what are we doing? 

Mr Speaker, then in our own Vision 2040 - the realisation of that vision is underpinned on the realisation of a strongly federated East African Community. From that point, we are making a second attempt for building this Community painful. This Community collapsed. The reasons for its collapse started with manoeuvres in member states and uncoordinated movements of policies and programmes. You remember when Kenya went one party, Uganda stayed multiparty and Tanzania went Ujama under communism, which created mutual suspicions?

If member states begin to suspect each other on questions of defence and signing pacts, then we are done. By ratifying this we are laying the foundation for the second collapse of the East African Community. 

Mr Speaker, there are constitutional provisions that we want them to reassure us about. The deployment of troops outside Uganda requires approval of Parliament. If we sign this pact, we would have signed a one warrant that forever and ever when our troops are moving into Kenya or into Rwanda, they will not require parliamentary approval yet this is what our Constitution says. If we are to deploy our troops outside Uganda, it should be for peace keeping not war.

The argument that we can tackle terrorism through this pact is superficial. The reasons as to why the world is grappling with terrorism are clear; terrorism has found a home where nations are dictatorial, for example, in Somalia, Yemen, Libya, Mali, and Djibouti. All these are dictatorships. It is those other manoeuvres that nations undertake that can lead to the fight against terrorism.

Terrorism, Mr Speaker, as I finish hit Tanzania first. It should have been the first county to sign this pact but it has not signed it and there must be a reason. The argument given that Tanzania is under SADC and that Uganda is a central defence corridor arrangement is superficial because despite that arrangement last year it signed the protocol. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are making a humble plea that there is no legal basis and justification for us to ratify these pacts. The only reason is that we do not know and which we must be cautioned about is that two of the partner heads of state that signed these pacts have been at war with everyone for the so many years. With due respect, His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Gen. Kagame have been at war for years since they were young men. 

Therefore, as we sign these pacts, we must be very careful whether we are not making pacts for another adventure in the military for individual benefits. 

Therefore, I beg this Parliament to work within its wisdom and answer the prayer that we started this session with; that we shall only make laws that help humanity and advance the peace of this country, to reject this pact and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I open the matter for debate, there are those substantial questions that are raised that I would like the Minister of Defence to comment on.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for the attempt he has made to oppose this motion. Very quickly I will go over the issues he has raised. 

It is true that the East African Community, as of now, is made up of five countries. It is also true that the pact that is before the House for ratification has been signed by only three of the five states.

As I said and also as the seconder and the chairperson of the committee have explained, in my view, it is clear that the principle of variable geometry means that within the Community any two or three or even four countries that are ready to move faster than a member who may be slow for its own reason, may do so. 

In fact, Mr Speaker, a private citizen of our Community did try to challenge the fact that the three states were moving forward on a number of initiatives. And our court of the East African Community ruled that it was in order following the principle of variable geometry for any group of states to move on. 

Secondly, again I did -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have details of that case? If you could help the House.

DR KIYONGA: I will need the help of the Attorney-General - I hope he will be around but it is factual that there was such a case - well I think, Mr Speaker, we are talking about a matter that has been endorsed by heads of state and before any head of state signs any document, the legal adviser, the Attorney-General will indeed have advised them very well. So that is the first point.

Secondly, is the issue of the Protocol on Defence and Security – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to disturb the honourable Minister of Defence save that the issue he is articulating is of great importance. I see a gap. Would you tell us what efforts the Government of Uganda has done to seek the consent of this House on all commitments it has been doing? We have a right, as Parliament, to be consulted so that you get our consent before you act territorially.

DR KIYONGA: Well, I think what we are doing is precisely what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is talking about; that before we sat to implement this pact, we thought we should come to Parliament and we are here precisely doing that.

DR LULUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You put it to the minister to guide this House - because what I know is that this report, together with the minority report, have been on for some time. I believe the Minister of Defence should have had some documentary evidence of the judgement of the East African Court of Justice to lay on Table. But he is continuing to make some verbal explanations without giving us evidence of that having taken place. Is it procedurally right? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no procedural hiccup in that. (Laughter) The speaker had just requested the minister to do that. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I also wish to thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to provide information on the case that the minister has referred to. In the East African Court of Justice in Arusha, the first instance division, Interpretation No.1 in which there was an application for advisory opinion of the court.

Mr Speaker, the matters which they sought opinion onto included:

    a) The application of the principle of variable geometry as provided in the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community, and
    b) The application of the principle of variable geometry visa-a-vis the requirement for consensus in decision making.

And they called this issue ‘opinion in affirmative’ as the minister has stated –(Interjections)- I have just given the particulars of it -(Interjections)- it is No. 1 of 2008.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What number is it?

MR MULONGO: It is No.1 of 2008.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are the parties?

MR MULONGO: The parties were the Council of Ministers –(Interjection)- no, it is a whole big lot of thing. Mr Speaker, can I be assisted to take refuge here?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As my colleague as put it, it is Application No.1 of 2008. It was the Council of Ministers of the East African Community that went to that court seeking an advisory opinion on how to apply the principle of variable geometry. And the case or the application was heard by the Principal Judge, His Lordship Johnston Busingye; Deputy Principal Judge, Her Lordship Mary Stella Arach Amoko; and the Justices: John Mukwawa, Jean Bosco Butasi and Benjamin Patrick Kubbo. 

The court listened to the submissions from all partner states and it gave its opinion. When you read the whole submission and the opinion, at the end of the day the court agreed with the Council of Ministers that using that principle other than basing on the principle of consensus, some countries can move ahead of others in applying or in implementing the East African integration.

Mr Speaker, the members are at liberty to use their ipads to google that ruling of the advisory opinion of the Court of East African Court of Justice basing on the advice by the Council of Ministers. Google and get the ruling. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that opinion which was offered by the East African Court of Justice was based on the delay of the heads of partner states not signing the pact on time. That was in 2008 and you recall, Mr Speaker - let us be correct here. Take your decision but let our decision be based on facts. The pact on security was signed on the 28th of April 2012. That advisory ruling was done in 2008. There was a delay in signing this one and the documents are there. So I do not know why we are trying to be diversionary. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what we need to establish is: Does the treaty prohibit this kind of operation? The minister said an opinion of the court was sought and that is why I needed a clear recap of what the court said about this issue of States being able to move and others following. That is why I was pursuing it. 

If it is true that indeed an opinion was sought and a ruling was made by the court confirming that of the five, any number of those five can move on and others follow, then we would be proceeding properly under what we are doing now. That is why I wanted to – 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I appreciate my good friends there for their presentation and citation of the case, generally they are not good in that area. The most important issue here is getting the case, looking at the facts and what the court based on and whether these are in relation with what we are handling now. 

Hon. Ssimbwa is citing the case but we are not being given the facts about the case and whether they are related to what the minister is saying. Procedurally, as you stated, I think we should first get the case and then –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that is not what I said. The issue is; the honourable member raising the objection in the minority report says the principle of variable geometry does not apply in this situation; it does not make a few States move forward and others follow. That is the point he made. 

Now the honourable minister has said, this particular issue of variable geometry was actually adjudicated upon and an opinion issued by the court and that is why I am pursuing it. In pursuance of that, I have now got the confirmation that the court has said that it is okay for some of the States in the East African Community to move under that principle to take certain decisions and move forward and others follow. That is what I have been able to establish this far. So please, honourable minister -

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank colleagues, hon. Simon and hon. Ssimbwa for that clarification.

So, the question of whether any group of States within the membership of the East African Community can indeed move forward on a number of issues is clear because that has been clarified very well. I also want to assure colleagues that -(Hon. Kafuda rose_)- just a moment colleague, I will give you the floor. There is no bad blood between the three States of the Northern Corridor and also the entire membership of the Community. 

As you all have been following, Summits of the Corridor are taking place and also Summits of the East African Community. There is clear understanding between the membership of the Community. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I will take that information.  

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for giving me way to give you this information. What we are talking about is very clear in Article 7(1)(e) of the East African Treaty of 1999. It states, “Operational principles of the Community. The principles that shall govern the practical achievement of the objectives of the Community shall include, in (e) the principle of variable geometry, which allows for cooperation in cooperation among groups within the Community for wider integration schemes in various fields and at different spheres.” 

So in East Africa, other countries may be moving forward and one country delays. What happens is that the two countries must move ahead. They will not wait for another country to catch up so - (Member timed out.)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my brother, hon. Kafuda, for that emphasis. In regard to the Protocol on Defence -(Interruption)- just a moment, comrade. The Protocol on Defence and Security for the EAC - That is true and the starting point is that all five member countries have agreed to closely cooperate on matters of defence and security. That is agreed upon and the only departure, which is still in line with the Treaty, is the fact that those who are ready; two or three, can move ahead and the others will join as we move on. 

I am a bit constrained but let me state this because the Treaty says each country will make an assessment on whether it is ready to move on this. Let me remind honourable colleagues that in the case of the United Republic of Tanzania, which is historically the champion of unity in our region, the United Republic of Tanzania is also a member of SADC and in the current arrangement under SADC, a member state may not sign a defence pact outside the SADC arrangement. This is a matter that SADC is trying to sort out quietly so that flexibility can be introduced. 

So, Mr Speaker, I really want to assure colleagues that this is a historical moment for us to move the defence arrangement of our country and of our region to a higher level so that the development initiatives we are undertaking can be better and sustainably protected. I do believe that with these clarifications, my good friend and brother, hon. Kivumbi, will move along with everybody else.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I have a problem with the minister because if you read the principle of variable geometry, you have to read it together with 8(c) and (5) on the objectives. In other words, if you ratify this, you must have already signed the protocol. However, this protocol has not been brought to Parliament for ratification as the law requires. 

I want you to interpret the full force of these requirements. Although we are given the go-ahead here, we must abstain from measures that are likely to jeopardise the realisation and full implementation of the Treaty and the Defence Pact. 
The other principle is mutual benefit and trust. You are killing trust and creating suspicion and this will soon lead to an arms race in the region. That is why we are saying that there is no harm in you bringing to Parliament the Defence and Peace Protocol by the five member states. 

The clarification I seek is: What is the full force of the requirement of 8(c) where you are required to abstain from those measures? 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague, the honourable minister. I would like clarification from you. My colleague has given clarification from the legal perspective relating to the procedures that concern the East African Community and defence arrangement. Uganda has handled many security threats alone before. Uganda has gone out to even assist other countries alone. 

This pact seems to be driven by Uganda because I followed from history that Uganda brought in Rwanda and dragged Kenya in. My question is: What fears do you envisage concerning threats that may come, which threats Uganda cannot handle alone so that Uganda needs to be assisted by these other countries? 

Mr Speaker, NATO came into existence when a pact was signed. At that time in April 1949, there was the fear of the Soviet Union and the fear of communism. That fear made the United States of America mobilise other countries because the US was sure that alone, they could not handle the threat. 

Again, the Warsaw Pact signed on the 14th May 1955 was driven by fear. This time it was spearheaded by the USSR, which was threatened by the capitalists. Now for sure, I see you not disclosing something. There is something you are afraid of and that you are not telling Parliament. What is driving you? Where is your fear coming from? Do you see some country intending to attack Uganda? A certain bloc attacking Uganda and Uganda alone cannot handle. Why don’t you tell us your fears so that we see what arrangements are good to defend Uganda? Tell us what you fear.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, let me further inform the House and particularly, hon. Kivumbi, because he has been insistent on the possibility that suspicions could emerge and derail the Community, apart from what I said before, that both the Summits for the Northern Corridor and the Summits for full Community have been taking place.

Secondly, our colleagues from the Republic of Burundi and the Republic of Tanzania have been attending meetings of the Northern Corridor in observer capacity. If indeed they had any fears and suspicions, these would have been cleared and they would have brought them up in these meetings, which they are attending.

Turning to the clarification sought by -(Interjections)- can I first address the second point so I give you a chance? There is the point raised by hon. Fungaroo where he asked, “Are there particular fears that we see and therefore want to prepare for?” Before I answer that, let me put it on record that I take exception to the insinuation by hon. Fungaroo that Uganda is dragging others. Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda are equal partners and each of these States has the capability to take decisions they consider in their own right. So for us to give an impression that there is one partner who is dragging others would not go well in this regard. 

In fact, I am surprised because hon. Fungaroo is a well-read person and I respect him for that. We are members of the African Union as you know. The African Union itself, not yesterday but more than ten years back, established an African Standby Force with regional chapters; regional forces as Gen. Aronda was articulating. At the African Union level, they find it critical and necessary that we make regional arrangements for our security now and in the future. 

As the chairperson of the committee has stated, we have thoroughly studied this issue. What we are doing now is not only consistent with the Treaty of the East African Community but it is consistent with the African Union Constitutive Act. It is consistent with the charter that sets up the United Nations. So there is no contradiction here, there is no particular fear, this is a general principle. If you want peace, you must prepare ahead of time and it is better that we prepare as a region rather than as individuals -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kiyonga for accepting my clarification. In the Seventh Parliament, I remember the time when we opened up for East African Community representation in Arusha. People came here and campaigned and one of them was a prominent son of this country who even served in the East African Community. He came here and as he was campaigning to be elected he said, “The East African Community died in my hands.” Members then said, “If it died on your hands, there is no need to send you there.” Read the Hansard, this is there. 

Here now is a situation, Mr Speaker - we struggled so much to give a rebirth to the East African Community and we went ahead and added two States to us. As we are here now, there is even another applicant, South Sudan, that has already applied to join the East African Community. I really thought we would be moving together in cohesion and transparently. But here is a situation where I have a lot of fear that tomorrow, the hon. Dr Kiyonga will come here and say, “I saw the East African Community die in my hands when I was the Minister for Defence because we brought such a treaty for ratification in Parliament.” 

Can you assure this House and the whole of Uganda that what you are about to do is not going to be the last nail that you are going to hit into the coffin of the East African Community? Because first of all, we have already seen there are a lot of things happening around; the railway network where Tanzania and Burundi are in the cold time and again. (Interjections) Please, I am well informed as far as that is concerned, hon. Migereko.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the important point is that you rose on information.

MR WADRI: Can you please give us that assurance that what we are about to do is not going to kill the spirit of the East African Community and that history will hold you harshly should you endeavour into it well knowing the repercussions thereafter? I thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Dr Kiyonga for accepting this clarification. In your presentation, you said that the United Republic of Tanzania and Burundi were attending as observers. Couldn’t this have raised the eyebrows of the other three members? Tanzania is one of the original members of the Community and for them to have come to attend this meeting as observers – did it not cross your mind to find out why Tanzania was attending this meeting as an observer?

Secondly, Mr Minister, hon. Kivumbi articulated his issues here. Are you rushing this Parliament to ratify this protocol because of a hidden agenda? Is it so that Uganda can send forces like you did to Kenya and South Sudan without having to get permission from this Parliament? Is that the reason? Don’t you think that the three countries going it alone could cause a problem in East Africa? Can you clarify on these issues?

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I will take information from hon. Migereko. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank Dr Kiyonga for permitting me to give this information, which my colleagues may not have been privy to. It is true that Tanzania and Burundi have been attending the Northern Corridor Summit meetings as observers. 

On Thursday last week, during the eighth Summit of the Northern Corridor, they came out to express their readiness to join hands with the Northern Corridor States by formally joining the Northern Corridor States in appreciation of the various programmes that are currently being undertaken, after appreciating the benefits of the various programmes that are currently being pursued under the Northern Corridor arrangement.

I also wanted to provide vital information to my brother, hon. Fungaroo, that it is a basic principle of leadership, particularly for States, that you must always anticipate war and accordingly, prepare for it. One of the things that has always been done, and you were quoting from history, is that all States enter into pacts of this nature as the way of safeguarding themselves against adversaries. As a leader, you must take off time and anticipate that there will be trouble and thereby build up arrangements to ward off that trouble. That is what keeps the country and the world secure. I thank you. (Hon. Aronda rose_)

DR KIYONGA: Hon. Aronda, I will take more information. Just let me address two points and then I will yield the floor. First - (Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. After the presentation, first the minister moved the motion. Then we had the chairperson of the committee reporting together with the authors of the minority report. Because the minority report raised very fundamental issues, you gave the minister an opportunity to specifically clarify those issues that are being raised in the minority report such as the issue of deployment of Ugandan forces outside the country vis-à-vis this pact and the issue of the existence of a similar protocol that the five countries have committed themselves to and then the issue of offending the Treaty.

The procedural point I am raising is, it appears the minister either did not respond to the very issues that you asked him to and as a result, he has attracted debate within his own presentation thereby denying us the opportunity to debate this matter substantially. It appears everybody now wants to raise a point of information. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right to continue raising endless points of procedure with the minister instead of clarifying, as you said, the specific issues to allow debate on this matter to commence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, any debate or matter that is formulated for a discussion normally hinges on one or two things. The strong point in this particular debate is that the minority report is not premised properly in law and that is what we need to resolve. The issue raised is that the three countries are acting outside the Treaty by signing a separate pact and in excluding the other two, they are threatening the Community.

So the minority report and report of the committee will rest on this decision. Once we resolve this then we have approved and we will ratify. That is why it is so important that the minister explains those issues clearly so that we understand. If that particular issue is explained properly, I do not even think there will be need to debate this matter. It is so important for this matter to be solved properly and only then will the matter have been finished. 

In law, there is what you call the rule and then the exception. We cite these exceptions to prove the rule. Article 7 of the Treaty seems to set the rule and also partly outline an exception to the rule. So, if a law provides for its own procedures and principles and then also provides circumstances under which those principles can be put aside and other things proceed, that means they have created the exception within the same procedure. 

So I think we are proceeding properly because if we are able to establish that the rule is that all matters should be implemented in a spirit that promotes integration and the same Treaty states, under the principle of variable geometry, that two, three or four states can proceed without others, if the same Treaty creates that exception, then we will be proceeding correctly, in my own opinion. 

Honourable minister, that is the point you should explain clearly. Please wind up and we see how to proceed.  

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving that further guidance. As colleagues will appreciate from the information given particularly by hon. Simon Mulongo and hon. Ssimbwa, that question did arise; should we at all times act and move by consensus or sometimes a group of two, three or four can move and others join? 

As hon. Ssimwba clearly explained and read out of his iPad, the matter was properly taken to a properly constituted court and guidance was given that in this union or partnership, we can move at different speeds. So I do hope that hon. Kivumbi has taken this in good spirit and will accept that, that is behind us. 

Hon. Wadri, my good friend, has asked a question, which I see is in the same line with what I said, that what we are having is a historical debate. We are here discussing affairs of our country and region so that we fortify the defence and security of our country and region. The question he is asking me is whether I can reassure the House that this move will indeed achieve precisely that. I want to go on record by answering in the affirmative. 

There has also been the question that by ratifying this pact, do we do away with provisions in our Constitution as they relate to deployment of forces outside the country? As of now Mr Speaker, we believe that when we ratify this pact, we will remain under the obligation of our Constitution in whatever we do. So I would like to assure the House that when the situation arises and we have to deploy the sons and daughters of Uganda to act in unison with their brothers in Kenya and Rwanda, we shall still abide by the procedures as dictated by our Constitution. 

At this point, Mr Speaker, I would like you to allow me to give Gen. Aronda an opportunity to give one further point of information and then I can wind up the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As seconder of the motion, yes honourable minister.
3.49
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Since 1999 when the Community was revived, there has never been more harmony in the Community than there is today. Regarding this question of defence cooperation, we have never cooperated more among the five States than we are cooperating today. We are working together in Somalia, in the Congo, in Sudan under IGAD arrangement and there cannot be any disharmony in this. We are training together, we do sports together – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs has stated here that we are together in Somalia in the area of security with other countries of the East African Community, for example, Burundi and Kenya. He is correct there because Uganda, Kenya and Burundi have troops in Somalia. 

He stated here that we are together with the same countries in Sudan. Uganda has troops in South Sudan but Kenya, Burundi, Tanzania and others do not. Is the minister in order to lie that these other countries have deployed troops and that we are together in South Sudan? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to clarify? Is that what you said?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker, under AU cooperative arrangement and under IGAD arrangement, South Sudan is being handled. I said cooperation in defence and security matters. Since AU’s establishment of the African Standby Force based on regional mechanisms - (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not yet ruled on your order.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker, we are working together under Customs Union; under common customs territory, in trade, in free movement of people and persons and in the telecommunications area. It is only in the area of Political Federation where there are disagreements and the five Heads of State have agreed to continue working together until harmony is achieved. But on everything else, we are working together.

Under the Northern Corridor, there are three countries but, Mr Speaker, there is also the Central Corridor consisting of Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania. There is the Southern Corridor. These corridors have been in existence and it was a matter of implementation that this question of fast-tracking came into place. 

So this Northern Corridor cannot be looked at as a way of causing disharmony in the Community but as a way of fast-tracking all that was agreed under East African Community. The problem was implementation. 

Under the Wako report of 2004, all five member heads of State agreed to study why the Community was not moving forward and the Wako report recommended a fast-tracking mechanism. But even that implementation was not put in place until 2008 when Ambassador Mwapachu, the Secretary General, was given an opportunity to also study why the Community was not moving forward. 

Again, a recommendation was made that the Community should move forward and finally a decision under Northern Corridor to move forward and implement – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Fungaroo raised a point of order to the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs. Before you could rule on that Mr Speaker, the Minister for Internal Affairs continued to debate and deal with other issues. Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to proceed in that order without you making your ruling first?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I always remind you that I listen to the proceedings of this House with particular attention. I even read the body language of members. In this particular situation, the honourable member had risen on a point of clarification. Upon rejection, he raised a point of order but still raised the same matter of clarification in his order. That is why I asked the minister to explain. So, by explaining the point of order, which was not a point of order, it was handled. So, please let us leave it at that. 

But members, I have in my hand and I have just looked through the case that has been referred to in the East African Court of Justice at Arusha Court of First Instance. The judges have already been named and this is an application No. 1 of 2008 in the matter of a request by the Council of Ministers of the East African Community for an advisory opinion. This is the advisory opinion of the court, the basis of which decisions were taken and movements made forward. I would like to read just two paragraphs of the ruling or the opinion of the court. 

“It is the court’s opinion and we so advise therefore, that for avoidance of internal conflicts and a possible emergence of mistrust among partner states, and in accordance with the Treaty provisions above discussed, decisions should be taken with the above two aspects in mind and simultaneous implementation thereof need not be forced upon an unready party just as refusal or delay of implementation thereof need not be used to block a ready partner or partners. 

Simultaneous implementation is impracticable in some circumstances and partner states cannot be expected to operate with such strait jackets or one-size-fits-all situation. Variable geometry is therefore intended and actually allows those partner states who cannot implement a particular decision simultaneously or immediately to implement it at a suitable certain future time or simply at a different speed while at the same time allowing those who are able to implement immediately to do so.” 

Based on what I have seen and read, there does seem to be a clear exposition by the court, designed by the Treaty, to handle this matter of interpretation of provisions of this Treaty on what variable geometry is and in that matter therefore, there is no inconsistency with what the three States have taken in form of a decision to move forward and others can join later. So there is no inconsistency in this particular situation.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the clarification you have given us from the ruling. However in the report, the chairperson informed this House that mechanisms have been worked out to allow non-members to be accommodated into this pact. In other words, Central African Republic and maybe Egypt can also be accommodated in this security pact. 
So I want to be clarified and guided as to whether this pact is actually for the member states that are ready and excluding those - how do they come in and how does that keep us within the confines of Article 210(b) which talks about approval of deployment outside Uganda if we are already passing the pact? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought this pact was under the framework of the East African Community Constitutive Act, which is the Treaty. I do not therefore see how Central African Republic, which is not signatory to the Treaty becomes a - So if there were statements made like this, please treat them like statements possibly made in error but which cannot be interpreted to allow members be partners to the Treaty when they are not. 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided. By the look of things, the Speaker is engaged in debating this matter with the members. Is it procedurally right for the Speaker to be engaged in debate instead of guiding members in the process of debate? I need your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Obongi sometimes has limitations on the use of the English language but we appreciate all this because of our various backgrounds. 

Rule 68 says, “The Speaker shall not take part in any debate before the House but may give guidance to the House on any matter before it.” I was asked by the House and I said these two issues hinge on whether or not this principle of variable geometry is being properly used in this situation. That is the matter before the House. 

The honourable member for Obongi may not have understood the crux of this debate. It is important that when you would want to draw the House to come to a particular issue, to understand and take an informed decision, you guide the House and that is what I have been labouring to do except it does not seem to be understood by some members, especially the member for Obongi. 

I am not debating. The Speaker cannot debate but the Speaker can guide so that the House can take a proper decision. The reason is simple because should this House make an error and take an illegal decision then the Hansard will show that the hon. Jacob Oulanyah was the one presiding and I must seek to avoid that. So, even if members get excited and they mix statements that are unfortunate, I still have to maintain my cool and say, no.

Let us proceed properly because these decisions we are taking are not for us. They must be correct for now and they must be correct for the future until so changed. That is what I endeavour to do and that is what I have been doing and I think I have not being doing a bad job so far.

So, the honourable member for Obongi, if now in your opinion it sounds like the Speaker is debating, then that would be an error of judgment, which can only remain in your mouth as captured by the Hansard, but it is of no significance as far as our Rules of Procedure are concerned. We will treat that as one of those mistakes that Members make.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The temptation for anybody who was listening to your guidance to conclude the way he could have concluded - you know, your guidance actually disposed of the minority report so the honourable member could have felt that you debated by giving the guidance. But Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have properly guided this House as to why you gave the guidance upon which hon. Fungaroo raised his point of procedure. Is it proper therefore for the honourable colleague to continue insinuating that Mr Speaker, you were participating in this debate and because of your excellent debate, you have disposed of the minority report? Is he in order to continue with that insinuation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member of West Budama South belongs to a profession very similar to the one the Speaker has so his appreciation of the situation might be a little better than what was uttered. (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much for your wise ruling. Mr Speaker, I rise on this similar guidance. The debate is to probably begin but what hon. Kivumbi had raised was quite pertinent, as you have said. I have equally accessed a copy of the same opinion of the court and before you guided, I actually wanted to rise. Hon. Kivumbi is a very informed member of Parliament and I believe that if he had gotten this, he would have decided otherwise on this particular matter. 

Permit me to wonder aloud whether, on the basis of your guidance, we should continue debating or start debating this issue, which has been disposed of by a very competent and properly constituted court. The court already guided that consensus does not mean unanimity and this is a matter that I feel you could guide us and we –(Hon. Mwiru rose_)- I wish you would allow me to finish so that - you are the author of the minority report and you will always have time - 

Mr Speaker, in my opinion, to which I am entitled, I am inclined to seek for further guidance from the chairperson on how we can build consensus on one thing; whether this House can debate a particular matter that has been disposed of by court.

MR JAMES BABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. The further information I would like to give is that the principle of variable geometry is actually already being applied. We are applying it among the three countries to the single visa, to work permit situations and as quoted in the report, it was also applied in the case of the Common Market in respect to the common external tariff where others were not yet ready to apply it.  

So in addition to the competent East African Court of Justice, which has given that advisory opinion, there is this practical element where we are already applying this principle of variable geometry to visas, work permits and a number of other areas.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the information you have given. Actually, the East African Community will not be the only bloc to apply this. In the European Union, 15 or 13 countries agreed and two opted out of the Monetary Union. Mr Speaker, my humble request is for some guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if these are the two issues that formed a basis for the minority report, I wanted to seek a response from the member for Butambala on the issue of variable geometry, especially after looking at the court ruling. Honourable members, you will recall that the honourable member for Butambala said that the principle of variable geometry applies to non-state actors, for example, if you are talking about traders and people in groups. This is what he said in the House and that is why I was pursuing it. 

Is it true that it only relates to non-state groups or is it actually referring to the States as such? That is why I wanted to come back to you on this to see whether the court clarifies some of these issues. This is so that we can see how to move forward.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I think there is something that all of us are missing in this debate. I was very clear. I seek to be clarified on whether groups referred to - because in the interpretation clause of this Act, they do not interpret groups. They only refer to partner states and therefore I sought clarification on where they talk about variable geometry of groups because this is tantamount to partner states. That was the first bone of contention.

The second bone of contention, which is a critical debate on this matter, is premised on Articles 5 and 8. That is what I started with and members here laughed it off. I said that although we may be allowed to operate under variable geometry, the decision that this Parliament takes should be premised on two other provisions of this Act. These provisions are that one, the objective of the Community is that any programme you undertake must aim at widening and deepening cooperation.

Two, under clause 8(3) on general undertaking, much as they give lee-way, they knew you could do certain things and that is why they said, partner states must abstain from any measure likely to jeopardise the achievements of those objectives or the implementation of the provisions of this Treaty. 

So, we must move under 7(e), 8 (c) and 5 (1). I am not a lawyer but law must be interpreted in its entirety. I was alive to that judgment, for your information, and I had read it word for word. 

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Thank you, hon. Muwanga, for giving way and I thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give hon. Muwanga is that actually the ministers have confirmed that this principle is no longer the exception but the norm. The State Minister for Internal Affairs has outlined instances where they have gone it alone and by alone I mean the three states. This is on issues of visas, work permits - 

Just recently, the three countries nearly signed the Political Federation after the Munyonyo conference but something must have happened. We had been mobilised to go to Kololo to witness as they were signing the Political Federation. 

Therefore, the government should be honest with Parliament. If you are going to move on a number of issues and as a Community, the five of you are only working together on two issues, is there really need for us to continue pretending that there is a Community? 

You are moving alone on a number of issues including defence, political federation, visas and work permits. So, can you tell us if there are other issues on which the five of you are moving together or if there are none then we dissolve and form another group? 

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Kivumbi. This is the best opportunity and the best time to discuss about security in our Parliament. It is for the interest of Ugandans that we are discussing security. Given the opportunity, Uganda should control the whole world militarily.
Mr Speaker, the question of the security of Uganda is not about other States. It is about us as Ugandans. We will not wait for Tanzania to provide security for Uganda like was the case in 1979. They are tired of providing security to Ugandans. 

The information that I would like to give hon. Kivumbi is that the issue of SADC Mutual Defence Pact is very clear under Article 15 which states that if a member state of SADC signs any other defence pact that is in conflict with the SADC pact then there is a problem already. 

When Tanzania came in and said no, we are not ready for that protocol, it was because of the SADC Defence Pact and this has to be clear. We should also understand that the Democratic Republic of Congo is part of the SADC Mutual Defence Pact. Burundi will not come in and join these others and we have to be clear in terms of security. 

Honourable members, we should never compromise concerning issues to do with security. Let us talk about democracy but with security, we should not compromise. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The only person I can allow to give further information is hon. Nandala-Mafabi and then I will conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Kivumbi and I also want to thank the Speaker for giving me the opportunity. In 1977, I was in primary six when the East African Community broke up. The last exams to be sat for the East African ‘O’ level and ‘A’ level certificates were in 1978. Those of us who sat these exams later on sat for the Uganda certificates. 

Why did the East African Community collapse? There were disagreements and when it collapsed, there were countries, which benefitted and those which lost. Hon. Kivumbi has raised matters pertaining to deepening and widening cooperation and he is raising fundamental issues. If we are talking of East Africa and we cannot widen and deepen and cooperate and we say we should move ahead without taking into consideration other States, I can tell you members of Parliament that we can pass issues here but tomorrow, we will be the ones to regret. 

Therefore, I would plead that members listen to what hon. Kivumbi is saying. We should not just clap for the sake of clapping. Security is an issue and we understand this. I have seen members of Parliament today who are never here like hon. Jeje Odong who is clapping. You are never here, you are eating money for nothing. These are the issues we must deal with.

Mr Speaker, I want to say you have done well to read for us the ruling. Indeed we can do without debating some of those pacts but there are those where we believe we need serious engagement. Mr Speaker, what you read is correct but are we doing something, which will last forever? 

I was listening from my office when they were passing the Monetary Union. You cannot debate a Monetary Union and say we have done it and we are happy. Tomorrow you will see.

I want to say that what hon. Kivimbi is raising is good and if members cannot agree with him then they will make their mistakes but I would plead that we do not want the East African Community to break again like it did in 1977. The main loser in the 1977 collapse was Uganda because the assets were elsewhere in Kenya and Tanzania and we lost out. 

I agree with my brother from Sebei who is saying defence is important. Yes, it is but we can all see what has happened to America. It is a very powerful country but American citizens are the most insecure citizens in the world and if you want to make Ugandans insecure as well -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, the information was for hon. Kivumbi. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I do not intend to take over your role but there is one Ugandan whose opinion I always take and that is hon. Fox Odoi.

MR ODOI: I thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the hon. Kivumbi for graciously yielding the floor. The information that I wanted to give hon. Kivumbi is very specific. I listened to the guidance of the Rt hon. Speaker on matters of the law and he did state that in law there are two things. One is the rule and two, the exception to the rule.

I wanted to add the third aspect, which is the intention of the legislator. When you go to court, the courts will be making an interpretation of probably three things: the rule, the exceptions to the rule and the intention of the legislator where the first two are not very clear. 

If you look at the principle of variable geometry, the intention of the legislator could not have been to restrain any set of member states from cooperating. I will give you an example. Tanzania and Burundi have a national asset; Lake Tanganyika. Uganda probably has no common interest with Tanzania and Burundi over the management of Lake Tanganyika. So if Tanzania and Burundi wanted to cooperate over the management of the resources of Lake Tanganyika, they would probably fall back to the principle of variable geometry and move ahead of Uganda, Kenya and the other partner states.

Also, you will recall that at the formation of the East African Community, you only had Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda. Rwanda was a later entrant, so was Burundi. If, for example, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania had signed a Monetary Union and I am giving you a hypothetical case, and Rwanda joined after they had signed that Monetary Union, you could not force them to immediately sign. They had to take their time to study and then make their assent to whatever protocols the original three States had joined.

On the basis of that my brother, I request that you drop your objection to -(Applause)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my good friend but he is a lawyer and he knows that there is a rule and the exception but we must be very careful where the exception does not become the rule.

Hon. Ssemujju has elaborated that as we go forward, it seems the exceptions are becoming the rules and that is an abuse of the framers of the law. Where you turn the exception created to become the rule, you are abusing the law. Therefore, Mr Speaker, that rounds off his good argument.

I have difficulties because people are reading small bits of the law. In Article 6; fundamental principles of the Community, (a) is mutual trust and political will. Therefore I would like to contend that as hon. Kassiano Wadri summed it up, this Parliament is making a historic and fundamental mistake in going forward to ratify this treaty. I want this to be on record and I will quote it for you some years down the road. 

The point we want to make, Mr Speaker, is that the future of Africa does not in any way lie in smaller states like Uganda. If we are not to be submerged by China and India and other countries, we have got to work together. Any group of leadership that takes this apart is out of step with the aspirations of our children. This treaty does not in any way consolidate that role; it only throws us apart. Therefore, I would beg this Parliament, strongly, not to be part of a historical mistake and go ahead to ratify this treaty. 

The problem that led to the collapse of the East African Community was that it was a treaty of heads of states; it was heads of states that disagreed, not the peasants from my village. Therefore, it was the presidents and ministers who made the mistakes that led to the collapse of the East African Community. We must not accompany them on any tea party. I commend to this Parliament, strongly, that ratifying this treaty and rejecting it is the only honourable way forward. I beg to move. 

4.30
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard people wanting to be on record and some of them want to think legally. Whereas I sometimes think legally, I normally think naturally. (Laughter) 

Naturally, in movement, you never jump with both legs; one leg goes first and another one follows. Naturally, if you look at the design of a human being, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the mouth, the breasts, the important reproductive organs, the hands and the feet are all pointing forward.(Laughter) God could have put an eye behind so that we see 360 degrees, instead He put muscles behind. He put the buttocks and the biceps to push us forward and that is why in UPDF, we say “Songa mbele”. Now, if you want to oppose God’s design, try walking backwards. 

What I want to ask is: for whom are we arguing, in whose interest are we arguing? The words used in the treaty, which have been well quoted, are widening and deepening cooperation. This assumes that in the first place, there was no cooperation, that there was separation. Now, in that journey of cooperation, from what I understand, the principle of viable geometry means that those who are willing move first, according to me. I think cooperation acts on the premises that in principle, we agree. That is why the whole East African Community, in principle, right from the treaty, is in agreement on security and strengthening defence for the small person and for the big person. However, it does not bind us. 

Agreeing in principle that we move together does not bind us; it does not say that we “shall”, and the lawyers are careful about the use of words. It does not say that in whatever we decide, we shall and we must agree on everything; it does not. If such a thing happened naturally, life would not move forward, because the leg that moves forward gives an encouragement to the second leg to move further forward. 

There are a number of ratifications that have already been done in the East African Community by the different states, one nation ahead of another. Tanzania is ahead in some aspects, Uganda is ahead in others and that is the natural movement. For anybody to talk of the bigger entity without considering the small entity first is avoiding the natural law, that everything big started small; I repeat, everything big started small. 

In the movement of cooperation, one of the first areas of cooperation that are crucial and should move much faster is security. If you have your neighbour who is strengthening his security and the next two houses or three houses are secure, you are strengthening your overall security inevitably.

Who are you speaking for? Have you heard Tanzanians complaining? Have you heard Burundi complaining? They have been participating, observing and following. Consensus or democracy - I thought everyone here believes in consensus and democracy - believes in the majority. Three out of five is a majority and therefore consensus. Consensus where you are not barred, not denied, not stopped from joining together - we are not stopping you from joining later on - is good consensus.

In my opinion, if this pact was buying the future of other countries -(Interrupted)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the honourable member that the country we are fighting for – Tanzania - is a partner state of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and they are limited somewhere in the SADC treaty. According to Article 15 (1) of the SADC treaty, they cannot sign any other defence pact with another community. They have already signed an agreement with SADC as they are a member state of SADC. 

Burundi, on the other hand, has very strong relations with Congo and Congo is also a member state of SADC - (Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I thank you. The honourable member is trying to labour to lie to this House about the SADC protocol, or whatever he is calling it, which he saying that Tanzania is party to and therefore -(Interjection)- I wish you could reason and stop heckling and wait for your turn, hon. Eriaku; be reasonable and honourable. (Laughter)

Is the honourable member in order to lie to this House that Tanzania is part of the SADC pact, and yet Uganda has accepted to cooperate with Tanzania and expects them to cooperate even where Uganda has gone ahead before Tanzania? If that was the case, why wouldn’t the Minister explain this to the House? Is the honourable member in order to bring reasons that do not apply in our situation? We want to be honest here because we are not discussing for the sake it. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not the first time that I have heard that statement in this House from the time we started this debate, that Tanzania is a member of SADC and under Article 15, – it was actually from the Minister - there are prohibitions on Tanzania signing another security pact with any other agency. That one was said before, so it is not coming out for the first time. So if it is not true, then it has been untrue since the beginning. (Laughter) 

What they have articulated is that this is the provision and Tanzania cannot sign another security pact without excusing itself or getting an exemption from the SADC treaty. So, can you finish? Honourable member, you were giving information; you were not clarifying on anything.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. Nobody should speak for Tanzania because Tanzania can speak for herself. For those who are referring to Tanzania, it has not put a condition for the three countries not to go the way they are going. If that was a condition put by Tanzania that if you do this they will break from the cooperation, you would possibly have some ground. 

I was talking about the natural relationship and saying that if your neighbour is secure, you are more secure than when he is not secure. Somebody was asking, “Is there a threat?” Even a snail or every living thing, the first thing it must do is to ensure its own security. Even a snail has an antenna to ensure that where it is going is safe. So, on the issue of having a threat, I want to assure you that there is a constant or permanent threat for you to survive, and you survive better if your neighbours are friendly, when you can stretch your antenna further than your own limitations. That is a constant, it is not changeable. 

Furthermore, I would not feel happier as a security person to know that the people of Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda know that now security is handled at that greater perimeter than at our limited small boundaries of our individual countries. Imagine that feeling if you had a house and you know that the security or the guards are far away instead of being near your door. Is it safer when they are guarding at your door or is it safer when they are at the furthest end, so that you know that by the time the enemy comes from that far, you are better prepared? 

Really, are we discussing anything that is not urgent or that was not necessary long ago? The only security that has secured the future of the world is that all the developing countries, whether they disagree politically, whether Germany does not agree with Britain over the currency, their defence and security is done together. Isn’t that why we are moving forward? (Applause) Why do you want us to work backwards?

4.43
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To me, there are basically two things: one, the legal dimension in terms of the treaty and our Constitution; and two, the dimension of the moral concerns - suspicion and so on. 

Before I go further, let us look at the legal issues. The Hon. Kivumbi raised a pertinent issue on provisions 7 and 8 of the Treaty, specifically (c) that prohibits anything done to injure the objectives or the implementation of the Treaty. My understanding of “anything” would be an act or omission by a member state that injures the objectives or the implementation of the Treaty. Therefore, if an act of moving forward by three member states would amount to an act that injures the objectives and the implementation of the Treaty, then the concerns of hon. Kivumbi are right. 

Also, if the omission by Burundi and Tanzania to do something to further the objectives and the implementation of the Treaty is bad enough, then that provision also applies to them. Actually, if they abstain from doing something by not cooperating, they are delaying others. So it is a double-edged sword; it does not necessarily apply only to the three member states that are moving forward but it also applies to the other two member states that are choosing not to move forward. That is my understanding. I need to be guided there. 

If that is true, we will be left with a question; the ruling by the East African Court, where my sister Arach from Nebbi had a chance to say something, stated that those who are moving forward are free to move forward and those who are remaining may remain. However, that brings in a question of suspicion. 

Mr Speaker, when you read John 16:33 - let me be a little bit religious - the Bible says that when Jesus was going back, He said, “I did not bring peace into the world; in this world, you will have trials and tribulations, but take heart, I have overcome the world”.  In other words, whenever two to three people are coming together, there will always be misunderstanding and suspicion; should it stop us from moving forward? 

Let us look at the United States and the rest of the international bodies. Talk of the ICC; they are not even signatories to the Rome Statute of the ICC and many different bodies. They always try to excuse themselves. Also, there has always been suspicion in all these groupings where people are united. The European Union is an example; the other time UK was saying if need be they would come out of the European Union. 

All that means we should not be dragged by Tanzania and Burundi; they could be having their different interests. What would be the interest of keeping away, especially for Tanzania? The question of the SADC Treaty, Article 15, is a total lie. Article 15 is on how the Secretariat must run. So they should not lie to us. We should look at what other interests make Tanzania lag behind. So, for me I would think -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the security pact, not the SADC Treaty; security pact for SADC.
 	
MR ANYWARACH: I did not address my mind to that; I was looking at the SADC Treaty. 

If by chance anything stops Tanzania, maybe undertakings that they have with other groupings like SADC, then my approach would be simple: let us have Uganda move with the rest who are ready. However, we would need to move on transparently, so that whatever we are moving on with is well published and communicated in the East African Community. Others who want to come and move with us will then join us on the way. Probably we will meet difficulties on the way; well, that is life. Even in normal relationships, we have wear and tear. So, when things go bad, you will turn back and say, “You know, hon. Kivumbi warned us”. So, I would like to say that we must be optimistic pessimists. We probably base on our background to cast doubt, but we should gather strength and move forward. That is my understanding of the matter. 

This House has agreed that security is a very serious issue; we do not need actual threats, just even imminent or potential threats are enough reason for us to come together. How about shalom? Shalom is peace without any conflict. However, there must be peace whether there was conflict or not. We struggle as religious groups to preach peace, not because there is an imminent threat but because there is need to have peace forever. 

I think when we talk about defence, peace and security we should not wait for a threat; let us move together transparently. The others will join us and if they do not join - After all, Mr Speaker, the other time you sent me to IGAD to attend a conference. Much as Uganda is part of IGAD, there were contentious issues that we do not agree on like the term limits. Other countries are talking about term limits, but for us it looks like we are not ready; but should we stop being a member of the IGAD? No.  

What about the question of rights of women? For countries like Djibouti or purely Islamic countries, when you talk about rights of women, they do not want to hear about it but they are still members. There are areas of co-operation where we can still move together - (Interruption)           

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I think members should be cautious of inciting religious feelings in this Parliament. I am a Muslim and I highly respect my wife and my mother. In religious countries, countries that purely operate an Islamic system have their own set of beliefs as far as respect for women is concern, which they do not have to share with anyone. 

In this Parliament, we are speaking about the three of us moving forward and leaving behind two countries because our views do not merge on that matter. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to suggest that we, Muslims, do not respect rights of women? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First, the Member for Padyere did not say Muslims, he said Muslim countries, and Muslim countries are not Muslims; they are different. (Laughter) They are countries, they are not Muslims. However, in the spirit of what you have just said about shalom, you might want to think about how you restructure that statement so that other Members do not feel offended by that statement.

MR ANYWARACH: Well, Mr Speaker, I was only explaining the reactions of the member states of IGAD. I was there with the honourable Col. Mwesigye and it came out clearly that a country like Djibouti - I am sorry for being direct – was relying on the provisions of the Sharia law on how to treat women. They said that our understanding of the rights of women in the contemporary democratic principle will stop them from cooperating in that area. 

Now, about shalom, shalom is generally a state of peace. Before any conflict, there is need to have peace. That is all we mean by shalom and I was just trying to explain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is why I am saying that you might want to adopt that principle when you make these statements in the House. You do not have to wait for conflict and then you start making peace. (Laughter)   


MR ANYWARACH: That is why I brought it forward. I do not need to offend any Muslim because Muslims are my friends and who knows, I might even marry a Muslim lady. The point I am making is that member states may still disagree on some issues but along the way, they find at least a standpoint where they come together. So we should not be scared.

I will say that the defence, security and peace pacts should be ratified and we should be very transparent in our dealings as the three member states; the other two will learn from us and join. Thank you.

4. 54
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by saying that in this Parliament, since I came in 2001, -(Laughter)- I think I have dedicated myself to work for the cause of women, peace and security. Those are the areas that I have dedicated most of my work in this Parliament. 

I remember a week ago, I was busy bothering the Minister of Internal Affairs about the need for Uganda to sign an international treaty called the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). This is a UN peace and security instrument dealing with curtailing and regulating the sale, manufacturing and transportation of arms. Uganda has not yet signed it but it will come into force on 24 December 2014.

Mr Speaker, I want to start by saying that most international defence and security issues are anchored on the UN Charter. However, in the context of East Africa, in 2004 in Libya, the African Union signed and adopted the Common African Defence and Security Policy. This was meant to guide all the countries in Africa on issues to do with prevention, management and resolution of conflict. Within that common African defence and security pact, it was agreed that the regional blocs will be the implementing organs. East Africa is one of the blocs mentioned as an implementing agent. So, I want to start from that premise. 

I want to also state that from 2005, at the peak of the conflict in the Great Lakes region, the UN constituted what they termed as the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. This was at that time, in DRC, Uganda and Rwanda there was a conflict, which most of you know as the Kisangani conflict. So, it was anchored under the African Union Charter and all this was to involve a lot of organs and groups, including women. I remember I participated in that conference with hon. Cecilia Ogwal and since then, I have been part of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. It now deals with issues of peace and security in the Great Lakes Region and most of the East African member countries have been participating. 

Mr Speaker, what I want to drive at is that while we have the East African Community, the issue of peace and security cannot only be narrowed to East Africa. There are several initiatives that will address the issue of peace and security. The most important thing is: how do we harmonise? How do we synchronise all these other initiatives that are trying to address peace and security? 

Within the East African Community, there has been a bilateral dealing between Uganda and Kenya on cattle rustling. I have participated in this as a Member of Parliament. I am a board member of a global parliamentary forum called the Parliamentary Forum on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which deals with ensuring that the proliferation of small arms and light weapons is dealt with. So, already, within East Africa or within any other bloc, there is no law that bars either bilateral relations or any group from coming together to deal with potential security threats. I am saying this based on what I have worked on as a Member of Parliament both nationally and internationally.

I also want to draw on the example of one of the blocs outside this continent – the European Union. If you have been following the debates in the European Union, you realise that not all the countries are for the single currency; the UK has said they cannot go for a single currency. However, this has not stopped the rest of the countries from moving forward if the UK does not want to move. Look at the European Union, on several issues you may find that only five countries move together or countries that agree that can move on a particular issue.

I want to appeal to this House. To me, the matter of peace and security is at the centre of my heart. This particular region has threats that we must deal with. We have the issue of piracy on the India Ocean waters. We have the issue of terrorism threats from Al-Shabaab. In Uganda, we have already been a victim to that and we have already co-operated bilaterally with Kenya to deal with the Al-Shabaab that bombed people during a sports activity. We have already dealt with issues of disasters – natural or man-made – in Bududa.

I have read the pact; the pact is about cooperation within the countries in respect to dealing with terrorism, peace and security and a standby force to deal with disaster management. I do not see why, as a Member of Parliament representing Oyam South, I would not support it. So, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues that let us deal with the principle and the substance. If countries within East Africa can move - Tanzania might not be having pressure of some of the threats that are imminent on Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda. I have not heard of Al-Shabaab attacking Tanzania of recent, but as a Ugandan, I know the threat Al-Shabaab poses. We still have the problem of LRA in our hands, which the US has helped and is still helping Uganda to address. So, for me, Mr Speaker, I want to support this and appeal to colleagues to support the pact. Thank you.

5.03
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. In the conduct of international relations, it is very difficult to imagine that partner states or parties will always agree. It is in light of this that within different conventions, clauses are made for exceptions, as the lawyers would say. I am not a lawyer but I know that these clauses are provided for, envisaging that at one time there will be issues on which countries will not agree. 

There are very few organisations like the permanent members of the UN Security Council – the five. Of course, you know it is supposed to be by consensus but in most cases they also do not agree; only that the rules provide that if they do not agree, then the whole issue collapses. Otherwise, with most of the other conventions, it is very difficult. That is why this is provided for even in the East African Community and in this pact that we are now trying to ratify. 

Personally, as a Member of Parliament from Buikwe North, and also as a Member of the Pan-African Parliament, I see no problem with this pact. It is a pact that is aimed at promoting security within the region and within the continent, and also within the world.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, a lot of issues have been raised. My colleague, hon. Kivumbi, was intent on the issue of Tanzania and Burundi but as hon. Tumwine pointed out, I would imagine it would be Tanzania and Burundi to complain. Normally, in the enactment of international conventions, there are four basic stages. The first stage is negotiation. Once you have negotiated, then you sign the instrument that you have negotiated. After signing, we come to ratification. After ratification, then you have to domesticate those instruments. If a partner state has an issue, these ones are normally heard at the first stage, the time of negotiation. I have not got any record anywhere where Tanzania went into negotiation and opposed this pact. If the authors of the minority report have anything to that effect, they could table it here.

Once it has been negotiated, you go to the signing. The signing basically shows that you have agreed with what is in the convention. If you have any issue with the convention or in the agreement, you may sign with reservation; you say, “I sign but on this one, I am reserved”. I do not see any record anywhere in the pact where Tanzania participated in the negotiations, agreed and then expressed reservations on something. 

What we are now handling here is the ratification that we are required to do as Members of Parliament. Once you have ratified as a member state, then you become bound by the treaty. That is exactly what we are doing here. After that, I would imagine we shall have to domesticate this - looking at the different articles and trying to re-align them with what is in our laws to make sure that they are applicable here.

Mr Speaker, having outlined that, I would imagine if those countries had any issues, they would have raised them at the first stage of negotiation, if they attended, and at the time of the signing. That having not been done, I think it is our duty as Members of Parliament to make sure that we pass this motion for the ratification of this instrument because we need peace and security and we needed it yesterday. We do not need it today but yesterday, and we should do it now. I thank you very much for your kind attention.

5.07
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to draw the attention of honourable members to the issue of Tanzania and Burundi. What we need to understand are the reasons given by Tanzania and Burundi for not signing. If we did that, we shall be assisting ourselves to understand whether their stay is in good or bad faith. Otherwise, if we simply come here to argue to defeat one side or the other, we shall waste time.

Mr Speaker, there is another issue of our history. Our history shows that we went to other countries without even the authority of this Parliament. We went to Somalia before Parliament approved, we went to South Sudan without Parliament ratifying, and we went to DRC without the ratification of this Parliament –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker and my colleagues in the House, the motion authorising the President to deploy forces to Somalia was brought here in the open and fully endorsed. Is the honourable member in order to state that we deployed forces in Somalia without authorisation of Parliament? Can he substantiate what he is saying or withdraw?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you know; proceed.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I can only add that I know as much as the minister knows that we went without authorisation first and then we came here and ratified. I am sure the minister knows that very much. My last point, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: MR Speaker, the point of order I am raising is a serious matter. We have a Hansard which takes the record; we came here and moved the motion, can the honourable member, if he wants to sustain this claim, provide evidence and substantiate his claim? Is he in order to make such a serious allegation without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order is in relation to Somalia. For the case of Somalia, the issue came before this Parliament in the year 2004. The sitting Speaker now happened to be a member of that House when that matter came up. So, please, let us harmonise this situation without making statements which may not be correct.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My last point is: I am wondering why in the report of the chairperson of the committee, she indicated that we want to include non-members. I do not know why we would like to include non-members where we have not been able to convince members to go along with us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we are debating is a pact that is already signed; I do not think the committee has any authority to say we should include any member. If they said so, please treat it as such because we know that what we are doing - Even this House has no authority to be caught thinking of amending it because it is not permissible. So, I am now asking you to note this so that you do not make it a big issue. So, please, let us deal with the big issue.

BRIG. INNOCENT OULA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When resources are pooled together for a particular undertaking, this undertaking is always accomplished in a short time and with ease. In my view and in the view of the people I represent, this pact should have been there 15 to 20 years ago. They think it should have been in place and they give reasons.

Mr Speaker, in Karamoja, the situation is very encouraging. The guns which were there in the hands of people are now being replaced with hoes and cows, thanks to the good actions of the people of Karamoja who accepted to lay down their guns and pick up hoes and ploughs, thanks to the civil authorities that supported that operation and thanks to the security forces that assisted in this endeavour.

Mr Speaker, the neighbouring districts to Karamoja in Uganda are now buying animals because they know they cannot be raided anymore. This is good development. This good issue will come to nothing if we do not handle the issue of the Turkana and Toposa in South Sudan. This is because occasionally, they will be infiltrating into Uganda and then raiding the animals and disturb this peace which has already been got through a lot of effort by the people of Uganda. 

I think that if this pact is put in place, it will assist us to disarm the Toposa and the Turkana. Right now, the UPDF or the security forces cannot go across into Kenya because of the borders, and the sovereignty of those countries would be violated if we disarm them. So, with this pact in place, we think that this issue will be brought to an end. (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Oula, for accepting this point of clarification, which I want to seek from you. You were about to convince me to see the sense in what the point you are trying to drive to us. 

Not long ago, Uganda as a country very successfully disarmed the marauding Karimojong with their guns and there is now peace and tranquillity in that part of the country. We never received any reinforcement from Kenya neither did we receive it from Rwanda nor from any neighbouring country. As a sovereign state, we were able to do that on our own. Why do you therefore have to involve yourselves in an internal matter of a sovereign state like Kenya? If the Turkana and the Pokot are still marauding with guns, don’t you think that left to themselves, they would be able to do what you did here in Karamoja?

BRIG. OULA: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for seeking this clarification. What I am saying is that the insecurity caused by the Turkana of Kenya affects the security in Karamoja. That is exactly what I am saying here. You are right to say they have not done it; Kenya has not disarmed. Why the pact? If the pact is in place, we can disarm the Turkana in Kenya and the Toposa in South Sudan together, so that the peace which is being realised by the people of Karamoja and the neighbouring districts can prevail. That is what I mean.

Secondly, this country, northern Uganda in particular, is still recovering from the effects of the 20 years of the LRA war. This war lasted for 20 years because of two things: firstly, it was supported by an outside country and secondly, the dynamics at the initial stage of the war. 

According to military science, a field which I belong to, for an army to defeat an opponent comfortably, it should have an advantage of three to one. At the initial stages of this war, because of the economy of this country which could not support the force in place, the ratio was one to one. That meant that if the LRA were using AK-47s and rocket propelled grenades, the same weapons were being used by our force just because the economy could not provide better support to the army at that time. When the situation improved, equipment was acquired and the UPDF was armed. That is why we have to reach down there. Mr Speaker.  Imagine a situation where this pact was in place at that time; we would be having helicopters from Kenya to come and assist UPDF. 

It took us 20 years and no single Ugandan in this country survived the effect of that war. If you or your loved one did not die in that war or got injured, then you might have been deprived of a service that should have come your way. A hospital that could have been built in Kalangala was not built; a road which was supposed to be constructed in Bundibugyo was not constructed all because the resources which were supposed to go for this construction were rechanneled for the war efforts, which were a priority at that time. We lost a lot of time in development in Northern Uganda and in the country because resources for the country were being used to pacify that area.

Mr Speaker, the people I represent still say we need this pact. Hon. Betty Amongi has just talked about the issue of pirates. This country and other countries of the region get their imports through the Indian Ocean. At one time, the prices of these commodities went up because the pirates controlled the routes from the Gulf of Aden down to Seychelles. It became so expensive to bring these imports into the country because the pirates were there. They were planning on the ground in Somalia and executing their plans on the waters. It took a concerted effort of the forces of AMISOM to deal with the planners. They were on ground in Somalia and in the water in Kenya and Tanzania. 

Other international bodies, which had the capability to fight on lakes, had to deal with that situation but it took time. The economy of this country, and not only this country but even the region, had already deteriorated. Imagine a situation where Kenya was left to handle it alone; we would still be having the pirates up to now. We need this pact to quicken action in situations like that one. 

I will now take clarification from the honourable member -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, as I conclude, you look at my size and with due respect look at the size of the honourable member seated near the doctor, the member from Kasese –(Laughter)- It will take him a lot of thinking to come and attack me physically -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate for the honourable colleague – First of all, hon. Sejusa has come back for his position. (Laughter) It should be on record.

Mr Speaker, the point of order that I am raising is to the effect that the matter, and the motion which the Minister of Defence presented to this House, is not about who is more powerful, energetic or weak. From experience, if I can quote from the Bible, you know what happened to Goliath. (Laughter) 

You also know very well that by 1986, the Okello Government, which actually he served in, was not of the same strength in muscle as the current President of this country, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who overthrew the Okellos in 1986. His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has even served longer than the people who were more energetic than him, and it is now coming up to 30 years. 

Is the honourable member therefore in order to deceive this House and to undermine Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni when he knows that he was not as energetic as the Okellos in 1986 and yet he has served for all this long? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the information of the honourable member representing the UPDF, Brig. Oula, the name of the honourable member who represents Busongora North is Nzoghu, which means a big elephant. (Laughter) So, I do not know what lenses you are using, but please be reminded that in case you were referring to the honourable member for Busongora North, he is a big elephant. (Laughter)

BRIG. OULA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your ruling but also in the same Bible where it is said that Goliath –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to continue bargaining and arguing on the ruling you have just made? According to our Rules of Procedure, the ruling of the Speaker is final. Would he like to state his issue outside of the ruling of the honourable Speaker? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when I rule on a matter, it stays. So, please proceed and make your point.

BRIG. OULA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the ruling but what I was trying to say is-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed with your issue. 

BRIG. OULA: Yes, what I was trying to say before the honourable member interrupted was that the pact would bring many people together and their strength would be increased. So, for a country to think of attacking Uganda, it would think twice because they would be attacking many nations that are part of this pact. That is what I wanted to put across.

Mr Speaker, I therefore urge this House, including the honourable member who can floor Goliath, to ratify this pact so that this country and the region develop. This is because we shall have peace, trust and a powerful force that the hon. Gen. Tumwine talked about. We shall be able to have a bigger influence with a big force. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have debated this matter since just after 2.00 O’clock and we have taken this long because the matter is important. Important as it is, we need to draw it to a close one way or the other. I was thinking that we could, at this stage, invite the Leader of the Opposition to speak because he has not spoken, and then I hear responses from the ministers and we see how to proceed. If there are still outstanding issues, then we shall see how to handle them.

5.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed, as you said, we are discussing a very important matter which has direct impact on the lives of our people. 

When the EAC was revived, I think around 1987, I was a member of the national committee. I was then a significant member of the media fraternity and I was chairing the communications committee. At that time, we were told by the then Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Kintu Musoke, that this was going to be a people-centred community different from the community we had before. 

Like I have said before, some of us benefited immensely from the community we had before more than we have benefited so far from the present one. I know there used to be a well-run railway system, an airline, a post office system, a harbour system, a meteorology system, research, examination; all that was part of the East African Community. Today, those things do not exist but we are hoping they will exist one time.

I am a child of a Kenyan and a Ugandan, so I value this community very much and I wanted it yesterday. However, we also want to pull together. Tanzania has had historical links with us. They shed blood to help us liberate ourselves. They have been a friend, a brother and a sister to Uganda. 

Tanzania is also our alternative route. We are now in bed with Kenya, in love, but that love can go sour. It has gone sour once; one time in 1988 I remember going with the late Rwigyema to Tororo and we had deployed troops and Moi had moved troops also. So, it can happen. So, today – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you very much, my boss. The information I want to give is about the concept of variable geometry. When the General was giving the concept and advantages, he left out something. Let me read it verbatim: “The concept of variable geometry allows countries to opt out of unwanted policies rather than being obliged to choose between vetoing them or accepting a majority verdict. Whether this flexibility weakens or strengthens the power of the nation state, federalizing institutions is an important and much debated question.” 

The information I want to give is that of course the concept of variable geometry is there but it can lead to the division and breaking up of the community.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. It is true that we are now in bed with Kenya with love and tomorrow the situation may change. However, it is very important to seize the Kairos moment, take advantage of it and get what we want for the advantage of Uganda and her people. Thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. Even in love, we should avoid opportunism. Before hon. Gen. Tumwine spoke, I had always thought Tanzania was our friend and not an enemy. Maybe I did not understand him, but he was talking about antennas; I do not know whether now Tanzania is where we should be putting our antennae or whether it is a comrade country or a brotherly country –(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, the record is very clear on what I said. In my whole contribution, I never mentioned or indicated that there was any hostility with Tanzania and I cannot. 

As a matter of fact, I was in Tanzania this weekend to give away one of my nieces in marriage to a Tanzanian and to visit some of those areas which I exercised in during the cadet training. My reference to antennas had nothing to do with Tanzania. 

Is it in order for the honourable member, the Leader of the Opposition, to impute improper motive in what I said and really raise suspicion that I said there was a threat or worry about Tanzania? Is he in order to impute that when I never said anything in that relation? If anything, Tanzania has been, and we are sure is and will be, a partner whether we sign this pact or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very particular on members imputing improper motive on another member. However, in this particular instance, the Leader of the Opposition said he did not know whether that is what you were saying. So, now that you have explained to him, he has understood. (Laughter) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Gen Tumwine – is it retired - for the clarification. I was a bit concerned. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you cannot refer to a member of this House as ‘retired’, because by law, he cannot be retired.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. We have had a history and I was alarmed because I had not understood him in respect to Tanzania. We have had the coalition of the willing, which was engineered by Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda and when that started, Tanzania cried out. Hon. Gen. Tumwine said that nobody has complained and that Tanzania has not complained. Actually, Tanzania complained. The Minister for East African Affairs of Tanzania, hon. Sitta complained that Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda were doing things they did not understand; they did not know what we were doing.

So, that is on record and really, should we proceed without Government telling us why Tanzania is being left out? There must be reasons and we need our Government to tell us why Tanzania is staying behind and when they are going to come in if they are ever going to come in. The reasons given by hon. Kafuda from Busongora South, Kasese - I think that is his imagination because if Tanzania knew they were inhibited by the SADC protocol, they would not have been signing a protocol with us. Why should they be fooling us? 
So, Mr Speaker, we need Tanzania and we need Burundi. To move the way we are moving, we are excited because of the new love which I personally think -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, in alliance formation, in practice and theory, you start with one as an ally and you can increase you allies. Secondly, when you make an alliance, does it mean the same thing as love? Mr Speaker, the honourable Leader of the Opposition severally has referred to what is going on between Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda as a love affair and you have heard him. Is he in order to look at international relations as a love affair? Can countries, according to the honourable Leader of the Opposition, engage in a love affair that involves building railways; building oil pipelines? Is that a love affair? Is he in order to misuse the word “love” when describing the relationship between the countries? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point the Member was making is that if we were not in good terms, we would not be doing the things together but he used a figurative term - (Applause) - being a literally person, a journalist and a poet, he was just trying to flower or colour his language – (Laughter)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I know that whenever people who are older than you stand in this House, you allow them to talk; sometimes some who pretend to have gone to school, you allow them first to say something and those who know English, you allow them to. Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for you, as our Speaker, to always allow some professors who get up to interpret things in the opposite way contrary to what they should be –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed the honourable Member for Budadiri West to speak, I am not sure whether he is older than me -(Laughter) - so it is not about age; it is not about level of education’ it is just about being a member of this House that I allow you to talk. (Applause)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, we are asking Government to try to give us some reasons if they have been given any by Tanzania, as to why they are not coming along because we are trying to fill in the missing gap. There has been some disputes of bad blood over Congo by some of the members of the coalition of the willing; could that be the reason?
 We want an explanation, hon. Prime Minister, I am sure you are searching for the answers on the iPad. Mr Speaker, in what we are doing, we should put Uganda’s interests first, not personal interests, not interests of certain people, not interests of survival but interests of the benefit and wellbeing of Ugandans; that is what should be guiding us in what we decide to do. 

I said last time that this new community which is supposed to be people-centred has not been understood by the people of Uganda very well. We have not explained to them. We have not been told the benefits of presence of the Monetary Union. Again the onus is on you to explain to us so that we can go and become your marketers of this union to the people who have voted and sent us here but you are suppressing us. There was even an attempt to gag us not to debate.

Mr Speaker, you even made a statement that this thing is fait compli, we cannot change anything, we can only accept or reject, if I got you right, Mr Speaker. But was Government given the mandate to take over the people-centred power or community and go and decide without consulting us - (Interruption)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. From the beginning of the debate, there were issues that have been on the Table and we have been getting a lot of information regarding this debate. Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is referring to people-centred each time but given the objectives that have been stated very clearly, if I am allowed to read so that I can refer to it, and it is as if he is trying to impute that what is being debated or put before the House is completely out of people’s interest. We have been hearing and know very well of Northern Uganda, Karamoja, the LRA and many other issues regarding insecurity that have been in this country. Mr Speaker, you are aware -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order.

MR AMOS OKOT: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. You are aware that leaders who came from Northern Uganda came out so that the world could understand the suffering the people of Northern Uganda were undergoing during the Lord’s Resistance Army revolution in the North. And today, the country is trying to bring issues about defence, peace and security so that we widen our security matters and safeguard issues regarding insecurity that may arise to this country. 
Mr Speaker, is it really in order for the Leader of the Opposition to keep mentioning that it should be people-centred and yet we are talking about the security of this country which is people centred issues. Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, the issue of security is people-centred; now you know from Agago. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. But by people-centred, I meant that people would be very much involved in the decisions taken. And over matters of security, are we saying we cannot have a problem coming from Tanzania? Are we saying we do not need to be cooperating with Tanzania on matters of security for this country? I need an answer to that. 

Finally, pulling resources as hon. Brig. Oula said is attractive and good. We need to pull resources because we are poor countries but pulling resources alone will not make us work together. The glue that will keep us together is politics. We must understand each other because it is only when we have the politics right that we shall have the will to pull resources. If others believe that we are discriminating, we are being conspiratorial against some members then we are wasting time. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.51
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, I want to thank honourable colleagues who have had the opportunity to speak about this motion. As I said at the beginning, in my view this is a historical debate that we have had and I thank you for having given us the time that you have allowed for this debate. 

Honourable members, it is not debatable that our continent Africa faces real problems particularly in the area of security and it is for this reason that our leaders and the AU set up the African peace and security architecture. This architecture, Mr Speaker, calls for and supports regional blocs so that we can work together not only for security but also for development. We have been very clear under the East African Community that in terms of where we are going, we have agreed on the direction but when it comes to implementation, we have also provided for ourselves under the Treaty the principle of variable geometry which we have thoroughly discussed. Which means that if two or three members are ready to implement or move forward on an issue that is in principle agreed, members are free to do so -(Interjections)- just a  moment colleagues, after the next point I will give you the Floor. 

The point about suspicion has been repeated by a number of colleagues. My answer is, I do not read this suspicion myself within the East African Community. The Northern corridor summit and other meetings have been taking place, the summits and meetings under the East African Community have been taking place and as we have clarified, the two members of the East African Community who are not yet part of this Pact have indeed been attending in observer capacity. So my reading is that we are moving in harmony and I want to assure members that our other colleagues who have not yet joined, it is a matter of time that they will come on board. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I will take clarification from our elder sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the Minister is right to say that this is a historic moment in the history of Uganda because Parliament is about to pass this motion in support of the protocol, so it is very historic. The points I am asking you to clarify are three.
 The Leader of the Opposition raised a very pertinent question that when the East African Community was being revived, it was agreed at that time and I remember your former Prime Minister was there; he has not mentioned that I was personally there too when this meeting was being chaired by the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. 

The other component of the current Community was supposed to be built on having an avenue of accommodating other neighbouring countries. For it was believed at that very moment that if the East African Community wants to survive, we should not remain three, we should allow - and I think it must be in the Treaty - other members to join. So that was the second pillar. 

Now you have been able to tell us that you have been moving harmoniously, just now that is what you said. You have been moving well that even other partners like Tanzania and the Burundians who are not part of this new protocol are virtually in agreement because they even attend your meetings as observers. 

The clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker, you asked a question at the beginning of the debate that this opinion which was given by the East African Court of Justice on variable geometry would be evoked if other partners are slow in the implementation. I would have wanted the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Security to bring on the Floor of Parliament evidence of how the partner states that is Burundi and Tanzania have been slowing down the implementation of the security protocol which have already been agreed upon and signed. And this opinion of the court was done in 2008 when all these other protocols were not signed, which was evidence that they could have been delayed. But the moment you signed in February 2012 and you, as our Minister of Defence, signed latest last year, a few months ago. And you have not told us the reason why the three have been able to go ahead with this security protocol and left out the other two, because that is critical for me to go with you and I am - Mr Speaker, I feel very emotional about this because matters of security should not divide the House. We should all be in harmony but you must convince us because posterity will judge us whether we are adopting this Pact for the purpose of the 2016 elections or for perpetuating one-man rulership in this country. We need to know; I want to be set free, I do not want to be part of that.

So, can you, as you summarise this debate, give me evidence why I am not in defence of Tanzania or Burundi when it comes to security. And I am one person whom you sent to the Pan-African Parliament. Internally, we were in disagreement as to whether we should engage Uganda in Somalia or not. But in the Pan African Parliament, I was one loud voice that stood up to support Uganda’s intervention in Somalia. And even today if you send me there, I will still speak that statement, but the reason why I want this minister to clarify to me, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now clarifying it yourself?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I want him to clarify. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the Minister of Defence also happens to be a relative of mine and when he was a Minister of Internal Affairs, whereas Police would be chasing me for arrest, for him he would wait until I have left the venue then he would send the Police. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have always remained very grateful to him unlike other ministers after him who tortured me but he was very understanding. So, I want him and I to go on record in this Parliament and posterity should judge you and me as having been always and constantly on the right side of history.

Much as we all agree and we must be unanimous on issues of security, tell me one or two reasons why Tanzania and Burundi have not been part of this new protocol? When you signed the new Pact just a few months ago not even a year; that is why I am seeking clarification, can you tell me why and give me some reasons?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now give him the opportunity to do that?            

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Finally, I want to thank the five members who signed the minority report because I go by it. I just want to seek one last clarification. The statement from the minister because he is the one replying on behalf of Government; your minister who is a friend of mine, Rose Namayanja, made a very important statement and I would want you to read that statement when you get time.  It came out in the Daily Monitor of 23 January, 2014. She made a very strong statement based on the security protocol which was signed and ratified by Cabinet. Read that statement and clarify on it before you urge us to approve this motion and pass it.

As for me and the people of Dokolo and for my children and grandchildren who will come after me, I will not want to approve anything that will work against my country in the future for which I would regret, never. God bless you.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Yes, there are some colleagues who want to seek clarification but let me first handle what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has stated. Indeed what hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised is where I was going. This motion and request to ratify this treaty is a common good, and it is a bipartisan issue. It is an issue that all of us should have interest in, indeed as the debate has shown. There are people on the other side of the House who have stood up and strongly supported although there are also those who have expressed reservations. 

Through you, Mr Speaker, let me first clarify what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said about the Police, that is a joke because as you know, the Police is under the command of the Inspector General. I was not in the operations but indeed we are relatives and great friends. (Laughter) 

I have explained, Mr Speaker, that the Treaty of the East African Community does provide that when any group of the members within the Community are ready to move ahead to implement something agreed, that is healthy. And in discussing this issue on the Floor of this House, we can give you some indications where we think the two friends are a bit slow. 

I would also like us to respect international relations. There is so much I can say here publically but there is also so much which I cannot say. And it is a prerogative of any member of the Community when it comes to how quickly to move to make their decisions; they do not have to come to the Community and give specific reasons why they are not moving at speed X. 

We have stated, through the Speaker, informing hon. Cecilia Ogwal that in the case of Tanzania, one of the issues is that there are still issues to negotiate within the SADC because when it comes to the defence Pact, they have already made certain undertakings. So, for them to come and display, sign this Pact; they need to agree to a certain agreement within the SADC community.

You are absolutely right that Burundi is not a member of the SADC but as I said, really the prerogative to move at speed X or Y remains with the member state. Again I said maybe before hon. Cecilia Ogwal rose up, that in this cooperation, in the northern corridor integration project we are equal members. Kenya, Uganda and the Republic of Rwanda are equal members. I think we would be over stepping our mandate to start imputing in this House that one country is pulling the others. And therefore when hon. Cecilia Ogwal states that is this  for the election of 2016?  We are going a little too far. This has nothing to do with the elections of 2016. I will take, with your permission, Mr Speaker, a clarification from Hon. Bihande.

MR BWAMBALE BIHANDE: Thank you very much, neighbour and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Defence has continually said, “the summit of the northern corridor states, then the East African Community States.” I want clarification; this Treaty you are asking us to ratify, are we ratifying it under the auspices of an East African treaty or a treaty of the northern corridor states?

DR KIYONGA: Yes, that is very important, hon. Bihande. Just in case I have not been clear, this Pact is for the three states - the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Uganda. But when my brother, hon. Kivumbi, did correctly point to an article in the EAC Treaty, he also said watch out; do not cause suspicion. Do not do anything that hurts the interest of the broader formation - the East African Community. So in answer and in trying to alley his fears, I said on the one hand we have been having summits of the Northern Corridor Integration Projects and two things have been happening: 

One, these two members who are not yet signatories, have been attending as observers. So, they are in the know.

Secondly, also the Summits of the East African Community have also been taking place so that in case other members had a discomfort with this issue substantively, they had the opportunity to raise that matter within the East African Community Summit. It is in that context that I was raising that issue –(Interruption)

MR SABILA: Thank you very much, honourable minister for giving way. I have listened very carefully to your deliberations on the need to have this Pact. Honourable minister, the information I want to give you is that I, among many other colleagues, represent border communities which have for a long time been affected by conflicts which are cross-border in nature. And the coming into force of such a Pact, in fact, is most welcome and it is overdue. We wish it had come much earlier than this; we would not have suffered all the consequence. For those who have not been hit by cross-border incursions, we are here to tell you and we have stories to tell. 

Honourable minister, there is a saying by one of the famous strategists, Sun Tzu, who wrote that in times of peace, you prepare for war. I think this is the most right time for Uganda to strategically plan to defend or provide security for its citizens which stands a test of time.

Honourable minister, you said in Africa we have defence Pacts; it is not only Africa. World over, we have blocs which have adopted regional peace Pacts not involving members of particular communities or blocks. Four states from the Eastern Caribbean came together on 29 October 1982 to form the regional security systems; it did not involve all of them. Seven countries in 1985 came out from Europe and formed the Warsaw Pact and they are co-operating on issues of defence and security. So, the issue that Burundi and Tanzania is not coming on is not only about East Africa.

Honourable minister, on 19 December 1995, Indonesia and Australia came together and signed a security agreement which is now operational; it does not involve all the countries. So, the information I want to give you is that you are perfectly moving on well and you need to proceed. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Well, colleagues, there is a lot of interest in this but I think we should not abuse the generosity of the Rt Hon. Speaker. I will now just accept one piece of information from Hon. James Baba and then I sum up.

MR JAMES BABA: Thank you, my honourable senior colleague. First, there was a protocol – the Peace and Security Protocol – which was signed by all the five countries. If you look at the minority report presented by Hon. Kivumbi and others, they attach that protocol as Appendix 1. Now for any protocol to be effective, it has to be ratified and that is why we have come here. Those who are ready to move now to implement this protocol they have to come to their governments to get ratifications and that is why we are here. And this is where the principle of variable geometry applies; the three have been ready to move. That is why we are here now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please. The reason we are here is not because of the security protocol. The reason we are here is because of the Security Pact that was signed by the three countries. We are not dealing with the protocol that was signed by the five East African countries. We are dealing with this Pact which is implementing, I guess, the protocol but in relations to only three countries – Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. So, the reason we are here is not because of the protocol; we are here because of the Pact for the three countries. Please.

DR KIYONGA: So, Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, this Pact comes here and it has followed the directives of our Constitution, it has followed the directives of the laws that we set up on ratification of this arrangement and I want to assure members that once ratified by Parliament, the implementation of this Pact will be within the context of our Constitution. I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has made a very pregnant but sweeping statement to the effect that our continent faces real problems in terms of security. And I was waiting for him to elaborate till when he signed off – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I take it that each time the minister makes a statement of this nature, it has to be substantiated. I wanted the minister to clarify whether he knows the history of pacts; that usually the coming into force of pacts have resulted into counter-pacts. And he is the Minister for Defence and I wanted him to address this House on matters, for instance, when the Warsaw Pact was formed, the NATO Pact was formed as well and they did not help matters because it exacerbated the arms race. 

Historically, the minister knows that there was the Berlin-Tokyo-Rome-Madrid Axis which resulted into the London-Paris-Moscow Axis. And lately, there was the Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact, which far from evading the World War, precipitated the World War. Now, for the minister to come and state in a sweeping statement that there is grave security danger for Africa without substantiating them and well aware that historically defence Pacts have caused counter-pacts. Can he tell this House which threats are Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda facing now in Africa? Which are those threats so that we know and we commit our country? 

In 1977, Mr Speaker, I was not around but I am seeing the trend that led to the breakup of the 1977 East African Community emerging now. So honourable minister, can you clarify as to why you are making a sweeping statement of the grave dangers without telling which country is attacking Uganda. Which country is leading that war?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you have now made your point. The honourable rose on a procedural issue and the premises of his concern is that the minister made a statement about the security threat to Africa without elaborating. The honourable minister was winding up. He spoke to this motion, stating those things you are asking for, almost four hours ago and this debate has been going on since that time. Unfortunately, you were not able to listen to this particular statement. So the honourable minister was now recapping just to conclude what he was saying. Certainly, he could not have started the way he started to conclude. Otherwise, he would not be able to conclude. So, those issues were raised - the security threats were raised and even the justification for this Pact, why it is coming in place; the reasons for it are outlined. I do not want to go into the Warsaw Pact and all those other ones; I have a fair knowledge of them but that would be something else but let me ask the minister to respond to those issues.

So honourable members, it is the prerogative of this Houses. Article 122(1) is clear about who enters into treaties or who gives permission to what category of people can enter into treaties on behalf of this country. That same Article 122(2) asks this Parliament to pass laws to regulate how the ratification process should take place. That is why we are here. The ratification of Treaties Act is specific about two issues. Issue of security and issues of matters that amount to amending or challenging some of the provisions are unconstitutional. 

When we were starting this debate last week, I said Uganda has a dual system of ratification where it does not require amending the Constitution or does not deal with issues of  insecurity, ratification can be done by Cabinet. But in the case where these issues are involved, then ratification should be done by Parliament. That is why these matters are before you.

Can this Parliament amend a treaty that has been brought for it for ratification? The answer is no. Parliament can adopt it in all, ratify it or not ratify it. You cannot begin saying that is why I was uncomfortable when the chairperson was beginning to anticipate issues that are coming for review in five years or three years. That would not be within the authority given to this House by the Constitution. 

So, the issue that was fairly evolving was whether three countries out of five can move on a Pact and that was the substance of the objection that was raised by the member who raised the minority report. Can three countries move on this Pact leaving out the two without challenging the key principle of integration contained in the same law, the Constituting Act of the Community? That was the question that he posed and we have debated that and we have gone back and forth. We have also been privy to decisions or opinion that has been issued by the court because the same question I have just posed which we first posed at the beginning of this debate was posed by the Council of Ministers to the East African Court of Justice and their opinion, we were also able to look at here. 
So, the conclusion of all those things is to the effect that this Parliament does not have to worry about whether the principle of variable geometry conflicts and undermines the principle of consensus which is in the Treaty. So the opinion of the court is that it does not and that countries should not be barred from moving if they are able to move and they should not be barred forth to join if they are not yet prepared to join a particular implementation mechanism. So that is the issue that the debate has brought us to. There is no inhibition that can make this Parliament move forward to either approve or not approve this issue.  It is time for us take a decision on this matter.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure and I want to observe that in my culture, a man is allowed to marry sisters but before the family hands over the second daughter to him, they must satisfy themselves that all is well with his first wife. Mr Speaker, this Parliament has been ratifying treaties; different treaties but I want to ask you to guide us if it would be procedurally okay for us to proceed and ratify this treaty when the Government side has not assured this House on our position on the ICC after His Excellency the President has been quoted in both local and international media for having denounced the ICC and indicated that he would not cooperate with it. Although this ICC is not an international treaty Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, I respect hon. Nambooze but I think at this stage, she has brought something which is not in the content of the debate. The content of the debate has been defined. Now what she has said  is a very strange ingredient which should not be heard at this time when we are really concentrating. We have taken all the time talking about something and we are about to conclude. Is it in order for hon. Nambooze of Mukono to come and tell us that she has not been following the debate since we started? She has come with something very strange. Is she in order? (Laughter)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those rare instances where a point of order is raised when a procedural matter is on the Floor. But the rules are also fairly clear on the subject of relevance when we debate these issues. The Rome Statue was signed in Rome in 1989 and came into force in 2002 and has been implemented in this country by an Act of Parliament. The Defence Pact that we are debating now does not have any connection to the Rome Statue that created the ICC. Now to import a condition on an explanation on the situation of Uganda and the ICC and use it as a condition for us to proceed to take a decision in this matter would be very far from near the truth. I think the two are very separate and if the member is raising a procedural point on how we proceed with this, let us deal with what is before the House and not the ICC or anything. The ICC cannot be a condition for us passing the defence Pact, please.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you for guiding me, Mr Speaker. I was drawing it from the analogy I gave above by the two we are targeting international peace. 

Mr Speaker, my second point is the Minister for Defence has just said in this House that this is a very historic moment. Being historic as it is, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for this House to consider the issue of quorum to ensure that Ugandans are properly represented?  I beg for your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a fairly elaborate debate on the subject. All that is left for us to do is to take a decision. The similar matter is on Item No.10.
Item 10 is Motion for a Resolution of Parliament for the Ratification of the Peace and Security Pact. It is similar to the debate. As you recall, both were referred to the committee as one item almost and the committee handled them as one. 

My view is that the debate has taken care of even the matter that would have risen in item No.10. It has similar objections from the minority report and similar motions of the ministers. So, when the House resumes at an appropriate time, the matter that will be remaining is for us to take a decision on those two items. I think if it is only about debating, we have debated this matter. 

When we come we will be able to take decisions on item No.9 which is Ratification of the Mutual Defence Pact and item No.10 on the Ratification of the Peace and Security Pact. Honourable members - why is the member pointing at the Speaker? (Laughter)- We are now not going to proceed with any further matters on this. We will close this for today and when we resume, we will be able to take those decisions on those two issues. Honourable members, I thank you for the spirited debate. We are not able to take that decision now but we will take it tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 September at 2.00 p.m.)

