
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 21 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting; it is the last sitting for this year. At the end of this, we will be going on recess to be with our people for Christmas, renew our faith, renew our energy levels and renew our commitment to come and do what we must in the next year to help our people.

Secondly, when they brought the supplementary request, there was a matter – a particular item – that the committee responsible for budget had deferred because, firstly, at the time it was presented, they sent it to the wrong Vote. Secondly, there was a bit of confusion about what needed to be done. Therefore, they deferred that particular request.

I am now informed that there is a motion to have that rectified. I will, therefore, be altering the Order Paper to accommodate this, as soon as the time is right. After we have dealt with the laying of papers, we will see. However, the process of doing all this and supply should not take more than five minutes. 

My original intention was that this sitting would last 10 minutes but now I have this amendment to deal with. Let us proceed with business.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2026/2027

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I understand the urgency of the matter the minister is going to handle – the laying of the Budget Framework Paper (BFP).

Mr Speaker, Parliament received – last week – a report from the Committee on Budget on the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility and the economic and fiscal update for Financial Year 2021/2022 to Financial Year 2025/2026. This report has been on the Order Paper for almost two weeks and not debated and approved by Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, it is the obligation of this House, under Section 5(5) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), to handle this particular report and, by extension, approve this charter.

Mr Speaker, my procedural matter is that one, the law is very clear: the Budget Framework Paper is supposed to be aligned to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. Clearly, that is what the PFMA says. The minister, probably, is privy to the requirement to comply with Section 9(5) of the PFMA. 

Now, we are receiving the Budget Framework Paper without an approved charter. Aren’t we, Mr Speaker, abetting an illegality by receiving a document not aligned, as by law? 

Mr Speaker, with your indulgence and guidance, wouldn’t it be neater, so to speak, for the minister – because the law gives the minster up to 31st of December to lay the Budget Framework Paper. The minister is inviting us to rush and commit an illegality. He has space between now and the 31st to present the charter for debate and approval and then the Speaker will duly invite the House to receive the BFP. Mr Speaker, I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. The charter should be discussed and approved by Parliament. The Budget Framework Paper must be discussed and approved by Parliament and recommendations made to the President by the 15th of February.

We have the charter with the report and, now, what is going to be laid is the Budget Framework Paper. When we resume, there will be a discussion on the Budget Framework Paper by the committees, eventually ending up with the Budget Committee for finalisation. While that is going on, we will be handling the debate and finalisation of the charter.

I do not see any contradiction because the charter will be approved before the framework. As to whether it should be aligned or unaligned, we have no way of proving that at this stage because I am sure whoever drafted the charter and whoever drafted the framework paper were conscious of this, although sometimes they behave like they are not. 

However, that is in the eating. When you open it up is when you make those discoveries that “no, it is not aligned” and then we take that decision at that time. For now, let us receive the Budget Framework Paper, receive the other thing –

MR MPUUGA: Thank you very much for your indulgence. Mr Speaker, this is not necessarily an attempt to block the minister from laying but we want to get the way of our methods of work very clearly. What does the law say?

The charter is to be debated, approved and published within one week by the minister but none of these has been done. I appreciate that the BFP can be made but a non-published charter is not publicly available and has not been debated. 

So, where does the minister get the audacity to give us the Budget Framework Paper, whose genesis is supposed to be an obtaining from the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, Mr Speaker? That is where I find a problem. There is a sequencing problem and, by accepting this to be the norm, we are actually creating a precedent that, in future, is going to cause us issues. 

I do not know whether, with your indulgence, the Speaker may not order the minister to urgently arrange with the Speaker to have this matter debated so that he can publish the charter. Subsequently, the minister should be able to lay the Budget Framework Paper. After all, we are going to debate it subsequently after the charter has been debated, approved and published. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have a situation where this House cannot sit any longer. I think we should be conscious of that. It was Parliament that delayed to debate that matter. It was not the minister. The charter was on the Order Paper and it was not debated because other items took precedence and we never got time to debate it.

I am faced with a situation where I need to adjourn this House now. I am saying it would be better if I adjourned it after I have received the Budget Framework Paper and the Parish Development Model from the Minister of Local Government. It is the kind of – What is the word in the rules? It is that kind of situation that I am dealing with, honourable members. Please bear with me that I need to do this now and then we will see how to do corrective measures. 

What is going to happen is, we will receive the Budget Framework Paper and the committee will take it and start looking at it. The sessional committee will start looking at it, and eventually when the time is right, they will make their references to the Committee on Budget and then a decision will be taken by the House as to what should be sent to the President. 

By that time, we will have finished with the charter and it is for us to confirm it. If there is a problem of lack of harmonisation or alignment, we can solve it at that time. For now, let us receive these two documents and we see how to proceed. Thank you. (A Member rose.) I have just made a plea to the House, honourable member. I wish you could respect that. 

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Years 2022/2023 to 2026/2027. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly referred to the sessional committees. While we break, they can still study it privately and eventually start convening meetings on how to handle this matter. Of course, eventually, it will go to the Committee on Budget and we will find a way to move. 

As for the charter, we will debate it first thing when we resume next year. Thank you.

LAYING OF THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL

2.41
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report on the status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model covering the period July to December 2021. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you will recall that this matter has been in almost every public discussion but we have never had the opportunity, as Parliament, to look at the document and give our advice on what should be done. The records have captured the Parish Development Model. I also refer it to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service to handle. During this break, they should study it and when they start meeting, they will come and give us recommendations on what we need to do with this matter. 

Honourable members, I had made a request. I do not know whether we can accommodate the motion to correct something. If we cannot, I will adjourn the House. Is the minister ready? 

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2021/2022 to settle outstanding claims by the Church of Uganda. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, today I will just remove the wig; I will not move down to the Table. Let us proceed. 

Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion so that we finish? I propose that a sum of Shs 21,250,000,000 be provided for as supplementary expenditure under Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission, to settle outstanding claims by the Church of Uganda. 

I now put the question that a sum of Shs 21,250,000,000 be provided as a supplementary expenditure under Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission to settle outstanding claims by the Church of Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply report thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the supplementary expenditure of 21,250,000,000 to Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission and has passed it. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report from the Committee of Supply. I put the question to the adoption. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. As I indicated earlier, we are breaking off sine die. We will communicate what date we will come back. Therefore, this House stands adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 2.46 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)


