Thursday, 13 December 2012

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

The National Anthem (Three stanzas)

The East African Community Anthem (Three stanzas)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your Excellency and honourable members, this is the only opportunity I get to address the House while standing and I am very grateful. (Laughter)

Honourable members, because of the presence of the President here, I will allow you to sit freely so that you are comfortable. Please sit wherever you fell like –(Interjections)- -(Laughter)– of course that is also granted by the fact that the Speaker is addressing the House from this side. (Laughter)

Honourable members, permit me, on your behalf and on my own behalf, to welcome the President to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) 

I further wish to welcome back the President from his recent journey to Russia where he went to market and promote Uganda. (Applause)

Let me take this opportunity, on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda to congratulate you, Your Excellency, upon being honoured with Russia’s highest public award of Valour, Honour and Glory, in recognition of your eminence as a military and political leader of Africa.

Honourable members, Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution stipulates as follows: “The President shall at the beginning of each session of Parliament deliver to the Parliament, an address on the state of the Nation.” His, Excellency, the President accomplished this on Thursday, 7 June 2012.

Clause 2 of the same Article 101 of the Constitution further stipulates thus: “The President may also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time on any matter of national importance.” I, therefore, wish to report that due consultations have been carried out between His Excellency the President and the Speaker of Parliament, and it has been agreed, therefore, that His Excellency the President addresses Parliament on this Thursday, 13 December 2012 here in the parliamentary chambers. That means, today this afternoon. 

Honourable members, this marks the first occasion in which His Excellency the President, will have addressed the Ninth Parliament in accordance with Article 101(2). 

Honourable members, I hope you have carried copies of the Parliament Rules of Procedure and you are conversant with them. (Laughter) But just for avoidance of doubt, let me state the provisions of rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure. “Presence of President in the House: There shall be a Chair of State for the President in the House.” The chair being occupied by the President now is the one referred to in these rules. 

Rule 10 (2) further states thus: “The House shall be called to order and stand in silence whenever the President enters or leaves the House.” Rule 10(3) also states: “The President may be accompanied in the House by an Aide-de-Camp.” Sub-section (4) further states thus: “The President, while occupying the Chair of State – (a) may make a Presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question;” –(Laughter)- emphasis added – “(b) shall not otherwise participate in the proceedings of the House in any way.” That means we will not be discussing any Bill because that would mean the President would have to participate in our debate. Those are our Rules of Procedure and we should observe them strictly in the normal way that we always observe these rules. 

It is now my pleasure, pleasant duty and honour, to invite His Excellency the President, to address Parliament. Your Excellency.

2.49
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Excellency the Vice-President; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers; honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; 

I have decided to use the rights of the President under Article 101(2) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to address Parliament. I am exercising this right in order to counter the nefarious and mendacious campaign of the foreign interests using NGOs and some Members of Parliament to try and cripple or disorient the development of the oil sector in Uganda. 

If Ugandans may remember, this is not the first time these interests are trying to distort the development of our history. When we were fighting the Sudanese-sponsored terrorism of Kony, or when we were fighting the armed cattle rustlers in Karamoja, you remember there were groups, including some religious leaders, Opposition Members of Parliament, as well as NGOs, which would spend all the time denouncing us the freedom fighters; they were denouncing those who were fighting to defend the lives and the properties of the people rather than denouncing the terrorists - the cattle rustlers or their external backers, in the case of Kony, as well as their internal collaborators. It would appear, if you listened to what those people were saying, as if the wrongdoer was the government - the NRM - rather than the criminals. We patiently put up with that malignment, at the same time as we fought, got injured, got killed against the enemy, until we achieved victory. Eventually we won, supported by the ordinary people and the different people’s militias. You remember those militias - the Arrow Boys in Teso; the Amuka in Lango; and the vigilantes in Karamoja. 

There is total peace in the whole country now and yet the misleaders of those years have not apologised to the Ugandans for their mendacity. Mendacity means lies. Instead, either the same groups or new allied groups have emerged to vilify - vilify means to give a bad name - the NRM Government and to spread obscurantism as well as lies on our oil and gas this time or on corruption.

This time, these people are spreading lies acting on behalf of external interests. I will later on show you why I think they are acting on behalf of foreign interests. However, before I do that, let me take Ugandans through the “battle” I have been fighting to defend the future of Uganda and its interests in the matter of petroleum and gas. 

I have told you many times, that first night in early 1986 when a team of Shell BP came to see me at Entebbe State House wanting me to sign an agreement with them that would give them exploration rights in the Mwitazingye area. “Mwitanzigye” means Lake Albert. After a little consultation I told them to go away because I had discovered that there was nobody on the Uganda Government side who knew anything about oil and gas. 

The Ghanaian working in the Bank of Uganda who had been put forward as an expert on oil was in fact an economist whose only involvement with oil was to handle the oil import papers. That is how he had become an expert in oil and petroleum. I directed Mrs Opio, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Minerals then, to send our young graduates with Bachelors of Chemistry, Physics or Geology to obtain Masters in petroleum studies. They would train in petroleum science, petroleum law and petroleum economics. Since that time to date, we have a total of 55 petroleum scientists and 17 petroleum technicians. Many of these were trained abroad. We have also set up the Kigumba Petroleum Institute. It has already graduated 30 technicians with diplomas in petroleum studies and another 60 technicians are undergoing training. We cooperated with Trinidad and Tobago as well as Norway in this effort. Since we created our own experts from the very beginning, Uganda has avoided and will continue to avoid the mistakes that have afflicted many of the African countries that have been producing oil and gas. I will enumerate some of the mistakes we have avoided. 

Mistake number one to be avoided, was the low share of oil for the state of Uganda. The Petroleum Sharing Agreement (PSA) that we signed, even before we had confirmed that we had the oil in commercial quantities, gives us a share of 70 percent of the oil produced if you count the profit oil, the royalties and the taxes. 

If you compare with other countries, the situation is that Uganda’s terms compare very well with other oil producing countries like Angola, Indonesia, USA in Alaska, Thailand, Gabon and Vietnam, which are in the range of 70 to 80 percent total government share, considering that there are those countries in the lower range of less than 45 percent share like Mauritius, Madagascar, Togo and Morocco. 

Later, Production Sharing Agreements, now that we are sure we have the oil, will be even more favourable. When we signed these Production Sharing Agreements, of course we had no proof that we had the oil for sure, but still, we were able to get this figure of 70 percent. That was because of our scientists. Even I did not know this. I did not know which share should go here, because I did not know. It was our scientists who negotiated this good deal. 

So, when you spend so much time here talking about the “minister”, the minister does not work alone. She works with these scientists. They are the ones who know; and the proof is here. You go, compare our Production Sharing Agreements with the Production Sharing Agreements of all the other countries. And these are agreements we signed even before we were sure that the oil was there. So, if these scientists could guide us well then, what is the problem now? 

So, we avoided that mistake not because of Museveni being the President or because of the minister, not because of Parliament, but because of these scientists, because they are the ones who knew it. None of us knew it; I did not know it for sure. 

The only correct thing I did was to say, “Ah Ah! I do not want to involve myself with oil without consulting people who know it. That is why you should give me a medal for that –(Applause)– I am waiting for my medal. That was the only correct decision I made - I just feared; - to say, “Oil! But I do not know anything about oil; Ah Ah! I do not want to sign an oil agreement before I train my own people.” After that, it is not my job, there are people who are trained, they are the ones who know; How do I know about oil? If you ask me about cows, I would tell you; but about oil! Petroleum! Which Musita has ever worked in petroleum? Musita is my clan. So, that is mistake No.1, which we avoided. We avoided that mistake because we trained the experts. 

Mistake No.2, Ugandans are the ones who pioneered the discovery of oil in the African Rift Valley. From Ethiopia, through Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, Lake Tanganyika, Burundi and Rwanda. Why is it that we were the first to discover oil? Why? We were the first to discover oil in teh African Rift Valley, all the way from the Red Sea, to Lake Malawi in the South, to Lake Albert here in the North. Why were we the first? It was because our scientists who organised the aeromagnetic survey – because they are the ones who used aircrafts to map the area - did seismological studies and the gravity survey studies, themselves. They confirmed that there was oil and gas containing geological structures underground, but what remained to be done was the drilling to confirm the amounts and the nature of the deposits. 

If our scientists had not done this, this oil would never have been discovered. So, when you hear what is going on now - that is why I decided to come; because I am here; I am not dead. If I were dead, you could tell all these lies. But fortunately, God has kept me this long and I can answer these liars, because I am here. 

It was after our scientists had confirmed these - that there were structures underground which could have petroleum - that they advertised for the oil companies to come in. the oil companies would never have come in if it were not for the work of our scientists, especially after the opening up of the Soviet Block, with the collapse of Communism. 

You see, Russia where I was yesterday, is a very rich country with a lot of oil and gas. Before 1990, the whole Communist world, especially Russia, was closed; the oil companies could not go there. That is why the Shell BP came to see me in 1986. When Communism collapsed in the Soviet Union, the whole Eastern block was opened. 

Russia has got huge amounts of oil and gas. So, once these oil companies like Shell BP and so on had the oil of Soviet Union, they forgot about our little oil here. In fact, I called those people of Shell BP back. I told them, now that I have got my scientists, you come and we discuss what you discussed with me in 1986. They refused and said, “No, there is no oil there.” So, if it were not for our scientists, this oil would never have been found to date; even the oil in the neighbouring countries like Kenya. 

Our original contact with Shell BP after our scientists had qualified, told me that they were sure that there was no oil in that area –t the same people who wanted to share an agreement with me in 1986. Later one when I called them, they said they were sure there was no oil there. I asked them, “Why were you interested in the first place?” They could not answer. 

Following our success, oil companies are scrambling over one another in the whole length of the Rift Valley; in Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, Burundi, DRC Congo, etc. 

Therefore, for the honourables, Ssekikubo, Niwagaba etc., to malign this historic achievement of their compatriots, the petroleum scientists under the leadership of the National Resistance Movement, is an unforgivable sin. Our Catholics have what they call, “Sakulirego” - Sacrilege. This is really sacrilege. To stand here, use the forum of Parliament which has been created for you by the blood of the NRM people and you insult patriots; the scientists who did such a tremendous job, is not acceptable. Yes, you are honourable, you are whatever you are, but please, God has given different gifts to different people. Recognise the gifts of others, please!

Is it in order Rt Hon. Speaker for a guest to drink a cup of coffee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, we will call it water. (Laughter) 

MR MUSEVENI: So, the second mistake NRM avoided was to depend on foreigners to look for oil. Uganda is the first African country to find the oil itself. So, whatever you are discussing, please bear this in mind. (Applause)

Number three; one of the big mistakes among the African oil producing countries has been the flaring of gas, because European companies were only interested in petroleum. Yet, gas is very valuable in its own right. The gas that is found together with petroleum is called associated gas; different from the gas which is found alone. It can be used to generate electricity; to reduce oxygen from iron ore in order to make steel; or to make fertilizers, in addition to using it for cooking. 

These are all the roles of gas. You can use it to generate electricity; you can use it to process iron from iron ore instead of using charcoal; traditionally, our people were using charcoal - “Amakara”. But instead of using charcoal, you can use gas to remove oxygen from iron ore so that you remain with steel. You can make fertilizers from gas; I did not include it here clearly; but apparently you can also use gas to drive vehicles; what they call, liquefied gas. You can liquefy gas and use it to drive vehicles. 

Now, since I hear you have got a lot of petroleum fora; what do those fora do, if they do not tell you that in many of the African countries, gas is being burnt; what they call flaring. Burnt! Burnt! And it has been burnt for the last fifty years. Some of them found petroleum in the 1950s and up to now the gas is being burnt. You are burning something that can generate electricity; that can make fertilizers; that can produce steel; and even drive vehicles. Who is doing this? Why is nobody helping these countries to know this? 

But here in Uganda, because of my scientists, the ones we trained, we couldn’t make that mistake because they explained to me. I did not know; how could I know all this? I was also learning from them. Here, what did we provide from the very beginning? Yes, it can also be used in transportation. In industries to manufacture plastics and chemicals; that is gas. 

This is a resource that was being flared in some of the African countries yet in some of those countries there has been shortage of electricity. In Uganda those mistakes will never occur.  (Applause)

If you look at clause 97 of the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Petroleum Bill, 2010 on restriction of flaring and gas venting, it states, “A licence shall not flare gas or vent petroleum in excess of the quantities needed for normal operational safety without the approval of the minister..., the hated minister; the minister whom Ssekikubo almost made a leper – “Minister! Minister! “...on the advice of the petroleum authority, and that all petroleum facilities shall be planned and constructed so as to avoid gas venting or flaring under normal operating conditions.” 

This means, the only flaring that is allowed is not to cause pressure so that there is an explosion; “venting for safety”. That is the only one allowed. 

The law also provides that this gas will instead be used, among other things to contribute to addressing the country’s electricity needs. This is captured in objective three of the National Oil and Gas Policy, 2008. 

So, you just have your score card. How many mistakes were avoided by Uganda because of our scientist; I have mentioned up to now three. 

Let us continue; number four. The other mistake that occurs in many African producing countries is the failure to build refineries. You find a country that has been producing petroleum for many years suffering from petroleum shortages because they export crude and import refined products, petroleum, diesel, aviation fuel, Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) etc. all the associated jobs are exported to foreign countries - I am referring to the refining jobs. 

You also lose the by-products. That barrel of crude oil you carelessly export contains petroleum, diesel, Aviation fuel, paraffin, High Fuel Oil (HFO) for electricity generation, PVC for plastics, and Bitumen for tarmacking our roads, etc. So, when you export that barrel of crude contains all these constituent parts. You sell it to someone else to be the one to – they call it “cracking” - and have all those products. And you then start importing the same ones from very far away. 

This is apart from the constituent parts of the associated gas already mentioned above. So, you can list about 20 products from petroleum and gas. I have read to you the ones of petroleum - diesel, petrol, PVC, aviation fuel, paraffin - these are all in oil. 

Now for gas, there is another list, the one I have already told you about. You burn gas and export crude, you are missing all these. So, we avoided that mistake; Uganda avoided that because from the beginning, we knew it. 

There was some campaign against a refinery, but very soon – even myself, for that one I was very suspicious, and I took interest. Very soon my scientists joined me and we were able to defeat these people with facts, that Uganda needed a refinery. 

I do not want to wait time with the petroleum fora – I will talk about those fora. But the Natural Resources Committee, the one of Werikhe, go find out how many refineries are there in Africa? This is one of the things you should research on; these are the facts you should deal with. And, why are there no refineries if they are not there. 

So, Uganda avoided that mistake. We even had to hire a company called Foster wheeler, who came and conformed that the refinery is the correct way for Uganda and they gave the figures. So, that was mistake number four which Uganda avoided. 

Number five; the above are mistakes and disadvantages an oil producing country with an ocean coast line would suffer if they just export crude. The disadvantages I have quoted here are those that will be suffered by a country near the ocean, like Nigeria and Ghana. They are near the ocean and if they make those mistakes, these are the losses they will suffer; the ones I have quoted above. 

When it comes to a land-locked country like Uganda, there are additional losses we shall suffer if we just export crude oil. When crude is pumped through neighbouring countries to the coast, you pay what we call transit charges. Let us assume such a charge of US$ 20 per barrel for the outgoing crude and another US$ 20 per barrel equivalent for the incoming finished products, Uganda in that case will lose US$ 40 per barrel.  If we do not refine the crude here, and we export it through Kenya, Kenya will say, “Please, pay obusulu - rent - for passing through Kenya.” $20 for the crude going out and another $20 for the goods that are refined abroad. So, when the price of oil is $100 like it is now, per barrel, you would have already lost $40 just for transiting; going and coming in. But that is not all.

However, since our oil is also waxy - with a high wax content - the cost of transporting it is very high due to the need of continuously heating the pipeline. Otherwise, the petroleum will solidify and stop being liquid. So, because our petroleum is waxy, you must continue heating the pipeline all the way up to the ocean. And when you do that, how much does it cost you? The cost of heating a barrel of oil all the way to the coast is estimated at about US$ 2.4 per barrel. That means that Uganda’s crude oil will achieve a lower price than it should have by this heating cost.  Therefore, in reality, if the price is $100 like now, Uganda will end up getting $57.6 per barrel instead of the $100.  This mistake we avoided because we said we must have a refinery. That war of the refinery is going on. 

I am told some of my people were invited to some of these places where you get invited. You are always invited; invitees! Invitees! One of the lessons you were being told in those places where you were invited to is whether your country really needs a refinery. “We don’t think that your country can afford a refinery.” (Laughter) 

That is why I had to go to Iran. I told the President of Iran, “You are producing oil, but do you have a refinery?” Because I was being told by people they call “experts” from outside that Uganda may not need a refinery. Eh! We don’t need a refinery, how about the ones who have refineries? Why do they have them? So, as a Mwanachi, I went to Iran and asked the President whether they had a refinery there. He said, “We have got nine and we are planning to build another seven.” I said, but I am being told there is no need for a refinery. He said, “No, those who are telling you are talking rubbish.” 

So, my invitees - my people who got invited, were being told in one of the forums – some of those forums I don’t attend, but I –(Laughter)– this is my old job of spying. They were being told, “We don’t think you need a refinery; your country doesn’t need a refinery.” Now, they have given up on that because they have known that I will not move.  There will be a refinery in Uganda. (Applause)

So, now they have started another – “Of course, you need a refinery, but you should have one with Kenya and South Sudan.”  I said, please, I want mine. That Communism is out of fashion. Because you said Communism was not good; so, why do you want to take me back to communism? So, it is a struggle. You block them here and they come in through there. It is a war. 

Therefore, for a landlocked country to export crude, you should be prepared to lose part of the money just in transit charges. You remember there has been a conflict between South Sudan and North Sudan; this has been part of the problem. North Sudan was saying that they needed to knock off $36 per barrel for the oil to transit from South Sudan to North Sudan. That has been part of the problem. You heard they had a lot of problems recently. I here they have now agreed though I don’t know what they have agreed on. I don’t remember what figure they have agreed on. But they were demanding $36 per barrel for transiting. If the price is $100 you will have already knocked off $40 for the outgoing and then you import it back. That is mistake number five, which we avoided. 

Mistake number six; there was the issue of the stabilisation clause, which attempted to state that Uganda should renounce its right of pushing up taxes over oil companies on account of a false argument that it would affect the level of profitability of the companies since they would have increased the level of taxation in their profit projections. We said, “That is alright.”

Indeed, a gentleman or a lady never changes his or her word. We do not want the level of profitability of companies to go down on account of raised Government taxes. What would, however, be the situation if the companies were making super profits, much more than they and we had anticipated? Should the government renounce its right to tax super profits that could have been done without lowering the profitability levels of these companies? Our answer was “No”. 

If there were super profits, they were to be taxed without lowering the profitability levels of the companies. In any case, how do you calculate the profitability levels?  We have to have a scientific formula.

Some of the oil companies did not want this. They simply wanted to use the words, “The parties shall negotiate in good faith to restore the licensee to the same overall economic position as existed as at the effective date of the agreement.” We couldn’t accept this. We rejected this very formulation and demanded that the concept of Net Present Value (NPV) be used to determine the planned level of profitability and how that will be affected by the new tax measures. This apparently was a ground-breaker in oil issues in Africa - because what I wanted us to do was to say - the Munyankore calls it okuhanikaakati; to  swear - I will never put up taxes on these oil companies because they said, “If you do that, it will change the profit levels we had estimated.” 

So, the argument was, what if we are making super profits; much more than we had all anticipated; why should I not put up a little bit of tax so that I also share in those new levels of profit? They did not want this to be done. But we said, “No it must be done,” and it was done. It was eventually agreed. It took a lot of time. I remember one very big oil person coming to tell me and I said, “Okay in that case, why don’t we use NPV - net present value?” because that is how you calculate profitability. And he said, “No, NPV sometimes is not good.” Otherwise, how do you calculate profitability? How do you calculate it? You must have a scientific formula. What was the anticipated level of profit? How has it changed? And if I put a new tax, how has it affected that estimated profitability level? So, that mistake we avoided.

Number seven; the other frontline with the oil companies will be the environment. Oil is a finite resource. It will be exhausted and finished after some decades. However, our fisheries, our tourism, our agriculture, our human resource - educated and healthy - our manufacturing sector will go on forever if we do not mismanage them. Therefore, protecting our environment, not only against oil pollution, but against all forms of pollution - silting of lakes and rivers, and environmental degradation - cutting of forests, destroying the wetlands, creating bare hills, soil erosion, overgrazing etc. - is a must. 

The laws we are proposing, or that have been passed, include the following: The 1995 Constitution; the National Environment Act, Cap. 153; The National Forestry and Tree planting Act; The Water Act, Cap. 1952; among others. 

So, this is another frontline with the oil companies to make sure that they do not damage the environment and yet that environment contains resources which will go on forever compared to oil, which will be finished after some decades. Fisheries; how long have the people been fishing in Lake Victoria? Agriculture; we cannot allow this temporary resource to damage our durable resources.

Number eight; there is also the question of auxiliary services - catering, civil works, clearing and forwarding, medical services, air charters, security services, waste management and environmental consultancies etc. During the exploration phase we had not certainly concentrated on this. However, there is no reason why outsiders should take that money for those auxiliary services away. (Applause)      

As far as auxiliary services are concerned, clause 122 of the Petroleum Bill, 2012 on the provision of goods and services by the Ugandan entrepreneurs provides as follows, “These auxiliary services will be provided by Ugandans.”

The next battle will be between me and elements of the political bureaucratic classes of Uganda who may want to use our oil money for consumption, salaries and administration. I have stated that patriots of Uganda will never support that course of action. (Applause) This has been the case in some of the other oil producing African countries. So much wealth squandered on consumptive expenditure - importing wines, whiskies, wigs, artificial bums -(Laughter)- cars and other luxuries.

Remember that oil, unlike agriculture or manufacturing, is finite. It is exhaustible, just as is the case with all extractive industries. So, when I talk of the wig do not include the one of the Rt Hon. Speaker. That one is a ceremonial one. Therefore, the money for oil should only be used for creating durable capacity for the country so that future generations would also benefit from this resource. 

What are the elements of this durable capacity? These elements are: Electrifying the whole country. We need at least 40,000 megawatts. A developed Uganda needs at least 40,000 megawatts of electricity. We now have about 800 megawatts. That is what we have now, when you include Bujagali and all that we have done. We need to generate at least 40,000 megawatts. That level of electrification will enable us to run a modern economy with or without our own oil. Even if the oil is finished, if we have built up a generating capacity, then we shall be able to do other things. We shall be able to manufacture and to do other things. Japan is a very prosperous country without oil, without minerals and without adequate agriculture. So, we need to use the money from the oil to create capacity, which will make sure that Uganda will be prosperous, even when the oil is finished, through industry and other means of wealth.

Two, we shall revamp the railway system and upgrade it to the standard gauge so that we are linked with South Sudan, Congo and Rwanda. (Applause) It costs $4,500 to transport a 40 ft container from Mombasa to Kampala by road. While the same container costs $3,100 by rail from Mombasa to Kampala. Therefore, the road transport is about 30 percent more expensive than rail transport. It is unwise to base our transport system on this expensive mode.

Number three; we need to support scientific education and innovation so that the brain power of the Uganda human resource becomes the new permanent base of the future modern economy of Uganda. Relying on mainly human muscle, the traditional Ugandan society was based on the indigenous economy of agriculture and artisanship. The colonial and neo-colonial economy of Uganda, until the NRM time, used only a portion of agriculture - coffee, cotton, tea, sugarcane and tobacco. The rest was neglected - milk, beef, bananas, maize, millet, potatoes, fruits etc. That is why, until the NRM time, we were in a ridiculous position of importing milk from Kenya, Switzerland, Denmark etc. Even today, we are still importing some of the fruit juices from Kenya, South Africa, etc. 

One of the NRM strategic goals has always been to diversify the economy of Uganda away from just depending on agriculture and minerals all under sold as raw materials to a modern economy powered by the scientifically-empowered human brain of the Ugandans.

Mwalimu Nyerere, when Idi Amin attacked Tanzania on the 30th of October, 1978 said that, “Tanzania always had the intention and also the capacity to fight Idi Amin.” By attacking Tanzania, Idi Amin had given Tanzania the ‘cause’ - the reason to get rid of Idi Amin. The Swahili words were “near”, “intention” “sababu”,- reason or cause and “uwezo” - capacity.

Similarly, the NRM always had the intention to transform Uganda’s economy away from just depending on natural resources to also depending on the empowered human brain. We also had the cause - sababu. What we always lacked was the uwezo - capacity. Uganda’s oil and gas has given us that capacity, the uwezo. (Applause)

Even before we had the oil and gas, we had used our scarce resources to start UPE (Universal Primary Education), USE (Universal Secondary Education) and BTVET (Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training). We had also started the emphasis on science courses in the universities.

Indeed, now we have a long queue of scientific inventions by our scientists which we need to fund. Dr Muranga’s bananas; Dr Kyamuhangiire’s mulondo and juice; Dr Tiko’s juice and Musaazi’s Kiira electric vehicle; Dr Kwesiga’s machine building centre; Makerere University’s Food Science and Technology Centre etc. All these are waiting for funding. With our oil and gas money, this will be solved once and for all.

Working on some of the trunk roads; my proposal is that we work on some of the major roads. Let us take the 19 roads which we read in the 2012/2013 National Budget Speech, which were also advertised recently by UNRA. 

Some private companies will use their own money to work on these roads. The government will pay them slowly using our existing resources. Oil money will save us from those headaches.

No.5: The other use is to utilise the oil money to stabilise our agriculture by providing irrigation so that our agriculture – one element of our durable wealth is immunised forever against the erratic nature of the weather. With additional use of fertilisers, the production of, for instance, bananas, will go up by 10 times as the experiments at Nyaruzinga in Bushenyi have shown. The experiment at Nyaruzinga in Bushenyi has shown that the peasants normally produce 5.9 tonnes of bananas per hectare, but in Bushenyi now, the scientists are producing 54 metric tonnes per hectare. Yes. The peasants have been producing 5.9. What you call farmers, but in reality, they are peasants. They have been producing 5.9 tonnes per hectare, but our scientists under Dr Muranga are now producing 54 tonnes per hectare. They have increased production 10 times compared to the peasants and they think they can go up to 80 tonnes per hectare. So, with our oil money, we should deal with irrigation so that we can increase production even with the same acreage. 

Another area we need to look at is real estate owned by the Government of Uganda in external markets. Idi Amin bought Uganda House in New York. It brings in US$ 1,452,000 per annum. What if we had other properties in the growing markets of Brazil, Argentina, India, China and also in the developed markets of USA, Europe as well as Russia? 

I was OAU Chairman in 1991. That was during the time Saddam Hussein had occupied Kuwait. The late Amir Sheikh Sabah al-Sabah of Kuwait was in exile. I met him in Abuja. He apologised that he could not do much for Africa because his country was under occupation. As Chairman of the OAU, he said I should nevertheless accept the humble gift of US$100 million for the African Development Bank. That is what Amir told me. I found him in exile and he was very embarrassed, and he said, “I am very sorry; I cannot do much now because you know my country is occupied by Saddam Hussein. But because I am in exile, I give you $100 million for the African Development Bank.” And he was really embarrassed, feeling shy that – what can he tell me, he is in exile, what can he do; but since he could not do much, he would give me $100 million for the African Development Bank. “I would have done more if my country was not under occupation.”

So, the question I am asking is, where was he getting the money from when he was in exile? He was getting it from Kuwait overseas investments. This is what I am telling you, Ugandans. One area we can look at is how to use this oil money to create resources which can bring income to the country on a continuous basis even when the oil is finished. 

What I have said about petroleum and gas, apply to some extent to other minerals. Let us take iron ore deposits at Muko in Kabale and Sukuru Hills in Tororo. We are trying to develop the two deposits in order to produce sponge iron to be used for our steel industry. The recycled steel which is being produced by Casements, Roofings, Tembo Steel, MB Steel Mwebesa in Mbarara, Modern Steel etc., cannot be used for very high rise buildings or for hydropower dams. It does not have that sort of strength. The steel for those purposes is still being imported. 
A tonne of steel bars from Hong Kong to Kampala costs about $920. About 20 percent of this is transport and insurance. A tonne of steel produced at Kabale with a rural branch at, for instance, Ntungamo from the Bihanga -Gisenyi Rwanda line which we are planning to build, will costs U$650 to US$700 per tonne. 

The point I am making is that, when you use imported steel, you pay more; and the additional cost is not because of additional steel, but because of transport. You are getting mitayimbwa from Hong Kong all the way to here. Some of the cost is just transport. The answer is to use our own steel. The question then is, when we develop our steel works at Kabale, for instance, should we aim at providing cheaper steel products for Uganda or should we aim at exporting steel so that others build their countries while ours either remains backward or is forced to used expensive imported steel? 

Let us take the other example of Uranium. We have Uranium deposits in the following areas: Tororo in Sukuru Hills; Arua in Keyi and Midigo areas; Packwach in Acha Aloro area; Adjumani in Dzaipi,Ibibia and Pakele areas; Kitgum in Nam-Okora; Ogiri and Wolo areas; Masindi in Waki Basin and Kinogozi areas; Fort Portal, in Kahambo Basin and Kyatwandare; in the Ankole-Rukungiri Zone, in the areas of Rudindi, Kashongi, Nyabisheke, Mirama Hill, Rubale, Gayaza - Isingiro, Kahirimbi, Kinyansano, Nyakibale, and Kagamba. In Hoima, in Karongo, Buryango, Mabale, Kagadi, Ishunga, Pachwa and Kaboya. All these areas contain Uranium. 

As President of Uganda, I have guided the Ministry of Energy in my letter of 2nd October, 2012 that no Uranium should ever be exported from Uganda or even mined until Uganda itself is ready to use that Uranium to produce electricity and also to use it for other peaceful purposes such as medicine, treatment of cancer, agriculture, sterilising tsetse flies, etc. 

Why did I give this guidance; indeed why did I give this directive? Even if we develop all the sites on the Nile, all the hydro sites on the Nile River such as Isimba, Kalagala, Karuma, Ayago North, Ayago South, Murchison Falls, as well as all the mini hydro stations on all the smaller rivers, such as Kagera, Mzinzi, Sipi etc. and all the geothermal sources, we shall end up with a total of about 5900 megawatts of electricity. 

Even if we add the small amount we shall get from oil and gas of say, 3000 Megawatts, we shall end up with a total of about 8900 Megawatts of electricity. Yet, the developed economy of Uganda with a population of 100 million people by 2050 –(Interjections)– I know many of us will be dead, but we should plan for our children and grandchildren (Applause) that is why you are here. You are called “Honourable members” and I am called “His Excellency”; that is a very big title. That means I must plan for the future; not just be here and called Excellency and then I expire without any vision. So, my grandchildren will be able to say, “Grandpa was a very clever man; he planned for us.”

We shall need at least 40,000 megawatts of electricity. This is the challenge we have. If we use all the hydro sources on the Nile and the small rivers; we use this little gas we have found; we use geothermal - “Ebitagata” – the English do not have enough words; we can lend them Runyankore words - “Ebitagata”. Even if we used all those, the total amount of electricity we will generate in Uganda will be 8900 megawatts. And yet by 2050, with a population of 100 million people, Uganda will need at least 40,000 megawatts; although I think it is an under estimation, but let us say, 40,000. 

South Africa now is producing 42,000 but they have electricity shortages; so I am not sure that 40,000 is not an underestimation. UK is producing 55,000 megawatts, but of course they have a problem of the winter. Like in Russia when I was there yesterday, it was very cold. I asked President Putin, how much electricity do you spend on just keeping warm. He did not have the figures, but I thought it was interesting. In fact, we Africans we are lucky, but – if you see the amount of effort taken just to keep the roads free from ice; they must keep ploughing the roads to remove the ice - because the ice blocks the roads –(Interjections)– is it called ploughing; the amount of money used is incredible. Here we are; everything is easy, but the problem is we are suffering from what my Basoga call, “Okulambala” - to sleep; “Nino matek” - sleeping too much. 

So, if you are going to need 40,000 megawatts or 50,000 megawatts and yet from water, geothermal and gas, you will get only 900 megawatts, where will the rest of the electricity come from? Solar –(Interjections)– the problem with solar is that it is still very expensive per unit. Solar was 40 cents per unit a little while ago. I was discussing with some people in Russia just yesterday, and they were talking of 23 cents per unit; but hydroelectricity is only 3 cents; if you do not include loans. Gas is 8 cents; nuclear is 1.5 cents; it is one of the cheapest. So, when we the old people have gone, the younger ones who will be there can debate this. But for me, I am planning for them. 

When the cost of a unit of solar energy comes down to levels comparable to those of hydro power, that will be a good source of electricity. In the meantime, the only reliable source of large-scale power is nuclear power using our Uranium. That is why I stopped anybody mining or exporting Uranium. We cannot power the economies of other countries and forget about our own. (Applause)

The putting in place of a comprehensive oil and gas policy for Uganda – Uganda made the first discovery of oil in January 2006. By that time, the policy framework was based on the principles formulated in February 1986, which were to build capacity of our human resource and to develop institutions; to carry out petroleum exploration and promotion by acquiring technical information and data, and use it to attract oil companies; and to monitor exploration work undertaken by oil companies. 

However, with the discovery of oil, the NRM Government embarked on a new task of formulating a comprehensive policy to guide the development of that sector. 

The National Oil and Gas Policy for Uganda was, therefore, put in place in 2008. The policy gives a clear roadmap on how oil in Uganda will be produced, value-added, treated and how petroleum revenues will be used to create lasting value for our society. It is important to note that there are a number of countries in Africa which have produced oil for a long time and do not have comprehensive oil and gas policies up to now, which is a recipe of resource curse. By doing this, Uganda has avoided another mistake. (Applause)

This stand of defending Uganda’s interests is not popular with the usual parasitic interests outside Africa. Hence, the pressure you have seen recently in respect of oil. There is now a multiplicity of NGOs on oil such as Advocates Coalition for Development and Environment (ACODE), NAPE, Global Rights Alert, Centre for Constitutional Governance, Atiago, the Oil Forum by Ssekikubo and Niwagaba; and others - the so-called Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas - PFOG. “FOG” means confusion. (Laughter) You know what ‘fog’ means. This is a good name for their group; PFOG - Parliamentary FOG. All these are funded by external interests. Seminars are held for our MPs especially. 

The recent circus and desperate actions in Parliament - the insults by Ssekikubo and his group against the government - are designed to undermine the firm stand of the NRM in defence of the exhaustible resources of Uganda, especially oil and gas.

The circus on clause 9, for instance, of the Petroleum Act about whether the minister or the Authority should have the power to licence and revoke licences is actually not about the minister. It is about the strong group of scientists that we have created in the Ministry of Energy. These are ones they wanted to avoid. 

A minister – what does a minister know – that lady there is an electrical scientist. She doesn’t know anything about oil. What did I know about oil? The only oil I used to see was – I don’t think I have even ever handled a pump of petroleum. But the people they wanted to avoid – I want the Ugandans to hear this from me. What Ssekikubo wanted to avoid were the petroleum scientists in the Ministry of Petroleum because they have blocked all the schemes. 

Towards the end of my speech, I will give you another example about these scientists, which is very interesting. So, when they say, “Minister”, you don’t mean the minister; you mean the ministry. That is what they are talking about. The minister is advised by these people who know. Yes, you can make an input if you are very sharp and you learn quickly, but much of the work is done by the scientists. 

Indeed, I have been approached by many people, saying, now that these scientists have found the oil, they should stay out. I have been approached. By the time they went to Ssekikubo, they had failed with me. So, many people came to say, “Now, these scientists, although they found the oil, they did great work, but we don’t think they know how to negotiate.” I said, but what is wrong with them. I called them and told them, “You people, did you steal my money? Because I sent you to train in petroleum science; in petroleum economics; and petroleum law. Did you train in all of them?” They said, “Yes.” “But these people are saying that you don’t know anything about economics; that you don’t know anything about law.” 

The problem is that they have blocked these people. And I have also blocked them because they come to me to decampaign the scientists. I call them, and I say, “You people, they say that you don’t know”; and they explain. Now, having failed with me, they go to Ssekikubo. Ssekikubo is the new route. I will give you examples. 

So, when they say, “Avoid minister”, it is not the minister. It is the scientists. That is what they are worried about. Those who were illogically and desperately opposing this are being financed by foreign interests through ACODE. Their main reason is that they are trying to avoid our scientists who have blocked many criminal schemes. I will give you an example.

One of the latest is what they call recoverable oil. You know, there are 1 billion barrels in the ground. The oil companies say, although there are 1 billion barrels in the ground, we may not be able to pump out all the 1 billion. We may be able to pump out so much. That is what they call “recoverable oil”. There is 1 billion barrels in the ground, but what you can pump out – because of the pumping and all that - is only a portion. 

Recently, one of the oil companies, in their first field development plan, proposed that they recover only 7 percent. That is the story! This is in writing. You say you have got forums; you have got all these. You bring me a forum where I will give you the documents; where somebody sits down and says according to my plan, I will pump out only 7 percent. In writing!

So, the scientists said, “No way; we cannot accept this.” So, the scientists are not cooperative. They were coming to me, but they have now given up. Now the new route is Ssekikubo and Niwagaba. This is the new route now. 

We have documents; somebody proposing to pump out only 7 percent and leave 93 percent. Because it costs money to pump it out. And these people just want to get quick money and go away. In the process they damage the wells because you will not be able to start again. They will have already damaged them. So,our scientists said, “No way, we cannot accept this.” When they said this, they started moving to this forum, and that forum - FOG, FOG, FOG. 

Our scientists rejected this. The highest recovery rate internationally is about 60 percent; “recovery” means pumping out. It is what is possible to be pumped out maximum. These fellows are now telling me it is 60 percent. 

But these people, in writing, in ink, in black and white, proposed to take out 7 percent; and our scientists rejected it. So, once they rejected it, they are bad now; they are not good. So, Ssekikubo, Niwagaba –(Laughter)– Katuntu - is it Katuntu? That is the group now; that is the group. 

This is part of giving licenses because if you don’t do what I tell you to do, I cancel the licence –(Interjections)- yes, it is all linked. If you don’t do what I want you to do, I cancel the licence. So, don’t divert and say, giving licenses – yes giving or revoking the license is part of disciplining you. When you do what I want you to do, I reward you; when you don’t, I punish you. What is the rewarding? It is giving the licence. What is the punishing? It is revoking the licence. 

I am not going to cane oil companies or punish them by using canes; I will punish them by revoking their licenses. However, one of the companies was proposing to recover only 7 percent. This is the struggle we are engaged in. 

Apart from wanting to avoid the scientists, the saboteurs working on behalf of foreign interests do not want our petroleum programmes to succeed. The success of our petroleum programmes in the next few years will mean financial independence and financial muscle for Uganda. That is the worry to the internal saboteurs and their foreign backers.

ACODE has organised the so-called seminars at the following places: Kyobe Lodge in Para; three in Munyonyo; twice at Imperial Royale; Imperial Botanical Hotel; twice at Hotel Africana etc. At each seminar, they would give Shs 1,000,000 to each participant. 

The so-called facilitators were being paid Shs 5,000,0000 each. Some of these are leaders in the politics of Uganda. How can such leaders speak about the interests of Uganda? Are they not foreign agents?

I have written to the IGG about these foreign agents. I am told ACODE spent Shs 1.5 billion at Munyonyo in one of those seminars. Where is that money coming from and for what purpose? I have written to the IGG about this. Things are not so simple. I have written to the IGG. It is wrong for a leader to accept gifts of economic value from anybody, Ugandans or foreigners, except probably from one’s parents or relatives.

When we came from the bush, the Banyankore gave me 800 heads of cattle as a congratulatory victory gift. I gathered and put all of them in the Government ranch at Ruherengyere. I could not accept such cattle on my farms as my personal property.

Eventually, I opened a Presidential farm at Buryamushemi at the confluence of River Mayanja and River Kafu, where we camped after attacking Masindi on 20 February 1984. I used those cows as President of Uganda, to donate them for charitable purposes. If I could not accept gifts from Ugandans, how much more reprehensible is it to accept money, gifts and favours from foreigners?

The malignment by internal – I would like to invite Parliament to go and see the Presidential ranch where I put all the cows that the Banyankore gave me. I could not allow those cows on my farm. They are gifts and so, I couldn’t. So, I put them there. They are there, and one day, I will invite all of you so that we can go and eat some of them. (Laughter)

The malignment by internal saboteurs working on behalf of the external parasitic interests must be stopped by legal, political and media action. 

The creation of foreign-funded parliamentary fora that are parallel to the constitutional committees of Parliament, such as the Natural Resources Committee, is something that you need to look at carefully. Why have a forum for oil and gas, when you already have the parliamentary committee on the same, mandated by the Constitution? (Applause)

It is these foreign-funded forces that used to derail our Ugandan centric approach and instead pushed for foreign centric approach. This circus, for instance, on the powers of the minister. Why should somebody spend so much time pushing to over involve the Authority, which is a regulatory body independent in its functions, to ensure quality in licensing and revoking of licenses? 

The formulation that the minister will grant and revoke licenses on the recommendations of the Authority was aimed at diverting the Authority from its work to control quality of oil activities, interfere in policy decisions, which sometimes guides licensing. Sometimes, when you are licensing, there is politics in there. For instance, if a certain country is hostile to Uganda, we shall not licence their company to extract our oil. Yes, they may have the technical competence, but the fact that they are hostile to Uganda; they know it; so we shall not license them. And who is the best judge in that, it is the one who is running the politics of Uganda. (Applause) The one who says, “Ah aah! abo mubaleke”. Those ones, technically yes, but – do you know how CNOOC came in, that Chinese group? There was an Italian Group that was about to come in because whatever they are called – the one they were saying had bribed Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi. What are they called? 

HON. MEMBERS: ENO.

MR MUSEVENI: Yes, ENO. If Mbabazi ate their bribe, he ate it for nothing -(Laughter)– because – I am not saying that he did. (Laughter) You see, my daughter, hon. Cerinah Nebanda - that young girl, has got bad ideas in her head. She is saying that I seem not to be sure. I am sure that Rt Hon. Mbabazi did not take that bribe; I was only speaking rhetorically that if he ate the bribe, he ate it for nothing because they did not get the licence, and the reason we did not give them the licence was for other reasons; we weighed Italy and China - we put them on the minzaani. When you weigh Italy and China, which is heavier?

Strategy - all these go into licensing. Why do you want the minister, who is manning the politics, to be excluded from this? It could create paralysis between the minister and the Authority. Even the interest of the promoters of the circus on clause 9 was to involve more brains in the licensing. That is already achieved by the minister, who will depend on our scientists to guide him or her.

Indeed, Article 174(3)(b) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda gives the civil servants like permanent secretaries the responsibility of tendering advice to the responsible minister in respect of the business of the department or ministry. Then there is the Cabinet, the President and ultimately Parliament, through their oversight role.

The Authority is also involved, not in a parallel way, but rather in a harmonised way. The final version of the Petroleum Bill of 2012, which you passed the other day states as follows; that the minister shall be responsible for granting and revoking licenses; initiating, developing and implementing the oil and gas policy; submitting draft legislation to Parliament; issuing petroleum regulations; negotiating and all that. He will do this in consultation with the Authority - The way you passed it. These ones have not copied it very well here; they will have to clarify it more.

So, the formulation, which you passed here the other day, having spent so many nights and many hours sitting and sitting; but eventually you passed it. Everybody was involved, but in a harmonised way, not likely to cause paralysis and uncoordinated movement or gaps for distorting the development of our oil and gas.

It is the Ssekikubos –(Laughter)- who wanted to distort the development of our oil and gas in foreign interests, and not the NRM government who discovered the oil and have correctly sheparded it to where it is now; 3.5 billion barrels confirmed in the ground in only 40 percent of the area we expect to have oil.

Commonsense demands that no foreigner or agent of foreigners should ever involve himself or herself in our politics. (Applause) If foreign interference and domination were a source of prosperity, then Africa should have been the most developed continent by 1960. At that time, Africa for 500 years ever since Vasco Da Gama went round the Cape of Good Hope in 1498, had gone through all forms of foreign meddling, domination etc. The menu of foreign involvement went from looting, slave trade, genocide to colonialism.

Why was Africa one of the most backward continents then if foreign involvement is good? Therefore, foreign interests, trying to meddle in our politics and plans is not beneficial. The foreigners always get it wrong. For instance, they welcomed Idi Amin and supported him. We opposed him from the word go. Who turned out to be wrong and who turned out to be right? The outsiders were wrong and we were right.

When we were disarming the cattle rustlers in Karamoja, some of the outsiders working with UPC Member, Pulkol, opposed us. Karamoja is now peaceful and they are beginning to produce their own food. I have told you that foreigners supported Idi Amin and we opposed him. What then would have happened if we were in some of the other countries who listened to foreigners? For us we do not listen to foreigners. I do not listen to foreigners. I only listen to them if they are right and if they talk in a nice way. If you talk to me in a bad way, I tell you to go to hell.

Where would Uganda be today? This is why common sense should tell us that if you listen to foreigners instead of listening to your own people, you will most likely end up with wrong results. It is not just common sense and history that forbid us from working for foreigners. Our Constitution, in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, states as follows, “Opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation.” This is national objective number 28(i)(e).

All this is put in the main body of the Constitution by Article 8(a) of the Constitution. Therefore, to get foreign-funded NGOs using mendacity to influence the direction of our country in terms of policy, offends the bitter lessons of African history, offends common sense, and offends our Constitution.

Then there are the bad manners of some of the actors. Let us take Bishop Niringiye, for example. This is a gentleman who is about 65 years old. This means he was old enough when Uganda needed patriots, and when 800,000 Ugandans died in the hands of Idi Amin and other regimes. I did not hear of Bishop Niringiye’s efforts in the defence of Ugandans who were being slaughtered. What qualifies him then to insult other compatriots when he was obviously found wanting at the crucial hour?

The same applies to some of the young actors like Ssekikubo. He was around when Kony was murdering, maiming, raping and looting Ugandans. What did this young fighter for peoples’ rights do to correct the terrible situation we faced? I did not see Ssekikubo volunteering to help out.

The situation in the country has stabilised. Inflation, which was 30 percent in 2011, is now 4.9 percent. (Applause) Besigye last year was saying that the economy would not recover, but it has now recovered. Inflation has been controlled. In spite of Besigye’s riots and all that, inflation is less than 5 percent. 

The dam at Bujagaali is now ready and load shedding has reduced. Where load shedding is still occurring is because of technical problems like old lines, but not because of the electricity supply. The electricity supply is now adequate.

There is peace in the whole country. We are working on a number of new roads. Here below is the list, but I will not read it; there is a long list which you will see in the speech when you get your copies. These roads are either being worked on, or we are planning to work on them. It is a very long list.    

Regarding electricity, apart from Bujagaali, the following mini-hydropower stations have been commissioned in the last two years: Mpanga - 18 megawatts; Bugoye - 13 megawatts; Nyagakwam -3.5 megawatts; Kisizi - 0.3 megawatts; Ishasha - 3.5 megawatts; and Buseruka - 9 megawatts, but it is undergoing testing to be ready for commissioning in the  course of this month. 

The following mini-hydro stations have been licensed for building: Nyamwamba - 14 megawatts; Kikagate-16 megawatts; Sipi I - 5 megawatts; Sipi II - 16.5 megawatts;   Rubiriha – 5 megawatts - this is in Kasese; Kakaka in Kabarole - 7.2 megawatts; Waki in Masindi area - 4 megawatts; Muzizi- 30 megawatts; Miingo - 7.5 megawatts; Nyamugasani - 15 megawatts; Ndibuto - 5 megawatts; Ishungyezi- 40 megawatts; Muyembe - 10 megawatts; Kyambura - 8.3 megawatts; Nyagak III – 4.5 megawatts; Maziba - 1 megawatt;  Aswa-Agago - 88.8 megawatts.

On another occasion, I will address you about fighting corruption. I will do so when you come from the recess. Suffice it, however, to tell you two Runyankore proverbs; one is a literal story with a meaning – ekitebyo – there is a big bird, entuha - what you call the Crested Crane in English; and a very small one akafunzi - a very tiny bird. One day, the akafunzi kicked the Crested Crane and the Crested Crane despisingly said, “What sort of kick is that? I don’t feel any pain.” Then the akafunzi said, “ogw’amushongyezi gwita gwahora,” meaning, “You wait, my kick takes time to produce results -(Laughter)- with time you will feel the real pain.” 

The other one goes like this, “Akasisi nyamutahatwa katahwata orakatahasireho otakakatahataga kwaza kutahata akata” One of these efficient African dialects says in essence that, ‘Only the one with experience to solve previous problems can solve the current ones.’ 

I have told you many times that it is the NRM that stopped the extrajudicial killings with impunity in Uganda. It is the NRM that removed Army roadblocks that were looting people.  It is the NRM that stopped the raping of women; it is the NRM that stopped corruption in Uganda Revenue Authority; it is the NRM that built a disciplined Army; and it is the NRM which will similarly eliminate the corruption in the Public Service. 

Those envious of the NRM monumental achievements try to pour scorn on this historical fact. We have now entered that phase; the exposure of the corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister, in the Ministry of Public Service, in the Ministry of Finance, and in the Bank of Uganda, was by the NRM cadres, the Police and others in my support when I was informed. 

So, I am really surprised when you are talking about corruption - the dishonesty of those who talk about corruption.  Who discovered the theft in the Public Service?  It was not even the Auditor-General. It was the NRM cadres who reported the matter to the Police and the Police sought my support, and we acted. 

Who discovered the theft in the Prime Minister’s Office? It was not the Auditor-General at all. The Auditor-General came in much later. It was the NRM cadres who made the alarm and we moved in and invited the Auditor-General. 

So, when I hear the lies which are going on in the radios as if you think that we are dead when we are here, we shall come and tell the people the truth.  The NRM is the one which fought all the previous battles and is even fighting this one. And you, NRM Members should be proud of that. Maybe the ones in the Opposition should be the ones to be miserable, but to hear any NRM Member joining this confusion is not good. 

The NRM cadres and professionals have stopped the theft of drugs in the health centres. You go back to your districts and find out what is happening in the health centres. Are the drugs there or not there? (Interjections) No, you go there. I will go with Nebanda and we pay a surprise visit to one of them. It is the NRM cadres who have fought this war of drugs. If they are finished but not stolen, that is another matter. But in the past the drugs were being stolen.  

The theft of the Basajjabalaba money was exposed by the NRM supporters even before Parliament was informed. Therefore, stay tuned –(Laughter)- You will hear how the NRM will crown its long list of victories by eliminating corruption from the Public Service. My next address to you will concentrate on this.

Therefore, in conclusion, I stand here to pour contempt on the pessimism and malignments being spread by the saboteurs and quislings of external interests. The NRM has led Uganda –(Interjections)- the NRM has led Uganda out of more difficult situations; victory is ours. I thank all of you. I wish you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you will agree with me that the President chose a good topic to discuss with us today. But it does seem that Your Excellency the President, you will need some induction in parliamentary procedure and use of language. (Laughter) But I thank the Members for observing the rules of this House very strictly except for a few occasions when phones were ringing too loudly and those violated the rules because the phones are supposed to be off. But Your Excellency, the areas where you need to iron out a few things involve, like I said, the use of language. For example, I did not know where to place the question of artificial bums. (Laughter) Your Excellency, our rules are also very strict on the way we refer to the honourable members. We refer to them as hon. Member for Lwemiyaga or the hon. Ssekikubo. (Laughter)

And under rule 4, the proceedings and debates of Parliament shall be in English. (Laughter) I heard you speaking Luo, Lusoga and Runyankore. All those are prohibited under our rules. (Laughter) 

But I am sure, Your Excellency, you will find occasion to iron out all this. We will take advantage of the Christmas break so that by the time you come for your next address, Your Excellency, you will be more prolific with our rules. But by far, Your Excellency, this is a topical issue and I am sure you have touched very good nerves of the Members. (Applause) 

If the Members deem it fit, they will be moving an appropriate motion, after which a discussion on the presentation you have made will be ably articulated. I am sure the points of order that were not given to you today, the Members will give among themselves because you are protected by our own rules not to be interrupted when you are speaking.

Honourable members, I will seek your indulgence. You know that this House was supposed to go on recess today - (Laughter)– and the other one is that the Speaker shall be heard in silence. (Laughter)

MR MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, as a good student, I will be ready to be guided about the nice language -(Laughter)- and I could start right now by saying, the honourable member for Lwemiyaga -(Laughter)- the hon. Ssekikubo. And I apologise for all the other bad language. (Laughter) In the Bible it says, “Rend ye your hearts and not your clothes.” So, look at the substance of what I was saying.

I wish to extend condolences to our young sister, Rebecca Kadaga, on the death of her father. On behalf Uganda, I extend my condolences to her. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members and thank you, Your Excellency. Honourable members I seek your indulgence. We were supposed to go on recess today, which will run until 3rd February, to give you a good break. Because of that long spell I am seeking to come here tomorrow at 10 o’clock. We are in the middle of the Accountants Bill which we need to complete. And there are so many other things that we need to deal with, and hopefully, if you all come tomorrow at 10 o’clock, in two hours we would have finished with this Bill and I will be communicating to you the next course of action before I adjourn the House for the Christmas recess, and then we resume on 3rd February.

So, thank you Your Excellency, and thank you honourable members. It has been a good interaction. House adjourned to tomorrow at 10 o’clock.

The National Anthem (Three stanzas)

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 14 December 2012 at 10.00 a.m.) 
