

Tuesday, 4 December 2018

Parliament met at 4.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and profusely apologise for the late start. I started the morning in Kasese where I went to discuss strategies for improving livelihoods of the people of Karamoja, Bukedi and Busoga, which as you know, are the most poverty stricken in this country. From there, I went to the industrial park in Kapeeka to see what is going on but it took much longer than I had planned. 

Nevertheless, I would like to update members that a lot of work is going on in the industrial park. They expect to establish 50 industries. So far they have set up 12, of which two are for food processing. They are buying sim-sim and mangoes and 25 tonnes of mangoes are being bought every day for processing in that factory; to be dried and exported. So, let us encourage the growing of emiyembe. 

There is also a lot of sim-sim being processed. There is a fishnet factory that is starting up. There are also two textile factories, two LED factories - one for cable electronics and another one for ceramics. 

Honourable members, when I went to that showroom, I realised that we might not continue going to China to buy tiles. The products are good yet they are made from our local raw materials. Therefore, I would like to ask the committee on trade to find time and visit that industry because I think it is something we need to support. 

I would like to report that the parliamentary team arrived in Bujumbura to participate in the Inter-Parliamentary Games. They have so far won in football and netball matches against Tanzania, which took place on Sunday. I am requesting you to put them in your prayers so that they bring home more trophies. 

This year, we are going to host a joint end of year party for both members and staff on Thursday, 20 December 2018 at 6.00 p.m. at the South Wing Parking lot. So please put on your dancing shoes and prepare for the 20 December, 2018. 

Our colleague, hon. James Kakooza, was involved in a motor accident last weekend in Mbarara. He is out of danger but he fractured his right arm and is admitted to Mayanja Memorial Hospital in Mbarara - he will be transferred to Kampala for further treatment. Again, I would like to ask that we put him in our prayers. 

Honourable members, of course the country is still in a state of shock and pain over the tragedy that occurred on Lake Victoria. I just want to remind you that on a number of occasions, both from this Chair and other public fora, I have been calling upon Government to take a greater interest in maritime transport. 

The laws to regulate water transport were done before independence and so they are very old – enacted in 1904, 1905 and 1939. However, in the meantime, the East African Community enacted the Lake Victoria Transport Act of 2007 but what I do not know is whether it was actually laid here and if it is in force in this country!  If it is in force, who is enforcing it because I do not remember it coming here? 

Anyway, I hope the Minister of Works and Transport can find out what is happening. I would like to read the object of that Bill, “It was an Act of the community to make provisions for the commission to regulate and monitor the safety and security; to make provisions for the construction, survey, registration and licensing of all vessels on the lake, for safety of passengers and cargo and for competencies of masters and crew and for other related matters.” 

Under Article 9 of the East African Community Treaty, the Council of Ministers was expected to establish the Lake Victoria Basin Commission to handle this. I hope that we can find out where it is so that we implement it. 

Related to that, honourable members, today in the press, I read something very surprising that the marine school is to be established at Busitema University. Honourable members, I just want to remind the Ministry of Education and Sports and that of works and transport that a decision was taken, about four years ago, to locate that school at Namasagali University. It was a presidential directive and he wrote to that effect. 

Therefore, when I hear that it is going to Busitema University, where there is even no water – you know the maritime school should be near the river. That is why it was to be at Namasagali University. Hence, it does not make sense to take it to Busitema on the mainland, unless they are going to go to River Malaba for practise. 

It is a very serious issue and I would like the Ministry of Education and Sports to tell us when they are implementing that directive to establish both the university and the faculty of maritime services. It is also supposed to train our captains and so on. 

At the moment, for us to service a ferry, we have to take it to Tanzania. That is why when the Bukakata Ferry is taken for service in Tanzania; there is an outcry in the islands because there are no other means of transport. How long are we going to continue relying on Tanzania for service, training and pirating? I hope the ministry can take action on that one. 

Finally, honourable members, last week I was in Iceland for the Women Leaders’ Global Forum. It brought together women leaders from all over the world: some presidents, speakers, prime ministers and others. It is a platform where women discuss and share ideas and solutions on how to advance society, increase gender equality and positively promote the number of women leadership positions. 

At that meeting, we, the members of the African Women Leaders Network were recognised for championing the campaign for gender equality in Africa. Among the recipients was Mrs Jewel Howard Taylor, Vice President of the Republic of Liberia and also President of the Senate of Liberia and the former First Lady, hon. Donatille Mukabalise, President of the Chamber of Deputies of Rwanda, hon. Bineta Diop, the African Union Special Envoy on Peace and Security and the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. I just thought I should update you on that. (Applause)

Honourable members, there are just two matters of national concern. Hon. Franco Centenary will have two minutes to talk about the street children. 

4.32
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is a little bit elaborate so I request for a little bit of time. 

Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding street children. I bring to your attention issues affecting children on the streets. In a bid to clean up the city, police are rounding up children on the streets and charging them with the offence of frequenting places with opium. The operation that commenced this Saturday, 25 November, 2018 has seen 20 children arraigned in Buganda Road Court. 
On the evening of Monday 3 December, 2018, a group of 35 children, on the same offence, were delivered to Luzira from the Chief Magistrate’s Court of Nakawa, bringing the total to 55 children. 
Apparently, there is a directive to get rid of children on the streets of Kampala. Currently, 55 have been charged with offence of frequenting places of opium.

These children find themselves on the streets not out of their own desire; they have been pushed there due to violence in homes and maltreatment; they had to turn to the streets for survival. Some are orphans trying to survive and fend for themselves.

While rounding them up to rid the city of crime during the festive season is a noble cause, there are better ways to manage this instead of using trumped up charges.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs and all those concerned with this operation should seek professional help from organisations that have been working with these children, and the probation office to ensure the process is professionally managed to let these children get to be provided with alternative care as opposed to taking them to remand homes.

You may recall, Madam Speaker, that in April this year, this House received a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the Commemoration of the International Day of Children on the Streets. 
In that motion, this House agreed with the stated objectives for the General Comment numbers to which Uganda is party and the objectives of the General Comment are: to clarify the obligations of the state in applying child’s rights based approach to strategies and initiatives for the children on the streets; to provide comprehensive and authoritative guidance to states on using a holistic child-rights based approach to prevent children from experiencing rights violations and lack of choices that result in them having to depend on the streets for their survival and development; and to promote and protect the rights of children already on the streets by ensuring a continuum of care and helping them to develop to their fullest potential -

THE SPEAKER: What is that you are reading?

MR CENTENARY: I prepared my notes.

THE SPEAKER: What is the issue you want Government to handle? 

MR CENTENARY: My prayer is that the Police should stop the victimisation and slapping trumped up charges against these street children. Taking these children to remand homes or rehabilitation centres without following the procedure will not achieve the intended outcome. We should be able to come up with a long term solution to this challenge. 

Secondly, we should ensure that there is a coordinated effort in rescuing the children with facilities that have been identified and availing resources to specialised organisations to rehabilitate – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, wouldn’t that be better coming as a motion so that we debate it and make a resolution?

MR CENTENARY: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, prepare your motion and we shall debate it.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Members’ Gallery, we have a delegation from South Sudan, led by hon. Majur Babur, the Chairperson of South Sudan Parliamentary Network on Population and Development. They are:

    1. Dr Margaret Joel – Deputy Chairperson 
    2. Hon. Simon Lumori Phillip 
    3. Hon. Sarah Benjamin 
    4. Hon. John Paul Lakor 
    5. George Maurice Kony and 
    6. Hon. Taban Luka Aligo.

They have come to interact with our forum on food security and population; they are welcome to our proceedings. (Applause)

I understand there are also staff from the United Nations Population Fund - Mr Dani Moses, from South Sudan and Mr Mugagga Kasirivu, from Uganda. They are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

In the public gallery, we have teachers from Mpungwe Primary School, represented by hon. Waira Majegere and hon. Julie Zabwe. You are welcome. (Applause)

There will be a “He-for-She” dialogue tomorrow in the Parliamentary Conference Hall, starting at 8.00 a.m. You are invited by the Chairman of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum and UWOPA Chairperson to attend. Please find some time to go there. Thank you very much.

I would like to bring forward item four quickly before we go to the statements. Can I ask the minister to lay the papers quickly?

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO GUARANTEE LINES OF CREDIT OF US$ 5 MILLION FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA AND US$ 15 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AfDB) TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED (UDBL)

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, a proposal for Government of Uganda to guarantee lines of credit of US$ 5 Million from the Export-Import Bank of India and US$ 15 Million from the African Development Bank (AFDB) to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL).

PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO BORROW UP TO EURO 120 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY – AFD FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF WATER AND SANITATION INFRASTRUCTURE FOR THE SOUTH WESTERN CLUSTER (MBARARA – MASAKA AREAS)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, the Government’s proposal to borrow up to Euro 120 million from the French Development Agency for the development of water and sanitation infrastructure for the South Western cluster (Mbarara – Masaka areas).

PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO BORROW UP TO EURO 150 MILLION FROM THE AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DÉVELOPPEMENT (AFD) TO SUPPORT THE KAMPALA WATER – LAKE VICTORIA WATER AND SANITATION II (KW-LVWATSAN II) PROJECT

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, the Government’s request to borrow up to Euro 150 million from the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) to support the Kampala Water – Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation II (KW-LVWATSAN II) project.

PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO BORROW UP TO SDR 174.6 MILLION (US $251 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, a proposal by Government of Uganda to borrow up to SDR 174.6 million (US$ 251 million equivalent) from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the integrated water management and development project.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, they are all sent to the Committee on National Economy. However, just the other week I had told this House that we seem to be borrowing for only the urban areas. I don’t know what provisions we are making for the rural areas, which are still badly off on issues of water. I just see borrowing for the towns; I don’t see borrowing for the rural areas. So, I hope minister, you will consider the other people too. Let us go back to item 3. Yes, point of procedure from hon. Muhindo.

MR MUHINDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. About two weeks ago, it was brought to your attention that the police have banned the activities of Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) in many parts of the country.

You directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs brings a statement to the House on Thursday, which he did not do. The sitting Speaker then directed that today, Tuesday, 4 December 2018, the minister brings a statement in this regard.

I have looked at the Order Paper - even when the minister is present today, this statement is not planned for. May I know whether we are proceeding right that we continue despite the directives from your Chair not being followed and implemented by a minister who is present? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not have the statement and that is why, it is not on the Order Paper. However, the minister is here. When are you responding to the issue of the disruption of the FDC rallies? If you could speak to that before we go to the main item.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, regarding the first item of the directive from the Speaker’s Chair about the banning of FDC rallies or meetings by the police, all I can say at the moment is that, we in the ministry heard of this statement for the first time yesterday in Cabinet that it was made in Parliament on Thursday last week. 

We have not received any information from the parliamentary staff about the matter. However, we undertake that by Thursday, we shall make that statement on the Floor of Parliament.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A member raised this matter on the Floor of Parliament that FDC activities are being interfered with by the police; that honourable minister was here. Therefore, is it in order for honourable minister to say that he did not pick or get any information from the parliamentary staff yet it was raised on the Floor of Parliament and it is on the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have the Hansard here and I think you were here. When the Leader of Opposition raised it, were you here? 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, on Thursday, my senior minister was sick. On Tuesday, I left for the Council of Ministers’ meeting in Arusha and came back on Friday. Therefore, there was no way it could be said that when I was here and I am defying the Speaker’s directive.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, we expect the statement on Thursday, as you have undertaken.

MR OBIGA: Thanks very much for your direction. As this Parliament knows, we always make our statements once we are informed. We shall do it on Thursday, as we have undertaken. Thank you very much.
            
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INTRODUCTION OF THE NEW INTERNATIONAL EAST AFRICAN e-PASSPORT AND EVENTUAL PHASE OUT OF THE CURRENT EAST AFRICA AND NATIONAL MACHINE – READABLE PASSPORTS (MRP)

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, the statement I am making to Parliament is about the introduction of what is known as the e-passport. In this text, “e” will be referring to as “electronic” passport. I do take it that it is already on our iPads because we submitted it yesterday. I would like to read it.

Introduction of the new International East African Electronic Passport and eventual phase out of the current East Africa and National Machine-Readable Passports (MRP). 

I know this is not in the text but I thought I should explain why we are calling it the “East African International Passport”. This is because all East African countries will be having a standard passport, which will be accredited in the same context to the ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization); which is the international body that controls international travel documents. 

Madam Speaker, Government is set to introduce the new International East African e-Passport to replace and eventually phase out the current East African and National Machine-Readable Passports.

You will recall that during the 17th Ordinary Summit of the East African Community Heads of State held in March 2016, their excellences launched the new EAC e-passport and directed the commencement of the issuance of the new international EAC e-passport with effect from l January 2017, and thereafter implement a phase out programme for the current Machine-Readable East African and National Passports within a period of two years.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs, being the lead ministry is, therefore, here to brief Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as follows:
a) The e-Passport project

Pursuant to the EAC summit directive mentioned above, Government of Uganda has signed a supply contract to provide a solution to the issuance of the e-passport system/infrastructure, supply of blank East African e-passport booklets and a fully furnished personalisation centre, to be constructed at the Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters. That means there are going to be three items under this contract.

The project also includes a fit for purpose rehabilitation and equipping of three regional centres (Mbarara, Mbale and Gulu) and seven missions abroad. For the time being, we have selected Washington, London, Pretoria, Beijing, New Delhi, Abu Dhabi and Paris.

b) e-Passport benefits

Madam Speaker, by mid-2018, more than 150 countries worldwide had migrated to this type of technology. The key benefits are that e-passports are more superior to the Machine-Readable Passports and have a microprocessor, which stores a digital version of the photography as well as identification data normally on the bio-data page of the paper passport, hence making it harder to forge.

In addition, digital fingerprints can be stored on the biometric passport to prevent unauthorised reading or scanning of stored data. The summary of that line is that all the data will now be stored and, therefore, only accessible by a certain machine.

The e-passport system has enabled the ministry to totally upgrade the travel document with additional visual and electronic security features to combat identity frauds, and to strengthen national and international confidence in our passport. 

We have re-engineered existing processes from enrolment to issuance, which will in turn facilitate border control as automatic border control gates will be adopted therein. The key component of this new e-passport is that it involves technology and solutions, which are robust and capable of improving service delivery so that people can get passports much more quickly.

Madam Speaker, the new e-passport system offers solutions to deal with the big crowds at the passport office and the associated bad practices as well as an opportunity to redeem the integrity of our national passport, which was being forged and accessed by non-citizens.

Finally, the e-passport system provides an opportunity for integration with other databases like the national identification register, and other innovative solutions for online identification and authentication for e-government services. With over one billion e-passports circulating in the world now, our citizens are set to join and must, therefore, embrace the trend. As Government we must in turn provide this because it offers our citizens a taste of cross-border movement that is as secure as it is swift and seamless.

In line with the implementation of the East African Community Common Market Protocol, which guaranteed the right of movement of persons between the East African states, we are therefore, to embrace this policy direction.

Commissioning and launch of e-passport

The new international East African e-passport will be commissioned and launched at the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ headquarters in January 2019. However, due to unforeseen transitional management issues, use of the EAC e-passport for international travel will commence earlier than that because we have detected early stock-outs of the current machine-readable passports before the commissioning and launch. We are going to begin issuing the e-passports earlier than the official launching because right now we cannot import machine-readable passports in big batches. Therefore, we shall soon announce a date and start issuing e-passports this December.

Phase out of the current EAC and national machine-readable passports

In accordance with the EAC directive earlier mentioned, our two-year phase-out programme for the current EAC and national machine-readable passports is scheduled to run from the launch date, in January and end in January 2021. Once a country launches its e-passport, it is given two years to run its course and phase out the machine-readable passports. 

Therefore, if we launch ours in January, we will have two years to use our current passports after which all Uganda citizens shall only be eligible to travel with the new international EAC e-passports. During the transitional period, all citizens with valid machine-readable passports will continue to use them for international travel until the end of January 2021, after which they will become invalid for travel.

For avoidance of doubt, after 9 January 2021, only the international East African e-passport shall be valid for travel. The current East African and national machine-readable passports shall cease to be valid travel documents for citizens of Uganda.

In light of the foregoing, citizens wishing to apply for the current national machine-readable passports now but without an urgent need for international travel between now and 10 January, 2019 are strongly advised to wait until the commissioning and launch of the e-passport system on 10 January 2019 so that they can be able to apply and be issued with the new international EAC e-passports. Mark the word “urgent.” Those wishing to apply for readable passports now but without urgent need - if you have an urgent need, it will be considered.

Further, citizens travelling to Rwanda and Kenya whose travel documents will have expired by 9 January 2019 or do not have passports, are advised to use alternative travel documents such as the National Identity Cards, which are allowed between the countries of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda; temporary movement permits; and certificates of identity for travel to the United Republic of Tanzania. Therefore, there are other alternatives in case they cannot wait for the e-passport.

Price of the new international EAC e-passport

Madam Speaker, considering the above, the pricing principles Government has adopted to set the cost of the e-passport are premised on a cost recovery model to recoup the cost of production but also to include a profit margin in form of Non-Tax Revenue (NTR), which is paid to the Consolidated Fund. 

Further, in terms of the EAC Regional Price Comparative Index of similar products/services, we believe that our passport fees represent what is accessible and acceptable to the citizens as the prices indicated below compare favourably with other countries in the region:

    1. What used to be called “Ordinary Passport” with 48 pages will now be called “Passport” and shall cost Shs 250,000.
    2. What used to be called “Ordinary Passport” with 64 pages will be called “Passport” with 64 pages and will cost Shs 300,000.
    3. Official Passport will be named a “Service Passport”; it will have 64 pages and will cost Shs 400,000.
    4. The Diplomatic Passport will have 64 pages and will cost Shs 500,000.
    5. In addition, if you want express passport service, we will charge you an additional fee of Shs 150,000, irrespective of whether it is ordinary, service or diplomatic. You will get that passport that same day.
    6. We are also going to issue passports in the diaspora and there will be a courier fee for Diaspora Passport applications in batches, which will cost Shs 300,000.

Diaspora ordinary passport will cost Shs 350,000. An ordinary passport issued in Washington and all those other places I have talked about, we regard them as diaspora as long as they will be issued outside Uganda.

The e-Passport Application Process
The e-passport application will be both manual and online. The entire e-passport application process involves five major steps namely, application, enrollment, processing, personalisation and issuance.
	
Madam Speaker, I do not have time to explain the details of these items but they are just the process one will have to go through during a passport application process.

For those who will be applying online, the process will be as follows:

    i. Applicants will be required to fill out an online form with all the details required. On completion, the form will act as an assessment form for URA; hence a Payment Registration Number (PRN) will be generated.
    ii. The applicant will be required to schedule an interview with the Ministry of Internal Affairs/Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control (DCIC) Office.
    iii.  Applicants will print out the application form with the PRN, schedule details and proceed to the bank where the payment will be done. The print out will have a list of all the required documents an applicant will be required to present before the DCIC officer.
    iv.  The applicant, after payment, will now proceed to ministry or DCIC office where the interview will be conducted.
    v. After the interview the application will be processed internally and a passport printed for those that will qualify at that stage.
    vi.  When the passport is ready, the applicant will be alerted to proceed and pick up their passport. And
    vii. If the applicant does not qualify, he or she will still be issued a notice and advised to apply for another facility or make all the necessary corrections, if any.

For manual application process

    i. Applicants will be required to fill out an application form with all the details required. On completion, the applicants will proceed to the bank where an assessment will be carried out to generate a PRN. Applicants will pay and proceed to the nearest Passport Application Center either in Gulu, Mbale, Mbarara or Kampala.
    ii.  A mandatory time of the day beyond which such applicants cannot proceed to the application centres will be communicated to avoid crowds and create an order in the processing.
    iii.  After the interview, the application will be processed internally and a passport printed for those that will qualify.
    iv. When the passport is ready, the applicant will be alerted to proceed and pick up their passport; and
    v. If the applicant does not qualify, he or she will still be issued a notice and advised to apply for another facility.

 The following points should be noted:

    a. All passports are to be personalised at the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Kampala. “Personalisation” means putting all the details of applicants in the entire process so that it is controlled in one centre. 
    b.  Passport applicants must possess valid National Identity Card or National Identity Registration Certificate in the case of children issued by the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA).

Colleagues, you will remember that we have been registering some people below the age of 16. We said that if you are below the age of 16, we will give you a national identification number with a certificate but not a national identification card.

    c. In case of changes on the national identity card, the holder of the National Identity Card will be required to first rectify the change with NIRA before proceeding with the passport application.
    d. Notices to applicants will be through emails and sms. I have talked about how people will be informed including telephone calls and public notice boards; and
    e. Issued passports will be picked from the same enrollment point where the applicant was enrolled.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, we call upon all Ugandans to embrace this new milestone as we join the rest of the EAC and the world to launch the new international East African Community e-Passport for the Republic of Uganda. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to also thank the Members who raised it because it has enabled Government to elucidate on this issue for the whole country.  Which Member raised the issue?

5.10
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to beg that as Parliament of Uganda, we should stop this deal; the ministry should go slow with this deal.

Madam Speaker, the report does not specify the fundamental differences between the current passports and the e-passport they are talking about. I have just looked at their press statement. The advantages they gave in the press statement are not the same as what the minister has given here. In their press statement, they point out that one of the advantages will be using e-gate.

Madam Speaker, we are international travelers; we have been at airports where you use your passport on e-machine and it clears you automatically. What is the unique advantage of this e-passport? 

The minister has told us that one of the advantages is automated issuance of boarding passes. However, Madam Speaker, this is common. When you have a passport, you just get a boarding pass.

The report has given us the usual advantages of computers that we studied in secondary schools; that it is very difficult to forge – it is robust biometrics. In every airport, we use biometrics to capture details. The fact that Entebbe Airport does not have an e-gate machine does not mean that one’s passport does not work. 

Madam Speaker, our passports work normally. The ministry needs to convince us about the unique difference that is causing Government to panic.

Secondly, our President advised the ministry to implement this in 2016 yet the ministry is just coming towards the end of 2018 and putting citizens on pressure. So, if Government must switch to e-passport as they would like to, they should do it without pressuring the citizens. If a citizen applies for a passport and pays money for a passport of 10 years, why should you make that person panic when he can easily travel with it?

They should maybe ask new applicants or people who are renewing their passports to be the ones to pay. Why would you ask someone to pay more money for another passport before the expiry date? So, you have to justify the cost of Shs 250,000.

I request that we first ask the ministry to go slow and let Parliament look at it critically. If we allow it, COSASE will investigate the same after five years from now. If someone has a valid passport, they should not pay for an e-passport; should take time and get a new one at the Government’s cost. Thank you.

5.14
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking at the prices that are supposed to be paid, the cheapest amount according to the minister is Shs 300,000 and official passports are at Shs 400,000 while diplomatic passports go for Shs 500,000.

People are complaining about the current amount they are paying for passports. Local passports are majorly used by our ordinary people but now that the ministry has increased the amount to Shs 300,000, we feel that it is too much; it is like we are denying the local people from acquiring passports.

If Government feels like hiking the amount to be paid, why not hike the amount of the diplomatic passports because they are normally used by people holding high positions.

Secondly, as hon. Majegere put it, the honourable minister did not clearly tell us what would happen to those who own valid passports, which expire after 10 years. Are those people going to pay for the e-passports as well?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, what is the duration of this new passport?

5.16
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification from the minister on how East African is this e-passport. When you look through the ministerial statement, it tends to concentrate on Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda and somehow mentions Tanzania yet if you are to go to Tanzania, they use a different document - Burundi, South Sudan are not mentioned.

If it is e-passport, why talk of so many numbers of pages? Does this proposed East African e-passport consider issuance of visas by those countries we travel to that do not have e-passports?

Lastly, how indicative are the prices you have set vis-à-vis the prices in Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda, which seem to have gone to East African e-passport? Why don’t you give us the prices that Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania are charging for us to compare and contrast?

That is not without prejudice to the observations raised by hon. Majegere because I fully associate myself with them but I never wanted to repeat.

5.18
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a simple question. Many Ugandans have applied and are stuck with files of already processed forms signed by the police, LC, RDC and all those procedures; they have to wait until January 2019 depending on the urgency.

You have not clarified on whether those forms that were already approved would remain relevant or you are going to come up with a new application form and therefore, they have to go back again through the tedious process of collecting signatures from LCI up to the upper levels. Thirdly, is it going to be the same process? Thank you.

5.19
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not quite convinced by the statement of the minister and I would like to ask him to make more clarifications to the House. 

Beginning with the cost of the passport - the minister has made it clear that there is an element of profit in the pricing to generate non-tax revenue. Is Government making these passports to make money from citizens when this is a document meant to only facilitate travel? The idea of generating and accumulating profits out of it should be far away from the mind of Government. 

To that effect, Mr Minister, you are constraining the business community and at the same time making it very hard for the ordinary citizen to access passports.

Other countries in Africa have already issued these e-passports as national passports and I am wondering whether the spirit in this East African e-passport is East African indeed.

Recently I was in Kenya and saw that the spirit of East Africa is not working for us. Ugandans cannot get jobs there. We visited the biggest telecom company there but we were clearly told that Ugandans cannot get jobs because -(Member timed out.)

5.21
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I do not agree with the minster’s statement regarding e-passports. If you recall, these are the same passports that recently caused a stampede in the ministry, having two senior officials arrested, detained and eventually losing their jobs. So, even before he comes to tell us what exactly happened and why they were dismissed, he is rushing to start something that is surrounded with controversy. Why all this rush?

Secondly, I thought that these protocols were supposed to be ratified and domesticated by Parliament. I need to be guided. You do not just get a protocol, come to the ministry and start implementing right away. Are you just informing us or seeking approval? What is all this? 

I need to be educated because I am not convinced at all that we are in such a hurry and need to go into this business. We have seen it all. A passport is just but a travel document. It should be made so easy for my father, mother, brother or sister to get it. 

That issue of reducing fraud that you are talking about –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I do support the issuance of the East African e-passport but I would like to question the legal framework. 

Honourable minister, is there an authoritative legal instrument that declares us citizens of East Africa thus qualifying us to get an East African Passport together with others? Some of the protocols that you are talking about have been under serious contention. As hon. Byarugaba says, we expected that you would lay these protocols here for us to first ratify and domesticate but that seems not to be the case.

Therefore, what is that binding legal authority that mandates us to acquire the East African Passport? I am proudly Ugandan. I hold a Ugandan passport. What is it that should make me to be proud to hold an East African Passport? Can you respond to that?

5.24
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I am sorry I still have a long way to support your proposal.

You are proposing that apart from the three regional centres internally, you are going to roll it out to seven missions abroad - Washington, London, Pretoria, Beijing, New Delhi, Abu Dhabi and Paris. What is going to happen to the other citizens in other countries? Are you really ready for a roll out? After that, what is going to happen to somebody who is not in any of these countries? Clearly, you are not yet ready.

Honourable minister, those of us who have been to your office along Port Bell Road, have realised that there is always a crowd from morning until evening. I have gone through the process you are proposing; there is nothing going to change. The process is lengthy and tiresome. From application to interviews, banking and retrieval; it is virtually the same process.

I would like to advise that when you are proposing a better system, can you establish a one-stop centre for processing applications and payment so that somebody walks away with a passport after all that? Can you also look at the regional centres you are talking about and equip them so that somebody does not have to come to Kampala?

Thirdly, there is the cost of the passport. Adding to my colleagues’ views, I have read through the statement but I do not see what this project is going to cost us as a country. You are trying to collect money from the citizens. 

Madam Speaker, remember when I was with you, hon. Mwijukye and others in Abu Dhabi, where a child at birth is issued –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: A half a minute to complete.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. We are talking of a national identification document and you are telling somebody that if you do not have Shs 200,000, 300,000 or Shs 500,000 you cannot access this? People need to go to Kenya for holiday, education and so on. What are you curing, honourable minister.

Finally, there is the issue of forgery of passports. Ugandan passports are known to be forged easily, world over. The problem is not the machine but your staff. What you enter in the machine is what you get out. I do not see it in your statement. What proposals and solutions are you bringing on board so that Ugandan passports are not abused by non-citizens? Thank you.

5.27
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had three issues; two have been mentioned so I will go to the third. 

I have looked through the cost of the passport and the calculations in there for the two ordinary types of passports. The one of 48 pages is costing Shs 250,000 and the 64 paged one costs Shs 300,000. If you divide Shs 300,000 by 64 pages, it means a page goes for Shs 4,687.5. If you multiply this by 48 pages, it would be going for Shs 225,000.  Why is that discrepancy? You need to be fair in costing or else we do away with one ordinary and remain with that of 64 pages. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kafuuzi comes up, honourable minister, I am trying to remember something. When this directive of the presidents from the summit was given, did you come and inform the House about it?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

5.28
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened attentively to the honourable minister’s speech. I know very well that before a child walks, they need to crawl and that before they run, they need to walk.

The minister’s statement has made it a condition that for any Ugandan to get an e-passport, as he refers to it, they must have a national identity card yet we know that acquiring a national identity card is next to impossible. 

There are people who applied for the national identity cards three months ago but up to now they have not received them yet you make it a condition for acquiring a passport. It would be okay if the national identity card was easily accessible.

I will give you an example. Six thousand Ugandans were placed at Rwentuha Sub-county in June last year. They were brought in from Sango Bay having been expelled from Tanzania. These Ugandans have no national identity cards up to now. They need to walk 45 kilometres to the district headquarters where they can apply for national identity cards. 

Everything that happens around that place, they are arrested as thieves because they do not have identity cards. Why do you make it a pre-requisite to acquire a passport? First simplify – (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement but I am a little bit perturbed by the fact that he wants to remove the passports we are holding and replace them with e-passports. 

The essence of an e-passport should be to facilitate travels and so it should be much easier and cheaper. However, when you look at the costs involved in acquiring an e-passport, it is going to be much more expensive to an ordinary citizen.

Most Ugandans have been failing to pay Shs 150,000 to get an ordinary passport. It is now going to be even more than double and worst of all to remove what we have been holding to replace them with e-passports. 

Therefore, the essence should be to make them cheaper and affordable by all citizens. Since it is going to be an East African Passport, it must be much cheaper with uniform fees throughout the region.

Madam Speaker, with those few points we need to look at it very critically before we take our final decision.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there an internationally recognised country called East Africa so that I can say I am an East African? (Laughter)

5.32
MR GORDON   BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is - let us consider the Ugandans who travel within the East African Community - I would like you to give me the statistical figures especially at one border posts like Malaba; how many Ugandans cross over to Kenya with passports and how many Ugandans cross over to Kenya with travel permits?

If you went to Malaba, you will find that those who use travel permits are thrice more than those carrying the Ugandan passport. Therefore, Mr Minister, what are you trying to cure? Ugandans don’t have passports and even national identity cards. 

You are rolling something bigger before you consider your citizens. Please consider the sovereignty of Uganda as the principle aim as to why we are in this Parliament. Thank you very much.

5.34
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Of course when the minister tried to justify the need for the e-passport, he attempted to convince the House about the need for Uganda to redeem its integrity. We all know our passports have always been forged by Nigerians and other unscrupulous dealers out there.

However, I would like to ask the minister why he decided to rush even before sorting the challenges at the NIRA. That is the national ID project. 

For us to qualify this new passport as an e-passport, we don’t need to again fill in forms, like the minister said. You only need to use your national ID. You don’t have to use the ID and at the same time go back to your LCI or LCV for signatures. That knocks you off, Mr Minister, for it is no longer an e-passport but an ordinary passport you still want to issue to Ugandans.  

Apart from the chip that you said is inside that passport - maybe that is what makes you think that it is an e-passport. However, the process doesn’t make it electronic. You need to reduce the process from all these five steps to one or two steps.

I would like to concur with my brother, hon. Magyezi, that for us to qualify this as an e-passport, we need to have a one –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for giving us a wrong report. The report we have here is wrong; it has not been developed in good faith and it is meant to discriminate Ugandans. You are talking of the many embassies - you have over 33 but you are only talking about four; how about the rest? I would like to begin at that point

Madam Speaker, there are so many issues that are involved and which are not good. When you ask I, David Abala, to reapply, it involves money and there are so many Ugandans who have ordinary passports and they are supposed to apply afresh. Are you going to refund their money?

Secondly, the “process” will involve interviews. In Uganda, whenever a word “interviews” appears, it involves money. Money is going to change hands. Now if the minister is talking about curing the element of corruption in his ministry, then in this case he is going to augment it - (Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give you is that although the minister has told us that the passports are being effected, he has not disclosed to us who the supplier is and where these e-passports are coming from. Otherwise it could be an issue that involves deals and making money. Therefore, could the minister explain to us the source and where these passports are coming from?

MR ABALA: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, the minister is using the kangaroo approach. This Parliament was ignored when the Heads of State discussed and agreed in Arusha or wherever they sat. They did not report to this House yet he is now asking the House to approve what he has brought here, after ignoring the House at the beginning.

In my view, we should not entertain this report unless he proves to us that he submitted a report here concerning what was agreed on in the Heads of State meeting. Short of that, we should shelve this report - and that means that the minister will have to come back with the original report or start afresh so that we approve the domestication of the process before we come here.

I don’t support what has been brought here. In my view, it is a way of destroying and cheating Ugandans and we should ignore it. Thank you.

5.39
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the minister for the statement. The provision that a national identity card should be a prerequisite to obtain this new passport is premature. Honourable minister, a few weeks ago, you established a new arrangement in this country that Ugandans who had not yet acquired national identity cards were given an opportunity to register. That was a welcome action.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that by choosing some embassies and missions where this exercise is going to take place is like conducting a pilot project. This cannot be a pilot project.

For instance, you have mentioned Washington DC where our embassy is but we have about 6,000 Ugandans living in Boston; do you expect them to fly from Boston to Washington or are you making prior arrangements with NIRA and other organisations to take services to these Ugandans residing in Boston?

Currently, with empirical data, there are about 65,000 Ugandans living in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and according to a record from the Bank of Uganda. According to the Bank of Uganda, remittances to this country through various financial institutions by Ugandans in the UAE by the Financial Year 2017/2018 alone amounted to $600 million - that is not a small contribution. 

You have mentioned Abu Dhabi but majority of Ugandans live in Dubai and they have been crying for a consulate in Dubai. What arrangements have you made to take services to Dubai where majority of Ugandans live? Otherwise, honourable minister, I think there are some things which you should put in order to ensure that this exercise can bear fruits. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.42
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report and I do not want to sound that it is a bad idea to have an e-passport.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs seems to have - first, a passport is an identity guaranteed by the State. It is the duty of every country to make sure that the holder of that passport is a citizen of that country, the country invested in that person; therefore, you cannot handle it casually. 

Most people have raised issues of cost - my passport expires in 2028; how do you make me - you are going to bring litigation for no good reason. I will sue you to refund my money.

Public policies must be well thought out. You do not just come with this. How many Ugandans hold passports? If they were just a few members of Parliament or people from Terego or Tororo –(Laughter)- that would be easy but this is about the whole country. You are going to cause panic; people will think that the old passports will not work. Are you prepared? People will storm your offices and the facilities will not be able to handle this. 

Public policies - you could not have ignored where a representative - (Member timed out)

6.45
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Busongora County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need clarification. On 10 January 2019, Uganda will launch the e-passport. As the East African Community, I believe we have data on when the other member countries are launching. May we know when these respective countries are launching so that we join them as they launch the e-passports?

Secondly, in this country, there are people who have lost their national identity cards. It requires a person to pay Shs 60,000 to get a new ID. Most Ugandans that have lost their IDs have completely given up because they cannot afford the Shs 60,000; how about the Shs 300,000 here? You have not mentioned, in the statement, what will happen when somebody loses this document. That might be another story which probably is more than the charge that is here.

Finally, about the interviews, you and I already have passports and we were interviewed; shall we queue again for a second interview for the e-passport? Thank you.

5.46
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to the minister’s statement and I have listened to my colleagues’ submissions. My observation is that they are opposed to this statement. I equally agree with them in all the four corners of thought.

I only want to add, as matter of clarity, to the minister that recently, we received a report from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development indicating that the ministry had licensed several companies to supply labour in the Middle East. These people have entered into contracts with our companies and the foreign companies and some for five years and others three.

As per the minister’s report, it shows that their passports will expire while their contracts are still running. How are these people going to come back and how are you going to reimburse these companies for nonperformance of the contracts since the labour will have been withdrawn technically by the operation of these passports? 

4.48
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Part of what I was to say, my honourable colleague has said it. However, it goes as bad as this; the people that we send out on labour export actually not only sign contracts but their passports are held by the employers abroad, where they work.

Therefore, if the period for holding their passports will go beyond the current period of phasing out the passports, how will they come back? 

However, you are speaking of January 2021. Politically, it would mean that any Ugandan who does not hold a passport or whose passport is not renewed to the e-passport cannot come back to vote. That is why they are selectively choosing which areas - did you hear of South Africa? Nothing - (Interjection) - I am sorry, then I did not hear it. 

However, that is suspect. Even us here, they can slap you with a political charge and they refuse to renew your passport and you cannot even take off. Therefore, there is political suspicion that we must cure. Why is it January 2021?

Let us go to the technicality of the process he was talking about; before a passport is issued, there must be personalization - this is capturing data. Before that, there is processing of that passport and before that, there is enrollment after you have applied; so, where is the e-ness in this process?

They are using this same process like the other paper machine-readable passport. Where is the e-ness in this? Technically, what that would mean is that once you feed in my data on the national ID, which is the bio data, then automatically the next is issuance and all these other processes are beaten down.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you made a point when you said that a passport is an identification of citizenship. Is there a country called East Africa? I am adding to that; by the time you say that this project is called East Africa - where is the East African-ness in this?

I see that you are trying to migrate our passport into an electronic passport but trying to use the name of East Africa. Where is the East Africanness in this and how does it help us to say it is an East African e-passport? I don’t see the connection. 

Madam Speaker, for all intended purposes, we are advising the minister. There are people like Mao who failed to vote or failed to be elected because of absence of a national ID and you want to push us again into a political quagmire up to 2021. Postpone your process up to after elections or we actually do not need it. I want to be a proud Ugandan holding a passport that belongs to me as issued by my country. There is no country called East Africa. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with the issues of management at the ministry. The Appointments Committee approved some names for the National Citizenship and Immigration Board but to date, they have not taken office. These are key in handling these matters; why has it not taken place? Thank you. 

On the issue that the minister has brought here regarding filling the forms; if we are moving towards e-passports, why are we still filling forms? My assumption is that by the time I give the data for my national ID, all the information with the ministry is with the Government. Why are we wasting time? 

In one statement, you said that we are going with e-passports and on the other hand, we are still going with paper work. What are we doing? You have all my information; it should be electronically interlinked. I do not need the RDCs, the LCs or interviews – you know who I am by the time you have my ID. 

If we are to acquire East African passports, let it be as and when my passport expires so that I get it at renewal. If I need to change it along the way, then let it be my decision but it should not be based on your dictatorship. Hence, that cannot be possible. Hon. Oboth has already stated that you will face litigation. 

Speaking of the diplomatic passport; diplomats by nature do not even pay taxes. Why would one pay for a diplomatic passport? This should be provided by the Government that is offering that diplomatic passport. You do not expect them to pay for it unless you are saying that that is the price the Government is going to pay in order to give Okupa a passport. 

Madam Speaker, back to the centres in Uganda; where are we putting the people of Toro and Bunyoro? Why do they have to go to Gulu, Kampala or Mbarara to acquire passports? Why don’t we have a centre in the mid-west – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, I was also going to ask where the Karimojongs will go. Must they really travel to Mbale? Consider transport and accommodation for three days in Mbale. 

5.54
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the minister’s statement. First, the East African Community is a regional inter-governmental organisation for partner states and there is protocol. To date, I do not think there is a formal legal framework that binds all these six partner States to become one State. Therefore, if we proceed with this move, we are bound to do a very unconstitutional process. 

Secondly, I do not know whether there is a move to de-Ugandanise us to the extent that we do it very publically. Honourable minister, you are aware that you have a lot of work in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. First of all, we have a procurement crisis. People have been benchmarking. They are losing jobs; we are not aware of – there is no board. 

The staff of the Ministry of Internal Affairs go to work with a lot of fear. If they see somebody in another office, they assume they are being reported. Therefore, there is something in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We need to investigate it properly before we do this hurriedly. There is something more internal than the Ministry of Internal Affairs that we need to exhaust before we get out. 

Honourable minister, the East African integration process at present is moving with a lot of suspicion. The summit could not take place in Bujumbura because one partner State could not attend. We have a crisis of membership; for example belonging to SADC and so many other things. 

At present, the integration process is not holistic and therefore, freedom of movement in terms of giving passports should be reviewed. It is a very serious national agenda and I request that the minister withdraws this so that we go back to the drawing board; sort out the internal issues first and then come back here. 

5.57
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like hon. Majegere suggested, this is a bad deal. It has actually caused acrimony in the ministry between those who were for it and those against it. Hence, that led to the interdiction of the other staff members. 

Madam Speaker, I think this is an unfair proposal; it is illogical, expensive, doesn’t make sense and is unattainable. I would like to move a motion that this proposal is thrown out because it does not make sense. 

5.58
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise with concerns about this proposal, especially among the children. Last week, I submitted on the Floor of Parliament regarding NIRA activities in Katakwi; registering children between zero to five years. The exercise totally flopped. The requirement to get this national passport is a National Identity Registration Certificate for Children. How will these children get the passport? 

Madam Speaker, it is a nightmare for one to acquire a national ID. I have voters who have lost national IDs and they are being asked for up to Shs 800,000 for a replacement. How will that happen? Thank you. 

5.59
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been discussed about this report. I only have about four questions to the honourable minister. 

    1. Honourable minister, before you came out with this proposal, was a research or consultation made to the effect that Ugandans are ready for e-passports? 
    2. I have seen samples of the e-passports on television, which means that they have already been procured. How were they procured? Was the PPDA process followed? 
    3. I know all procurements come with funding; so, who is funding this project? -(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is that today, the honourable minister and the chairperson of the Committee on Internal Affairs were invited to go and witness the handover of about 24,000 e-passports at the ministry. They already arrived in Uganda. Thank you. 

MR KASUMBA: Thank you for that information. Who procured them? Did we budget for them? If they have already been launched, what are they coming to do here? All those are questions to be answered. 

Finally, the report states that for one to qualify for the e-passport, one must have a national ID. In some countries, children get passports at birth. In Uganda, we have seen some kids die – (Member timed out.) 

6.01
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bughaya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This year, Parliament passed a budget. However, I do not remember seeing anything to do with a budget for e-passports or setting up new centres. I do not know where the minister is getting the funds from because this whole venture is very expensive. I think it needs better planning and proper budgeting. Let us wait and plan properly and execute this idea in the next budget. 

Otherwise this business of somebody sleeping and dreaming and then the next day he comes to Parliament to implement something must be stopped. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I have about three issues that I seek clarity on. 

The first one is the express fees payable. From the tedious process of applying for a passport and following your statement that when you pay Shs 150,000, you get a passport in one day; does that suggest that the Shs 150,000 is a shortcut to the tedious process of getting a new passport or renewal?

Like it has happened before, what would be our fate in the unlikely event that the East African Community collapses? Would those passports still be valid? Or if we opt to integrate the entire Africa, what would happen to the East African passports?

Thirdly, by consolidating those passports to the East African status, would we be at liberty to renew our passports in any of these countries in East Africa upon expiry? If that is so, you have not given us the infrastructure that would benefit us in the same line. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6:03
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report because he has opened the eyes of this House. We could not have known what is happening behind the scenes but now we understand. 

First of all, I think that when protocols are signed by our Heads of State, they are brought back to this House for domestication, which I think has not been the case on this matter.

I would also like to remind ourselves and the minister that a passport is a right for all Ugandans. It is not a privilege. Every Ugandan is entitled to a passport and there should be no attempt to hinder a citizen from getting a passport in anyway. 

We have had problems in this country with the national IDs. These problems are still on. Citizens out there, including children in schools, are still struggling to get identity cards and no effort has been taken to help these Ugandans. I wonder what the problem is. 

As somebody put it, these e-passports are trying to make us East Africans first and not Ugandans first. They want to de-Ugandanise Ugandans. Let us try to Ugandanise ourselves by strengthening our national ID and maintaining what we already have. After all, we have all the data in our – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I sense a serious legal issue. The Treaty for East African Corporation allowed us to issue passports for use within ourselves. I am trying to find out from you, who allowed us to move to other countries using those passports because the treaty has not been amended and the protocol hasn’t been laid here. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on your point? If we are wrong on that then obviously, the debate does not have to proceed. However, if we are right, then these other questions can be answered. 

I would like to explain to the Members about the East Africaness as presented here - (Interjection) - about the passports. The rest I can answer later, with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: I am interested in knowing the legal standing. Where did we acquire the legal authority to change the East African passport to an international passport without amending the Act?

MR OBIGA: That is what I want to explain. Madam Speaker, I must admit that the mistake I made was not to come with a copy of the passports we are talking about because – (Interruption)

MS BANGIRANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to insist to give information but now I must insist on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable minister to refuse to answer a question put to him by the Rt Hon. Speaker about the legality of bringing here a passport when the treaty has not yet been changed?

He goes ahead to tell the Speaker and the august House that he made a mistake not to bring the same e-passport. In the first place, who authorised them? Is it in order for him to smuggle a document and ask the Speaker for permission to smuggle that e-document into this House? 

Is it in order for the minister not to know that the East African countries are not yet federated and that some of those countries purported to be in East Africa are now in Central Africa?

Is it in order for the honourable minister not to know what is happening in the region? 

Is it in order for the minister not to know that we are moving towards having one African passport? What is the use of the national ID? Is he in order to stand here? 

Isn’t it in order, Madam Speaker, to throw this thing out? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Those are so many points of order; it is difficult to rule on them. However, honourable minister, I would like you to explain to us the legal status. Who allowed you to issue passports internationally? The treaty was about us and that one is okay. How did you move to international passports without coming here? That is what we want to know.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, this is exactly what I wanted to explain. These passports are issued by each East African country in their own names. Uganda is issuing its own passports. Kenya is issuing its own passports and has already started. Rwanda is doing the same. What is East African about it is the design that the East African countries agreed on during the summit; that the design - (Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, what is the domesticated law for us under which you are making these passports? Is it in order for the minister to meander, with all due respect?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is the legal status of your project? Internationalising the passports without coming here?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I have stated that each country is issuing each of these passports under its own domestic laws. The only difference in the current law under which they are being issued is for example, the Uganda Immigration and Control Act. The only difference is that the East African summit agreed that each of those passports should carry a chip. In that chip, there should be minimum data on each individual. 

Therefore, the legal basis is that each country still has its own mandate to issue those passports. The laws have not changed. Those passports do not read East African passports and that is why I said that I made a mistake not to bring it. It reads, “Passport” and on top, it has the Ugandan emblem. The Kenyan one reads “Passport” and on top it has the Kenyan emblem. Therefore, each of those passports is still issued under the national laws of each of the countries. 

It is only on the features that have been agreed on to be common –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to continue confusing this House? You have asked for the legal authority under which the honourable minister is now saying that these are Ugandan passports but they read East Africa. Can the honourable minister give us the authority under which he is issuing this Ugandan passport as he calls it yet at the same time, it is East African?
 
Is the honourable minister in order – is it enough that the Presidents have sat and said that the East African passports should be issued? Are there no legal procedures that should be taken to domesticate the decision of the Presidents for Uganda to own this passport and allow the honourable minister to issue this East African passport?

Is the honourable minister in order to continue confusing us and not owning up to his mistake? 

THE SPEAKER: You explain yourself. You know, there are so many gaps in this issue that raise a lot of questions.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, Chapter 17 on the Free Movement of Persons, Labour and Services, Right of Establishment and Residence under the East African Community Act under Article 104 states:                 

    1) The Partner States agree to adopt measures to achieve free movement of persons, labour and services and to ensure the enjoyment of the right of establishment and residence of their citizens in the community. 

Madam Speaker, this is regarding the movement and the issue of the e-passport, which you alluded to; that the issuance of the East African passport was for free movement of the East African Community citizens within the region. Now, the minister comes here and starts explaining that the word “passport” is not East African; he has not answered your question. 

The minister said that it was for free movement within the region. The question you put to him was when was this internationalised? Is the honourable minister proceeding right by dodging the question that you put to him of stating the legal basis of internationalising the East African Community passport which was meant for the movement within the region? 

Therefore, is the minister proceeding correctly?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think Ugandans would like to be satisfied about how you came to do what you are doing because we just read in the press that there are e-passports. No one came here to report after the summit; no one brought anything and no proposals for amendment of the treaty.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, you have raised legal issues relating to the legal documents on which these passports are based. I do not have those documents right now. 

In the circumstances, may I request that you give me time so that I bring those documents that you have raised to explain the basis of these passports including the directives of the summit, which you are concerned about; whether the directives were based on the laws or not. If they are, then I will be able to bring the laws in the House.

At the moment, I beg that we stand over this explanation until I bring these documents. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, it is important for us to know. We shall give him time. For now, no decision will be taken on this matter. We will wait for him to bring the right information.

MS CHEKAMONDO: What will happen because we have already seen it on television? It was launched and 24 e-passports were being displayed. Can we know what is happening? Is the exercise suspended? What is it about because Ugandans are not really satisfied? What was wrong with my passport because the moment you put your thumbprint anywhere whether you are in America or somewhere else, it will show everything. What is wrong with that?

I have been crossing to Kenya with my national ID without anything. What is special about this e-passport? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister said they will be issued in January. For now, nothing happens. Can you come back to us on Tuesday? That is enough time for you to collect the documents. 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, as you have said, the questions which were raised are quite many and they need quite a lot of consultation. I will try to be back on Tuesday but if I am not, for any reason, I will inform the Speaker. 

In addition, in my statement, I did not say that we are withdrawing any Ugandan passport. My statement is very clear. In fact, I said that if there is to be any stoppage of your current passport, it will be in 2021 and that is if we all agree and that is why I am here. For all those other issues, I will answer them when I come back on Tuesday or thereafter, as I will advise you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Item No. 5

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

5.22
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by three members of Cabinet. Proceed to the justification.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Briefly, Madam Speaker, the objective of the Bill is to;
 
i. 	Protect the privacy of the individual and of personal data by regulating the collection and processing of personal information; 
ii. 	Provide for the rights of the persons whose data is collected and the obligation of the data collectors, processors and controllers; and 

iii. 	Regulate the use or disclosure of personal information and for related matters. 

It is very fundamental for the sector and I feel it is urgently required to ensure that Article 27(2) of the Constitution is given effect. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I believe our committee has studied the Bill. Can we receive a report?

6.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Annet Nyakecho): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the sectoral Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015. I beg to lay the report, together with the minutes and proposed amendments.

Introduction

The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015 was read for the first time on 20 April 2016 and referred to the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance in accordance with Rules 127 and 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee scrutinised the Bill and hereby presents its findings and recommendations.

Background

The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015 is premised on Article 27 of the Constitution of Uganda that provides for the protection and promotion of the right to privacy of a person, home and other property. Whereas Article 27(2) of the Constitution provides that no person shall be subjected to the interference of the privacy of that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property, there is currently no comprehensive law to safeguard personal data by regulating how personal information is collected or to ensure that it is used only for the purposes for which it is collected.

Laws such as the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act, 2010 and the Registration of Persons Act, 2015, among others, have some provisions relating to regulation of collection and safeguarding of personal information. The frameworks provided under these laws are mere examples of the numerous scenarios of collecting personal information and how it may be safeguarded. In the absence of a comprehensive law regulating and safeguarding the collection and use of personal information, there is need to provide a comprehensive framework for data protection in Uganda.

Object of the Bill

The Bill seeks to protect the privacy of the individual, which also covers personal data by regulating the collection and processing of personal information; provide for the rights of the persons whose data is collected and the obligations of data collectors, data processors and data controllers; and to regulate the use or disclosure of personal information.

Methodology

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, Members can read the methodology. Go to the observations.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, let me go straight to the observations, as you have guided.

Observations

The committee studied the Bill and considered the concerns raised by the various stakeholders and made the following observations:

Right to privacy

Privacy is envisioned as a multidimensional concept which has been recognised both in law and common expression. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to privacy which forms an integral part of fundamental human rights. 

Uganda is also party to a number of international instruments that recognise the right. These include the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights. It should, however, be noted that this right is not absolute and thus should be regulated to ensure that its protection does not prejudice other constitutional rights.

Concept of data privacy and protection

The concept of data privacy requires that personal data should not be availed to other persons without consent. It encompasses an individual's right to control the collection, use, storage, processing and disclosure of his or her personal information. This information, which is usually of a personal nature, may easily be abused or misused in the absence of a comprehensive legal framework. 

The Bill, therefore, aims at safeguarding persons against misuse of personal data by proposing administrative, technical and physical deterrents.
Convergence of technologies
The rapid and ever-dynamic technological advances have made personal data easily accessible, which has increased concerns over privacy rights, hence the need for a law ensuring data protection. Over the years, the amount of data collected by the Government and private institutions as well as individuals has become enormous. There is, however, no central register for the various data collectors, processors and controllers to facilitate appropriate regulation of the data collected. The Bill, therefore, provides solutions to these lacunas.

Challenges necessitating the law on data protection

Uganda currently faces a number of challenges, which necessitate a law on data protection and privacy. Some of these include the fragmented regulatory framework on data protection and privacy, abuse and disclosure of personal data, use of personal data for direct marketing and high data illiteracy levels, among others.

The committee was informed that various institutions collect information which requires disclosure of personal data such as biometric details, place of birth, place of origin, names of parents, spouses or dependents, health status of individuals to mention but a few. This information often ends up with businesses, for example telecommunication companies, food stores, advertising agencies among others which send unsolicited messages or publish this data in print media, hence infringing on the privacy of the data subjects. The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015, once passed into law, will mitigate such challenges.

Study visits to the Republic of Mauritius and the Republic of South Africa
During consideration of the Bill, two delegations from the committee undertook study visits to the Republic of Mauritius and South Africa to benchmark on data protection and privacy law. The delegations interacted with several stakeholders. These included officials from the respective data protection regulators, telecommunication operators, communication regulators and data protection advocates. The information acquired guided the committee during the consideration of the Bill.

Lessons learnt from the study visits

    1. The delegations to both Mauritius and South Africa found that the laws regulating data protection are based on the need to protect the right to privacy of a person - both natural and artificial. This is indeed the same policy behind the proposed law in Uganda since it intends to enhance Article 27 of the Constitution.
    2. The delegation to Mauritius was informed that alongside the policy to protect the right to privacy, the other motivating factor was the need to enhance the country niche into a business process outsourcing-hub for its business partners in Europe and Asia. Consequently, the Mauritius Data Protection Act, 2017 was to a large extent influenced by the General Data Protection Regulations of the European Union.
    3. In South Africa, the motivation for the law was due to discussions that followed the enactment of their Access to Information Act. In this regard, South Africa decided to establish an information regulator to oversee the operations of both the Access to Information Act and the Protection of Personal Information Act, 2017.
    4. Transition to compliance with the new laws on data protection and privacy has been relatively smooth. However, from the regulatory and compliance point of view, the two countries are still faced with the following challenges:

    a)  Absence of regulations to clarify on interpretation of the Mauritius Data Protection Act, 2017, which has affected its operationalisation.
    b)  Inadequate funding and understaffing of their respective data protection offices.
    5. One of the key international standards for data protection laws is the requirement to have data protection officers in both private and public institutions that collect, control and process personal data.

Sustainable Development Goals (SGDs) and Data Protection 

Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnerships for sustainable development.

Indicator 17.18 requires that by 2020, developed countries should enhance capacity building to developing countries to increase significantly the availability of high quality, timely and reliable data disaggregated by income, gender, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographical location and other characteristics relevant in national context.

In order to achieve this goal, tracking progress on the SDGs requires the collection, processing, analysis and dissemination of an unprecedented amount of data and statistics at a sub-national, national, regional and global level. However, the absence of a common set of principles on data protection, privacy and ethics in several countries around the world makes it harder to use big data for development and humanitarian goals. These gaps complicate efforts to develop standardised and scalable approaches to risk management and data access. Subsequently, a coordinated approach is required by developing countries, Uganda inclusive, to ensure the enactment of regulatory frameworks for safe and responsible use of big data.

Specific Observations

Regulation of Data Protection and Privacy

The Bi11 under its memorandum proposes the National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U) to monitor persons and bodies collecting data and ensure that personal information is collected, processed, stored and used in accordance with Article 27(2) of the Constitution. This position is re-stated under clause 2 that defines the “Authority” under the Bill to be the National Information Technology Authority.

The committee received concerns about the mandate of NITA-U in respect of data protection and privacy. Furthermore, concerns were raised on the capacity and independence of NITA-U to ably oversee the implementation of the law and ensure safety of personal data.

Consequently, proposals were made from entities such as the Human Rights Awareness and Promotion Forum, Uganda Law Society and Bank of Uganda to the effect that a new body should be established under the law to handle matters of data protection.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, read the subject and the recommendations because Members have the copy of the report. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that;

    a) NITA-U creates an independent data protection office, which should report directly to the Board.
    b) The functions of the data protection office be clearly specified under the Bill to give clarity to the responsibilities of the office in regard to data protection and privacy.
    c) All institutions that collect, control and process personal data designate a data protection officer who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this Act.

Application of the Bill

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Clause 1 of the Bill be amended to widen the scope of application of the law to apply to all data collectors, processors and controllers handling data belonging to Ugandans outside the territorial boundaries of the country.

Protection of Personal Data Relating to Children

Article 34(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that laws shall be enacted in the best interest of children. Despite the fact that children have the same rights as adults over their personal data, they need particular protection when their data is being processed because they may be less aware of the risks involved.

The committee noted that the Bill does not have clear provisions that guarantee the privacy of children as far as consent is concerned. The law should be strengthened to ensure that parental or guardian consent is sought when collecting or processing personal data of children.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that a clause be inserted in the Bill to provide for protection of personal data relating to children to ensure that their right to privacy is equally upheld.

Madam Speaker, we have principles of data collection and processing, which Members can go through.  Allow me to go to the observations. 

Observations

The committee observed that the principles enlisted under Part II of the Bill are in tandem with the international and regional principles and the guidelines provided under General Data Protection Regulations, 2018 of the European Union; the African Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data, 2014; as well as the East African Community Legal Framework on Cyber Laws.

The committee observed that the principle of consent is a core condition of data protection, which allows the data subject to be in control of when their personal data is collected and processed. This in turn promotes the exercise of the fundamental rights of autonomy and self-determination. The committee, however, noted that the Bill does not make mention of the type of consent required from the data subject.

The Bill under clause 5(1) provides for several categories of personal data, thereunder referred to as “special personal data” that should not be collected by any person other than the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. The committee, however, observed that there are other categories of data such as health status of individuals as well as financial information of an individual that should be included under “special personal data” due to the nature of their sensitivity.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the term “consent” be defined under clause 2 of the Bill.

The committee also recommends that clause 5(1) of the Bill providing for special personal data be amended to include health status and financial information of the data subject.

Data Portability

The Right to Transfer and Share Personal Data

The concept of data portability connotes transmission of personal data from one data collector, controller and processor to another without hindrance from the controller to which the personal data has been provided. It allows data subjects to move, copy or transfer personal data easily from one controller to another in a safe and secure way without affecting its usability.

The committee noted that the Bill allows individuals to access their personal data. However, this is limited to ensuring accuracy and correction. The Bill does not provide for free portability of personal data from one controller to another, which in turn limits the data subject's control over their personal data. The committee is of the view that the Bill be reconciled with policies already in place that provide for this concept, for example, the Regulation on Credit Reference Bureau Service.

Recommendation

The committee, therefore, recommends that the concept of data portability be provided for within the Bill in order to ensure full maximisation of data collected to reduce duplication of similar data collected by different collectors and processors.

Penalties

The committee observed that the Bill under clause 8 provides for penalties for the offences there under. The committee, however, observed that the fines levied therein are not deterrent enough for corporations and thus there is need to provide for additional penalties.

Recommendation

The committee, therefore, recommends that a fine of not more than 4 per cent of the corporation's annual gross turnover be imposed in addition to any other penalties imposed under the Bill in case of breach.

Offences

The committee noted that the Bill emphasises criminal liability of persons who breach the law by providing for the offences of unlawful obtaining and disclosure of personal data. 

The Bill, however, does not provide for the offences of unlawfully destroying, deleting, misleading, concealing or altering personal data despite being prevalent breaches.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Bill should extend criminal liability to persons who unlawfully destroy, delete, mislead, conceal or alter personal data by providing for an offence and prescribe penalties for the same.

Transitional clause

The committee noted that the Bill does not provide for a transitional clause despite introducing new obligations there under. 

Compliance with its provisions will require the different stakeholders to review their internal systems and processes. Furthermore, it is a generally acknowledged principle that when a new law is introduced, the affected organisations and individuals need a reasonable period of time to consider and adapt to the new legislation.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that a translational provision be included in the Bill to allow data collectors, controllers, and processors and the other stakeholders sufficient time to align their mandates and processes within the new law.

Conclusion

The committee urges that massive sensitisation be undertaken by the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to raise awareness among the different Government ministries, departments and agencies, private entities and the general public of the new law in order to ensure compliance.

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of Members. You may debate.

6.43
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for a good job done. There are a number of issues raised in the report, which we need to reflect on.

First, on the proposal to establish an Authority to regulate and oversee data collection and management, we are aware that such authorities are in the process of being phased out. Don’t we run into the problem of establishing an Authority, which has no future?

Secondly, the right to privacy in terms of personal data, there are reasons and times when the state may want to inquire into your data due to public duty, national security, prevention of crime and others.

It is important that as we go into the detail of the Bill, we ensure that the right to privacy of an individual is ensured, for example, where they talked of data portability, cross-referencing and use of data by various users. If I collected it, the next user may not need to go back to the same data subject.

This is to maximise utilisation and to lessen duplication but again, we need to protect the right of this subject - my personal data regarding politics, religion, finance and others. I need to be sure that within the law, I will be requested to give consent to any other user.

It is not enough to say that data portability is good because it will ensure that we maximise use of data, still within that framework, you need to protect my right to privacy in terms of data use.

Thirdly, there is a tendency to zero in on data collection and processing and when you look at the report, we seem to minimise other processes of data management including data storage, dissemination and utilisation. 

At all stages of this law, we should ensure that this critical aspect of data management is ensured. It is not enough to talk about data processing and collection and forget that storage, dissemination and utilisation of my personal data is as important as its collection.

Finally, on application of this law to Ugandans, the chairperson in the report proposed that this should apply to even Ugandans abroad.

I propose that it should also apply to non-Ugandans living here. We should have the right to collect, process, secure, store and use their data within the confines of the law. It should not only be limited to Ugandan citizens but also non-citizens who are in our country. Thank you.

6.47
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for coming up with the Data Protection and Privacy Bill. 

We have heard about the challenges necessitating the law on data protection and we have learnt about the abuses of personal data including the place of birth, origin and others.

There is some data that is sent on print or social media by us. Recently, our names and phone contacts were posted on social media and I was scared because some of our personal data is being used to trail, con and do all sorts of things against us.

The origin of the leakage of our personal data could have come from this institution of Parliament to the public and ended up on social media. There is a big challenge because as members of Parliament, our personal data is not protected.

A lot of care should be taken in posting personal data on the websites and social media like Facebook and Twitter. I am concerned about how this law will protect the individuals who post their own data on social media. We sometimes post our own personal data including place of birth and phone contacts. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we have catered for identity theft. There is a phenomenon in Europe where some people steal someone’s identity and use it for even one or two years.

6.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the minister for this very important Bill. We need this law to protect individuals in this country.

In the Ninth Parliament, I remember that communication on WhatsApp between one minister and an individual was published in the press. Such information tarnished the name of that particular minister. This law is important because it protects individual Ugandans because your personal communication with an individual must not be known by others. This is very important.

I am also happy when you talk about the health status information. You realise other medical personnel have made it their personal business. You find someone moving around conniving with the medical personnel and the latter reveals the health status of an individual, which is very dangerous. It has happened in this country and we need to protect such individuals.

Thirdly, I would like to find out from the chairperson; right now, we have information and the body, for example, NIRA that is taking data of Ugandans. I would like to know how you are going to liaise with NIRA to make sure that the information of an individual is properly protected. 
It should not come as a way of following an individual. Some people may use it for a wrong purpose. Therefore, we need to liaise properly with people who are collecting data on individuals so that they are properly protected. Thank you.

6.52
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. I support the report and this Bill was needed like yesterday.

However, there are some issues where we would need clarity especially on what kind of data this Bill is providing for. For example, we have our Parliamentary Handbook with some of the information and data that concerns some of us but we have found this in the public domain. Is it part of the information that is supposed to be protected? 

At one time, I found a Member’s payslip outside Parliament with all the loans and others inclusive. Is it part of the data –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, colleague. Within this very environment, the Members of Parliament are very much at risk and we need protection. 

You go to borrow money from some agency and the fellow tells you; “Do not worry, I will not reveal. Even Magyezi has been here; it is not only you but even the minister, David Bahati has borrowed.” (Laughter) You wonder how much we are protected. You look at the media and you see information on private life especially of political leaders. 

Therefore, even if we had some misgivings on some parts of the law, this is necessary. Let us regulate this aspect but let us correct the issues therein. 

MR MBAJU: Thank you, colleague. There are also some people who give wrong data about individuals. Is that provided for especially for those who want to illegally take people out of the country? You find that he has given wrong data for one reason or the other.

When it also comes to the issue of the data that concerns children who do not have the capacity to give consent as to whether or not their data should be exposed - in the circumstances, the data is supposed to be given by their guardians or parents. Children do not have control over their data. 

I have not internalised the Bill well but if it is not provided for, then it is important that penalties must be extended even to parents that may give out information illegally or wrong data of the children to where it is not supposed to be. Thank you.

6.56
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the timely report. It has been long overdue. It touches on the lives of individuals when it comes to protection of individuals’ privacy. 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 recognises the right to privacy and calls for its protection. Article 27 (1) states, “No person shall be subjected to-

    (a) unlawful search of the person, home or other property of that person; or
    (b) unlawful entry by others of the premises of that person.” 

A lot has been mentioned. Many times, we have seen in the media people’s information being disclosed but this report is not so deterrent on the penalties and offences. What happens when someone’s information is put in the press without his consent?

Uganda being a signatory to several international conventions with privacy provisions, it is our duty, the Tenth Parliament to ensure that people’s information is protected. Short of that, we shall pass the law here but it will not protect the Members.

Data protection is a phenomenon to everybody. When you are doing business, you give information. When you are opening an account in the bank, you give information. You go to book online, you give information but if we do not protect all that information, it is not going to help us. Therefore, it is our duty to ensure that the data collected is protected.

Madam Speaker, digitisation of the world has increased the capture of data but it is our duty to ensure how it is being protected, held and stored. If we work on all those areas, we shall pass a law that is going to be binding to all citizens. Thank you.

6.58
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson and the minister for coming up with this report and the Bill respectively. We needed it long time ago.

Madam Speaker, there are eight data protection principles that the report has covered very well. These are;
 
    1. Fairly and lawfully processed
    2. Processed for limited purposes
    3. Adequate, Relevant and not excessive
    4. Accurate; 
    5. Not kept for longer than is necessary
    6. Processed in line with your rights. (This is very important)
    7. The data must be secure whether it is business or Government or any corporate entity.
    8. Not transferred to other countries without adequate protection.

The report, however, has not covered the exemptions that are provided by law. For example, the legal profession has some privileges. Even when you are cross-examining some witnesses like a married couple; if you are a husband, the law prohibits you from giving information about your wife in some circumstances. We need to provide for this in the report and also cater for it in the Bill. Thank you.

7.00
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report as it concerns development of technology in this country. Right now, when you look at our technology, we need to have regulations to control it.

The problem here is not lack of good laws but it is lack of implementation. We may come up with this law and it will remain in the cupboard without implementation. Therefore, what are we doing now? Why don’t we implement whatever we passed here in this House? It appears Members of Parliament are wasting their time. When it comes to this law, let us make sure that it is fairly implemented so that Ugandans become beneficiaries.

Madam Speaker, I get from the report that we shall have data transferability. What situation do we have to transfer data without informing the owner? How do you do it? Are we going to use it in terms of intelligence network or in which situation are we going to do the transfer of data? This is my question to the committee.

About the issues raised about having some people as data protection officers, my prayer is that once we get such people, they must be corruption-free. Once we do not train them properly, they can always give information, which is unfair and can implicate our Ugandans. Therefore, I beg that once this law comes out, it must have safeguards to protect this law. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Abala comes, honourable minister, sometimes when you go to the bank to apply for a loan, they tell you that you have a loan with other banks. How are you protecting that? (Laughter)

7.03
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That was one point I was going to raise. I am happy that you have raised it, so, I am not going to repeat it because it is not good for us to disclose or allow some entities and individuals to disclose personal data belonging to other individuals. It is not proper. 

I thank the committee for the very good report and I support what you have recommended. I only have some few concerns. The first one is talking about NITA-U creating an independent data protection office.” Could this be the reason why all the data concerning Ugandans is littered? You can even get it in Owino? If that is the reason and this is going to help us to cure that problem, then I have no problem.

Secondly, the issue of creating an Authority is where I have a question mark. I am confident that Cabinet discussed this matter. Assuming now - (Interjections) - may be you prefer I come there. 

Remember there was a Bill here concerning laboratory issue that was talking about an Authority. We threw it out only because it was talking about the Authority. I am not comfortable with that element of Authority again. 

Thirdly, the law provides for penalties, which is very good. My only hope is that this law does not infringe on the rights of Ugandans. If it is going to protect Ugandans, I am happy and I will be one of those who will be celebrating every day.

How will this law cure the element of hacking into people’s accounts? I would like the chairperson and the minister to help me know how this law will help us to cure that disease of hacking into people’s accounts such as Twitter, Facebook, WhatsApp and others.  If the minister will help me to understand this, I have no problem. Thank you very much.

7.05
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for this timely and comprehensive report. Uncontrolled data access, misuse, abuse and mismanagement can be a threat to the economy because it could erode the confidence of entrepreneurs and the business community in the system. Therefore, you have brought this report and it is timely for this country.

We are aware that there are many institutions in this country established by the Act of Parliament that are eligible to protect and keep data for individuals or entities. Some of them are the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Immigration Department, banks, communication companies like Airtel, MTN and others.

However, we know that with the advent of terrorism, it had become absolutely necessary to ensure that the country establishes the Financial Intelligence Authority. I believe it is not operational as it is only confined to money laundering, terrorism and others. However, in cases of litigations, I know that courts of law or the police or any other security agency can apply through legal means and get data of any individual or any entity.

However, we have evidence that some information could not be obtained through legal means and once you are in court, you are unfairly treated by taking that information that has been retrieved illegally to be part of evidence.

Therefore, when you bring in the penalties, it should cover all people who are responsible for keeping this data to ensure that these penalties are so punitive so that we can have data protection in our country as one of the most important things in guaranteeing privacy of our people and even those who are not Ugandans but are ready to invest here.

When you are opening an account in any bank, there is a provision for confidentiality. However, I know that some members of staff in commercial banks can avail to anybody these account details and one can establish - not through lawful means - the account details of any individual or entity. 

I believe this is where we need punitive measures against such flaws that abuse the system. I thank the committee for bringing this and I support the establishment of this Authority because it could cover many areas, which are additional, for example, to the Financial Intelligence Authority. I thank you.

7.09
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for a good report. A lot has been said but I would like to subscribe to the submission by hon. Katuramu. 

There is no doubt that there is need for a body to collect and store data and make sure that it is available for utilisation as and when it is needed. However, one wonders, if this Authority is established, how different will it operate from NITA-U and how will it coordinate the information or data that is held by NIRA? How will it coordinate the information and data that is held by NIRA? Statutory bodies that are by law allowed to hold data like the Ministry of Public Service, for example, and all the others that we can think about? 

How will it link with the archives that are held by different organisations and then, once that data is availed to this body as my colleagues have said, what safeguards are put in place to ensure that it will be properly stored and that there will be no leakage? And if the leakages are there, then what are the prohibitive, punitive measures for the individuals?

I do appreciate when people say that data should not be shared. However, I think the use of such data is that it should be used, for example, to prevent criminal cases. If you have three loans in banks, why should you take the fifth? 

Therefore, the banks should be able to share this data but without revealing it to individuals. In addition, we would have personal data regarding spouses and children protected. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the concern that we have too many authorities and with every authority that we establish then it goes with the expenditure. What value are we adding to the existing bodies that are holding data? If we put this in place, are we going to reduce on staffing levels in the existing bodies?

Otherwise, if those challenges are handled, there is no reason we should not have a body to hold our data and make sure - it gets surprising, Madam Speaker, that you go to institutions and you want data of two or three years but you cannot find that data there. 

Therefore, it is important that we have a centre that holds this data but we must make sure that we reduce on public expenditure by establishing such bodies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a number of Members have contributed but I think we should get better time for the Committee Stage. However, I do not know if the minister is ready to respond or he will respond tomorrow. 

7.14
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, I thank the chair and her team for the good report.

Before I answer a few specific areas of the issues raised, Members were trying to emphasise the importance of securing data, which is the primary objective of this Bill.

In summary, Madam Speaker, to make this law simpler, it is talking about three or four categories of people. One is the data subject and it is defined in the law; the data subject is you and I on whom personal data is collected and given out. For example, Madam Speaker, all Members of Parliament are data subjects of Parliament and I think Parliament is a data collector and controller. 

Therefore, one, the person we are protecting is the data subject because it is your personal data being given. The data controller and collector - we are putting obligations on them on how to store your data and how to use it. 

Madam Speaker, you raised an important point of identity theft. When you look at Part IV of the Bill, a number of sections guide on how to secure the data. If I give my personal data to the Office of the Clerk of Parliament, the law imposes responsibility on Parliament to secure my data, so that it is not stolen. As you rightly said, it is “identity theft”, meaning somebody steals information about my identity. 

Then the other cases of fraud which hon. Abala raised, that is cybercrime of hacking. Hon. Abala, you should be interested in this. That is why we have the Computer Misuse Act, which this Parliament passed. If you hack into an account and you commit many cybercrimes - quite often, Madam Speaker, people tend to think cybercrime is about curtailing freedoms but it is actually legislation for data protection. 

When you go to the bank and they say you have this loan and the other loan, the banks do that legally. They do that under the Financial Institution Credit Reference Bureau Regulations, 2005. 

Therefore, this law further imposes obligations on the banks to only use my data or my personal information for the purpose it was collected. That is within the confines of that particular law. If they misuse it, then sanctions - the committee is even proposing heavier sanctions, which we agree with. However, we will make some comments at Committee Stage.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, generally, in principle, all the technology people have been talking about - sharing on WhatsApp - what people need to know is that technology has brought excitement. 

All those pictures we share on our Twitter, you need to know that you go and click a button agreeing to the terms and conditions. Therefore, when you do voluntary publishing, then I do not think - there is an argument we have with the committee but we will resolve it later. 

If the information you have voluntarily published is used - I am a researcher, for example, writing about the most important people in the north and I want to know about hon. Gilbert Olanya and I find all his information on the Internet and I use it, especially from his verified accounts,  should I be held responsible? Madam Speaker, the committee has some proposals on that.
However, if it is not voluntarily published, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, my employer, Uganda Revenue Authority, my bank and my telecom service provider collects it for me. The law imposes on them responsibilities. If this law is passed, it will be a very strong piece of legislation. Thank you.


THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister and honourable chair. Honourable members, I want to ask you to read the Bill and the proposals - this is a very important law - so that when we come to the Committee Stage tomorrow, we do something robust for the country. 

I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
THE SPEAKER: We shall go to Committee Stage tomorrow. Therefore, House is adjourned to 2 o'clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 December 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
