Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 10 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The images that we have seen on television, on social media and those we have witnessed in the print media are very disturbing. This happened in Bundibugyo, and I would like to thank the police officer who singlehandedly rescued so many people from dying. 

We would also like to thank similar people who have tried their best in the areas of Bugisu. The mountains seem to be very upset and they are burying people every day. These things are going on as we speak. In the Islands of Bukooli, the water levels are rising and houses are being washed away. People are scampering for little cover in small places, waiting for rescue. 

We have a serious situation. The response system should be activated to deal with an emergency that is likely to take even longer. There was a debate here about two weeks ago and some money was approved - Shs 20 billion - to help handle the emergencies, although the emergencies are getting worse. If River Nile can overflow, things are not as good as they should be. The Government and all of us should begin designing a more resilient and vibrant response system to deal with situations because they are really causing suffering to people.

All our people in the low-lying areas are now under attack. People in the mountains are also under attack. We are about to have nowhere to go. I insist that our response system should be on high alert to rescue people so that we do not have so many deaths in such short a time arising from natural calamities. We should be able to do this as a Parliament and as Government to save our people. Many have died; I think it would be proper for us to rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We also pray for the recovery of those who have been injured in Bududa, for example. Even as they leave, the cracks are still there. Excavators have been sent in but we do not know how many bodies they shall be able to discover. It is a serious situation and we should do something about it.

Honourable members, there were Members who had requested to speak on urgent matters. I start with the honourable member for Manjiya County.

2.06
MR JOHN BATIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of national importance is in respect to the general displacement of the people in Bududa and the serious disruption of their normal life after these catastrophic landslides occurred.

Given that the voter registration and verification exercise is almost winding up, a number of our people are in Bududa Hospital. The causalities are quite many. You cannot expect those to go and check for their names on the registers. Even the survivors who are in places of worship, schools or at host families of relatives and friends are traumatized and in that state, they cannot make time to go and check for their names or even register.

Therefore, I am seek for your indulgence, Mr Speaker, and that of the House, to give a directive to the Electoral Commission to find it fit to adjust and extend the duration of time for voter registration and verification. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Another Member wanted to raise a supplementary issue on this specific issue of registration.

2.08
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to the rains disturbing people everywhere, the machines are also very slow and the network is disturbing. I even think the Electoral Commission is not following the law properly.

The Electoral Commission, in accordance with Article 61 (1) (e) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 18 and 19 of the Electoral Commission Act, Cap.140, started that exercise. The Electoral Commission directed that the general update of the national voters register would be conducted from Thursday, 21st to 11th of December, which is tomorrow, starting from 8.00a.m. to 6.00p.m. on each of the appointed dates, including weekends. However, because of what is happening nationwide, that has failed. Many people and voters are not coming in.

The Electoral Commission further pointed out that Wednesday, which is tomorrow, would be the cut-off date for registration of voters in Uganda. Registration and transfer of voters’ names from one polling station to another within Uganda will not be conducted after this date. The section of the law that the Electoral Commission is basing on does not give it any deadline to conduct this exercise. 

First, section 18 of the Electoral Commission Act states thus: “The commission shall compile, maintain, update, on a continuing basis, a national voters’ register, in this Act referred to as the voters’ register, which shall include the names of all persons entitled to vote in any national or local government election.” 

The section goes on to state, “The commission shall maintain as part of the voters’ register a voters roll for each constituency under this Act. The commission shall maintain as part of the voters’ roll for each constituency a voters’ roll for each polling station…”-.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we dealing with urgent matters now? Can we deal with the urgent matter?

MR BAMUKWATSA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I am concluding. By putting deadlines, the Electoral Commission is acting illegally since the law requires the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain and update the national voters register on a continual basis. They are not supposed to disfranchise those who are not yet 18 years of age as of today but shall be 18 years old either tomorrow or next week as they are completing tomorrow.

On this note, I would like the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to explain to this House why the Electoral Commission is working contrary to the law. I want him to assure Ugandans that all those who shall be 18 years old and registered citizens shall vote in the coming elections. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter came up last week and the issues that were raised had to do with the 10 forms per day that are being given at all stations that are doing this update. The forms were not enough and the officers were getting overwhelmed. We made a prayer here that the Electoral Commission should revisit all these things, intensify on supervision and correct these anomalies. 

Two, some computers, which were put in those places, were not working. Three, they were not registering people who are already 17 years and nine months or 11 months old, yet elections are in a year; in which case, they would have already turned 18 years. The Government Chief Whip said there were guidelines that were issued and if there were officers that were not following the guidelines, those officers would be corrected. However, we do not know whether they have been informed or made aware of the guidelines and what they should do. 

We also do not know whether changes have been made on the number of forms and if the computers have been replaced. That is what we do not know and that is why this issue is coming up again, and the deadline is tomorrow. The new issue that is being raised, which was also raised last year, is the issue of the deadline, honourable minister. 

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the deadline has been extended to 16 December 2019. In the meantime, we request that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is in charge of the Electoral Commission, comes here tomorrow to update the House and address the issues that have been raised, including the congestion, forms and all that. That is if Parliament is sitting - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he not coming today? He has a Bill on the Order Paper.

MR BAHATI: Given the fact that the issues have been raised now, we wanted to give him a few hours to prepare so that he updates the House with the right information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 	

2.14
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join you to sympathise with our people who have passed on, especially during this hard time.   

Mr Speaker, as you said, in Bukooli Islands, 13 villages have been affected by the water levels that have risen due to the rains. In all these villages, people are now being carried to the landing sites. Around 5000 people have been affected - 2000 in the islands of Sigulu and 3000 in the islands of Lolwe. 

It is my humble prayer that immediate action is taken because these people are being taken to the nearby landing sites, which do not have toilets. I think what is going to follow is an outbreak of cholera. Therefore, I would like Government to take serious action. 

In addition, as the water level is rising, we may not know what will follow in the other villages. Therefore, it is my prayer that this response team goes to the islands and makes sure that the affected people are given relief like food. Thank you very much. 

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we have requested the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to act as fast as possible because the whole country is affected. The only response that people want is for Government to be present and address these issues in the field. Therefore, we take note of your situation and we assure you that the minister will be there. 

I would also like to mention, as I said last week, that the resources are being provided to purchase relief food –(Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. A month ago, I raised a matter concerning the lives of three people in my constituency. The Speaker directed the Prime Minister to immediately intervene in Kapelebyong County. To my surprise, to date, the Prime Minister has not intervened. This was a situation where three people died and an entire subcounty was cut off. This is the second month and there is no response from the Prime Minister. 

I seek clarification from the minister as to whether, as a country, we have the capacity to respond to disasters affecting the country. Assure this country. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we are responding to the disasters that are happening within our means. We do not know how the situation will be in the future and we pray that it does not get worse. However, we are doing all we can to come to the rescue of Ugandans. 

As I said, we plan that every week, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should come and update the House on how far we are going because every day, there is something happening. Hence, every week, Government should be able to update the House. We cannot have these issues raised every day because it does not help. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Disaster is now nationwide. I would like the honourable minister to clarify if the structures in the districts and subcounties, referred to as disaster management committees, are still functional. Even in Aswa County, Paicho Subcounty, the water levels have gone up. Instead of us rising up haphazardly or individually, we could have the structures feeding the minister with information. In that way, the minister could make informed statements here weekly. 

Why are we so disorganised? Why do we have non-functional structures? Can you clarify if those structures are there or not? We always come up individually to lament about these disasters. Look at Bundibugyo; if these structures were there, people would be helped quickly. Thank you.  
MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we are not disorganised. We are only overwhelmed by the situation but we are up to the job. 

I also agree that the structures in the districts should be working. If we do not receive information on time, we cannot respond. Therefore, we appeal to the committees at the districts to attend to these issues and inform the centre as soon as something happens so that the centre is able to send a team to respond. 

Mr Speaker, we are going to be updating this House on a weekly basis on how we are handling the situation. Thank you. 

2.20
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am the shadow minister in charge of disaster preparedness and I join you and the rest of the country in mourning those whose lives have been taken. 

I have an urgent proposal to make, Mr Speaker. In the face of disaster, we cannot pray or simply begin to hope that the rains or disasters will stop. We need to take action. Updating the House should come after action has been taken. 

This is the proposal I would like to make: Bulambuli, Bundibugyo and Bududa are mountainous places and the rains are here to stay. The only thing we can do now is to find ways of relocating these people urgently. There was a relocation plan that was allocated funds in the past - Shs 37 billion. The status of that plan has not yet been given to Parliament, so we do not know the status of that relocation plan. 

In the meantime, I would like to propose that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees finds places where we can move these people as a matter of urgency. We are not forcing them because they have already been forced out of their houses.  Some have no places to sleep or even houses to go back to in those places. Why can’t we find alternative places for these people to be relocated? Schools have closed and we can take them to classrooms somewhere so that we do not wait to lose lives again. That is my humble proposal. I hope that the ministry can respond to that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, would you like to say something on that? 

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we will benefit from the proposal by the shadow minister for disaster preparedness. All ideas on how to handle this situation are welcome.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.23
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, it is sad for this country that disaster has caused the death of many of our people. Yesterday, at midnight, I got news that I lost one of my voters due to cholera because River Sio, which is in Kenya, burst into a sewage system at Busia-Kenya. Because Busia Municipality is at a lower level, we have many people who got sick and have been admitted at Busia Health Centre IV. 

It is my prayer that Government gives emergency attention to that problem because even a nearby school in Marachi and in the whole of Marachi village, there is fear that we may lose many people. I pray that the Ministry of Health puts up an emergency cholera camp with all the facilities to handle this problem. As I talk, we do not have enough essential medicines to handle this outbreak. 

In addition, I pray that the season we are in is better so that at every parliamentary session, the key ministers of the affected areas, majorly health, disaster and works, should always be in the House to respond to these issues and give updates to the august House. They all know that these areas have been affected but it surprises me not to see any of the ministers from the disaster preparedness department. They are leaving everything to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to answer what he does not know. 

Mr Speaker, we need an emergency response for the cholera outbreak in Busia Municipality and the district at large. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. The Government Chief Whip has just come in and she has not followed. 

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I agree that the responsible ministers should come here and I think they will be coming shortly. As I said, Government will be updating the House on a weekly basis. 

Hon. Macho, I am fairly informed on what is happening in the country; I am not ignorant of the facts. When the ministers are not here, Government must be available to respond to these issues. In most cases, hon. Ecweru keeps in the field so that we attend to these issues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you release the Shs 20 billion that was approved here? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Government is responding to these emergencies. The relief is being procured. Parliament gives us instructions and should give us time to handle your instructions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have councillors and chairpersons from Wakiso District. They are represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde, hon. Rosemary Tumusiime and hon. Peter Sematimba. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In July, you will recall that I raised a matter here regarding the presidential advisors who were appointed on 19 September 2016. Up to that time, they had not been paid their salaries and allowances. The honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, after we had passed the budget, gave a guarantee that the money was provided and they would be paid. To date, they have not been paid any single coin. It is embarrassing that such senior members of society who were appointed by the President can be treated to this level. 

For purposes of clarity, may I remind the minister who these senior citizens of this country are: Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, Dr Nathan Karema, Dr David Kazungu, Lt Col Anthony Kyakabale, Col William Omaria, Bishop Nicodemus Okille, Pastor Christopher Besweri Kaswabuli, Mr Victor Kobel, Mr Henry Makmot, Mr Ogwang Ochoo, Mr Michael Dramadri, Mr Maimuna Juma Yusuf, Mr Patrick Lajul, Mr Patrick Zikanshagiza, Mr Richard Kaijuka, Mr Concy Obima, Ms Kabasindi Anna Mary – unfortunately this one has passed on - and Ms Kagaayi Jane Frances. 

Those are the senior citizens who were appointed on 19 September 2016. However to date, they have not been paid anything. If the minister now has something useful, may he pass this information to these citizens together with the Minister for the Presidency because it is in her docket. This is embarrassing because this is the Head of State who has put his signature on paper and to date, these senior colleagues cannot be paid. They keep calling us and coming to our offices, begging.

Mr Speaker, I think enough is enough. Let the Government respect the signature of the President.

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I met some of the people that hon. Okupa has mentioned. I would like to assure him that the President was informed and his attention was drawn to this. Probably, the minister in charge of the presidency will have to tell us how the President responded. I also have some letters, which were written to me for onward transmission to the President. 

I would like to request that the Minister for the Presidency comes here and briefs us on what the President decided. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the President played his part and appointed them. This is about payment. It is now up to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  It does not require us to go again to the minister. 

I remember when the President was in Bukedea, some of them met him and he told them, “I did my part”. When he was in Tororo last week, again Bishop Okille and team were there and he said, “I thought you people had been paid.” The ministers in charge of finance and the presidency should help the President because this was budgeted for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The simple question is: Has the instrument been given to the responsible officers to pay? If the instrument has been given to you, why haven’t you paid? The issue of coming back here with a statement does not help anybody. All that is required is for those people to receive their payments. 

Honourable minister, is there an instrument to this effect that has come to your knowledge? When are you paying those people - from the date of those instruments?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we commit that these individuals will be paid in January.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INSTITUTE AN INQUIRY INTO THE STATUS OF THE UGANDA ASSOCIATION OF EXTERNAL RECRUITMENT AGENCIES MONITORING FUND

2.33
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to institute an inquiry into the status of the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies Monitoring Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded or you would like to present it first? Okay, present the motion first.

MR MPAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
“WHEREAS National Objective and Directive Principle No. XXVI enshrined in the Constitution is emphatic on the fact that all public offices shall be held in trust for the people, that all persons placed in positions of leadership and responsibility shall, in their work, be answerable to the people, and that all lawful measures shall be taken to expose, combat and eradicate corruption and abuse of office or misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices; 

AND WHEREAS Ambassador Ahmed Ssenyomo, acting on recommendations of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as a condition to lift the ban on exportation of domestic workers appointed Mr Yasin Abdulaziz Musoke as Labour Liaison/Consular Assistant at the Embassy of the Republic of Uganda in Saudi Arabia on 1 May 2018; 

NOTING THAT the external recruitment companies, on behalf of domestic workers, remit $70 per Ugandan to the account of the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies held in Stanbic Bank, which money is then transferred by cheque to Mr Yasin Abdulaziz Musoke’s personal account held in Stanbic Bank, Metro Branch; 

CONCERNED THAT the Labour Liaison/Consular Assistant for the Embassy of the Republic of Uganda was not only appointed irregularly at the embassy but has mismanaged the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies Monitoring Fund; 

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in a report presented to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and this Parliament stated that a monitoring fund was established as a condition for lifting the ban on domestic workers in 2017, but the fund is operating/existing under no legal framework and its expenditure is unaccounted for;

ALARMED THAT the phenomenon of externalisation of domestic labour in Uganda has caused untold pain and suffering to the jobless youth of this country and should not only be regulated but strictly monitored; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 

    1. Parliament suspends any further payment to this monitoring fund until the gender committee investigates and submits recommendations for proper management of this fund.
 
    2. The Labour Liaison/Consular Assistant at the Embassy of the Republic of Uganda at Saudi Arabia be suspended.

    3. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should answer for its failure to supervise this monitoring fund, leading to its mismanagement, yet it continues to force companies to pay the said amount of $70 per domestic worker exported or terminate their job orders. 

    4. The Ambassador of Uganda to Saudi Arabia should answer for his involvement in Yasin’s appointment.

    5. In light of the above, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should show cause as to why Parliament by this resolution should not suspend labour export of domestic workers since their safety can no longer be guaranteed.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded by the Members for Fort Portal Municipality, Kioga County, Lamwo District, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Mbale Municipality, Amuru District, Soroti County, Gulu Municipality, Manjiya County, Youth Representative Central, Mukono County South – there are many seconders. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly?

MR MPAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The monitoring fund was established on 9 March 2017 as a condition to lift the ban on labour externalisation of domestic workers. The 2005 roles and responsibilities of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development solely put it in charge of monitoring, inspection and oversight of labour externalisation within the country and in the destination country.

What is wrong with the fund? Mr Speaker, during the establishment of the fund, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development concealed information regarding the fund’s operations and implementation to this Parliament and to the public. The ministry further agreed with the labour export companies to appoint a labour liaison officer to control this fund. This officer was appointed as a public servant with an appointment letter, which I am going to lay on the Table, earning Shs 6 million per month, with gratuity, a free ticket and so on.

How is this fund facilitated? A total of $70 is submitted for each Ugandan domestic worker through their respective companies to the labour externalisation association’s bank account held in Stanbic Bank. The money is then transferred by cheques to the personal account of the labour liaison officer, known as Yasin. If each of the 185 registered companies in this country were to take a minimum of 50 domestic workers per month, it would be an equivalent of $647,000 per month. In a year, this would be an equivalent of $7,770,000, which is about Shs 28 billion. We have a six-month bank statement of Yasin’s account showing a deposit of $867,000.

How is this money mismanaged? This money is operating under no legal framework and mechanism of accountability. God forbid, if something happened to Yasin today, his family would inherit this money and there would be no legal repercussions.

Yasin makes 62 per cent of large-amount withdrawals from Kampala yet he is appointed to take care of Ugandans in Saudi Arabia; for example, between June and July 2019, he withdrew Shs 226,000,000 from Kampala as indicated in his bank statement. Yasin further uses this money to purchase shoes, perfumes, chocolates at duty-free shops as indicated in his point of purchase using credit cards. All credits on this account come from the external recruitment agency’s account.

What is being done in regard to the monitoring fund by a public servant holding public money on his personal account is arbitrary and prejudicial to the interest of the Ugandan Government. It is, therefore, my submission that the conduct of Yasin at our embassy in Riyadh - and any people further found wanting - is tantamount to abuse of office prohibited under the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, if this Parliament does not act the risk implication for Ugandans and the country would be that the welfare of our domestic workers abroad is not catered for. They cannot be re-expatriated back home when need arises yet there was a fund established. The duty of the country to its citizens is thus neglected and human rights are abused. As Parliament, we would be indirectly facilitating modern day slavery if we turn a deaf ear to our Ugandans’ welfare abroad. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Where is the seconder of the motion? Okay, hon. Alex Ruhunda seconded the motion.

MR MWINE MPAKA: Mr Speaker, there are documents I would like to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MWINE MPAKA: This is the appointment letter of Mr Yasin Abdulaziz Musoke. It reads, “I am pleased to offer you an appointment as a labour liaison/consular assistant at this embassy. The appointment is subject to embassy rules and regulations. 

In addition, the appointment will include the following terms of service: 

    1. Starting salary, Shs 6 million 
    2. Date of appointment, 1 May 2018 
    3. Probation period, six months
    4. Leave entitlement, 30 days
    5. Gratuity will be paid to you every end of two years of your contract.”

It is signed by Mr Ahmed Ssenyomo, Ambassador in Riyadh. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on the Table a bank statement of the External Recruitment Agencies of Uganda Association from Stanbic Bank showing deposits from various companies of the said amounts and how it is transferred to Mr Yasin Abdulaziz Musoke’s bank account. It is dated 7 November 2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that an original back statement?

MR MWINE MPAKA: Yes, it is certified by the bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MWINE MPAKA: From 3 January 2018 to 7 November 2019, this is US$ 822,356. The available balance is Shs 4000. This is Mr Yasin Musoke Abdulaziz’s personal bank account statement from Stanbic Bank certified by the bank at Metro Branch. It is from 2 January 2019 to 6 November 2019. The available balance is Shs 90,000. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Usually, we capture those records when they are going to facilitate debate. However, since it is a motion, we will see how to use that appropriately. Let us have the seconder of the motion before I propose the question.

2.45
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpaka for this brave step of getting evidence to this august House. 

It is very unfortunate that our Government officers can personalise Government. The act that we see here clearly shows that there is group of individuals who have now gained enough confidence to personalise public resources.

Mr Speaker, I have been seeing many people cry. There has been a public outcry about our Ugandans who are suffering out there. Actually, whenever I travel out of this country, I carry shame on my face when I see Ugandans being taken as slaves to Arab countries. We have graduated from the slavery of the Americans and the British and in this 21st century, we are being put into perpetual slavery by Arabs. This is a big shame. They even collaborate with Ugandans - the elite of this country. This is something we should condemn in the highest degree.

Mr Speaker, there are some external companies which do whatever they do with impunity. Recently, there was a gentleman - I do not think he was gentleman – who had a pistol and he used it to threaten everybody until that pistol turned against him and ended his life. There were videos of that gentleman terrorising Ugandans - people of my colour suffering in this century.

This is something that Parliament must assert itself on. We should combine our efforts and rescue our country from this shame. Recently, I had a chance to meet the quality assurance officers of all the universities in the country at Kyambogo and we asked them how they can allow their products to be abused like this. What type of education are they giving our people when, at this point in time, our young graduates only think of going abroad to do jobs that dehumanise them? There is something terribly wrong that we must fix.

Mr Speaker, this is something very small; I call it an iceberg. There is definitely something bigger than that. Yasin is just an indicator or a small signal that we must follow to unearth the rot that is going on when it comes to the externalisation of our labour. I beg that this Parliament constitutes a committee to investigate this in detail.

I do not know why the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has been so silent about these matters because they have been going on for a very long time. This is the time to find out who is behind this rot. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, the motion is for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle and not any special committee. Secondly, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has reported twice on this matter of externalisation of labour already. Therefore, it would not be fair for the record to continue reflecting the statement that has just been made by the honourable member that our Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is not doing anything; they have done quite a lot.

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to institute an inquiry into the status of the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies Monitoring Fund be approved. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now.

Honourable minister, would you like to start? She has requested -

2.50
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving the Government the opportunity to address this august House on hon. Mpaka’s motion seeking a resolution of Parliament to institute an inquiry into the status of the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies Monitoring Fund.

From the onset, I wish to clarify that the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies, hereafter referred to as UERA, is a private and non-public entity. It is registered as a company limited by guarantee under the Companies’ Act.

Mr Speaker, UERA is an umbrella body of companies licensed to place workers abroad under the Employment (Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad) Regulations that were passed by this Parliament in 2005. Regulation 69 (2) of the said regulations provides that the recruitment company shall be responsible for the faithful compliance by their foreign principles of all obligations under the employment contract and therefore be liable for any and all violations of the contract.

Accordingly, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Inter- Ministerial Committee on Externalization of Labour established by my predecessor, hon. Muruli Mukasa, recommended, among others, that the recruitment companies should complement Government efforts to monitor migrant workers abroad. Consequently, the recruitment companies under their umbrella body decided to establish a fund to support monitoring of migrant workers abroad as stated by hon. Mpaka.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is this fund that hon. Mpaka wishes to make a subject of parliamentary investigations. The instant motion is similar to the previous request by hon. Sseggona that the Speaker should consider instituting a select committee on the externalization of labour. 

Mr Speaker, in response to hon. Sseggona’s request, on 29 August 2019 you wisely counselled as follows: “This Parliament has received three different reports from three different committees of this House. The Committee on Equal Opportunities presented a report on the externalization of labour and they made visits to the affected countries. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development did the same and reported to this House. Furthermore, the Committee on Foreign Affairs conducted the same study, visited the same places and came back and made a report on the substance of what they found in the field” 

Mr Speaker, you further wisely advised this House thus: “Instead of setting up another committee to deal with these issues, our Committee on Gender Labour and Social Development has already studied this matter and the outstanding issues are clear. Therefore, I will not set up a select committee to deal with this issue. However, I have substantively referred outstanding matters to the Committee on Gender Labour and Social Development to handle and come and brief the House”

Mr Speaker, it is our view in the ministry that the UERA funds are a private matter and are therefore outside the ordinary purview of Parliament. Should this view not find your favour, then the issues raised by this motion should, in line with your 29 August ruling, be referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, as directed by you, prepared a preliminary report and I have a copy here. I think the Members have copies too because it is on the Order Paper. They will prepare a final report in a month’s time. I would, therefore, advise hon. Mpaka to spare no further moment to declare his interest to interface with the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Mr Speaker, for emphasis, on 29 August 2019, you ruled that all outstanding issues related to externalization of labour should be handled by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. The place for the issues raised by this motion is therefore the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I, therefore, pray that you direct the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to consider this matter among other issues it has handled on externalization of labour. I will present myself with detailed responses to what hon. Mpaka has raised in that committee. I submit.

MR MPAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister says that the labour externalization agency is a private company. However, the role of monitoring our Ugandans, according to the 2005 labour externalization regulations, is solely under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. If she is clearly stating that companies are now handling monitoring, it is more less saying the lives of our Ugandans are now in the hands of private companies.

Secondly, the minister has gone ahead to even warn companies that do not pay this money that she is going to terminate their job orders. I have a recording which I am going to lay on the Table. She stated in a meeting held recently with the labour export company directors that the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Labour Externalization recommended that the ban on labour externalization should only be lifted after a mechanism of monitoring migrant workers is established. That was a condition.

Furthermore, lifting of the ban by Cabinet on 9 March 2017 was also done on the understanding that the recruitment companies would complement Government’s effort financially to monitor workers deployed abroad. However, it is now clear that some companies are undermining this financial obligation. So, no company in line with the Cabinet decision will participate in externalization of labour without undertaking this monetary payment.

She furthers says, “accordingly, all companies that have fallen short of that financial support expected of them under the monitoring mechanism must ensure they make good as soon as possible or have their job orders terminated because I committed myself to Cabinet and Parliament”. Therefore, Mr Speaker, what interest does the ministry have in a fund it claims it does not have authority over? (Applause)       

Secondly, why is a public servant holding this money on his personal account if it is money for a private company and a private association? (Applause)

MS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am requesting that this matter be referred to the committee because I will also be able to show that hon. Mpaka is presenting information here which is skewed- (Interjection) – Yes! I will present. Can I be protected, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS MUKWAYA: I do not have the regulations here now. The regulations Parliament passed place the responsibility of monitoring on two bodies. With regards to the ministry, I have to monitor whether the company where we have placed our children is complying with the contract that was signed. I must also find out, using the embassy, whether the companies that have requested to work with us are really genuine and not briefcase companies; using Government to Government. This Parliament decided that placement will be done between companies and not Government. I was not here at the time. However, as the minister, I am implementing the law as you gave it to me. 

The reason I am requesting you to refer this matter to the committee is that many people are concerned about these children and not how much money you have given me to do the job. Referring this matter to the committee would enable this Parliament to get information; we would know what is available for me to do the job and what I require to do the job.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that when I appeared before the committee, we submitted our manpower requirement, our requirement for office space and all that we needed to make this industry very viable. I was promised a supplementary budget but to my surprise, this money is not there under the supplementary request before Parliament. I am hoping that when we interface further with the committee, it will concretise their recommendations to this House so that you give me the money. 

My mandate, as the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, is to create employment for our people. Government has put in place the Youth Capital Venture Fund. Government also put Shs 100 billion in Centenary Bank, which was exhausted. We have the youth fund and other things. However, for externalisation of labour, I am appealing to you; it creates US$ 600 million per month, over and above what coffee brings, because coffee brings US$ 550 million. 

Therefore, we need to organise this industry in order to take those children who cannot find employment here in Uganda to do a better job out there. That is the only interest of the ministry. However, if there are any other interests that people have evidence about, we shall take them up and investigate. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I guide? The debate is not on the creation of another committee because the mover of the motion says, “Parliament suspends any further payment of this monitoring fund until the gender committee investigates…” The reference is to the gender committee, so we are not talking about another committee. 

Honourable members, I think we have made rulings on this. On this particular issue, we have already made a commitment to them and we are not going go back on them. We are just going to streamline the issues which should be dealt with by the committee, if we so wish, and then they will handle it. We are not going to create a select committee. I have already ruled on this matter and I do not want to rule again. I do not like repeating myself. 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas the motion by my brother says that the gender committee should investigate, clearly the response of the minister shows she is an uninterested party. I am of the view that in order to serve the interests of the parties involved and for the sake of justice, we should create a select committee. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made a substantive ruling on this matter and I have seen no justification to depart from my previous ruling. I stand with my previous ruling on that. Let us debate the subject of the motion, please. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeing properly, honourable? (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: My apologies, Mr Speaker. The motion, as presented, heavily impacts on an individual. The authenticity of the documents that have been presented need to be verified and established. 

Madam - Mr Speaker, I have taken long without getting the opportunity to make a presentation before you, Sir, so I apologise. If you open debate further, there is a likelihood that the discussion in this House will move in a manner prejudicial to one of the parties to this motion. Therefore, I would like to move as a point of procedure that may it please you, now that you have made the decision for this matter to go to the committee, to let the matter go to the committee where the individual or individuals concerned will make their case. They will be heard, documents will be verified and a presentation from the committee will be made before the House and then we can debate. This is my prayer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The synopsis of what you are proposing is that we adopt the motion as it is. Is that the essence of your prayer - that we just adopt the motion as it is and proceed? 

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, and we refer it to the committee. Mr Speaker, refer to the committee, as is in the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable minister is suggesting that we adopt this motion as it is and forward it to a committee. However, I had already proposed the question, so let us have a limited debate and draw out the areas.

I have guided on this matter before that one, it is a new industry; two, there are people who are abusing the procedures; three, there are children who have had the opportunity and fortune to actually find good placements and they have worked and earned money; four, there are children who have landed badly and have been mistreated and some of them have actually been tortured and died; and five, there are also children who have gone on their own without going through any agency or going through agencies that are not regulated. Hence, the issue is about regulation. There are benefits to this but there are also challenges with it. 

We had asked the honourable minister to clearly guide on this process of how they regulate - protecting both the interest of the people who need to find work and earn and their own personal securities while they are placed in those foreign countries. I think this is what we had agreed on then. 

The issue that comes up now today is that in the process of creating these regulatory mechanisms, funds are being demanded from the companies that are formally dealing with this and have authorisation from the ministry. Those funds are being collected in an account, which is managed by an employee of the Government of Uganda. There seems to be concern with the way the money is being managed. 

Does it fall within the ambit of Parliament to find out if citizens collect money and put it together and entrust it with the Government department through one of its employees to handle? If there is mismanagement, should this Parliament be concerned? I think the answer is yes, this Parliament should be concerned, but in the process of doing it, we should not cause prejudice where there should be none. We should deal with the issues as they are presented and find an answer that solves the problem but not extends the problem. Are we together? 

Therefore, our debate is in this area. We are not going to go into a general debate because we had that before. We are going to debate what is presented in this motion and debate starts now.

3.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the minister for her response. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is issuing licences to some people to export Ugandans. In short, this is slavery. If you have taken the time to go to the ministry –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it is to externalise their labour; let us use the language of the motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, to externalise some people to go and labour and others to be slaves. Mr Speaker, if you have had an opportunity to go to the Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, you will find two categories of people there; there are Indians and Pakistanis asking for work permits and then there are Ugandans looking for passports to go and work outside the country. Why do we give permits to foreigners to work here while our people are taken out to become slaves and even be killed?

I thought the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was the driest place. However, today I have confirmed that it is not, and I have asked my brother, hon. Werikhe, to become the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development so that we also “eat” this money. I did not know that there was money in this ministry. To tell us that between 1 July and 31 August, they had withdrawn US$ 221,000 - To do what? That is why I am saying there is a lot of money yet I thought that this was a dry area.

The money they are taking is from these poor girls and boys. It is not that the agencies pay, because they must collect money from these poor people and remit it. Those who employ them say, “We paid for you and so you must work or else you are killed.” People are selling their property to go outside the country to look for jobs and part of the tax is given to this individual who is collecting this money. 

Mr Speaker, don’t you think that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has abused the power we gave them? If they wanted this money to stay in the ministry, we would have come and created a vote for them. We would have said that there will be a fee for everybody who goes out and the money will be collected and banked on the Consolidated Fund. In case there is a problem, we would go back, draw the money and bring these people back. 

When somebody is given a work permit, they tell them to deposit money for the return ticket. When you deposit the money, it is collected by Bank of Uganda and it is never touched. In case that person is to be deported, they withdraw that money and use it. We do not appropriate it; it stays on an account. If it is a deposit, it would not be wrong for us to have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development collect this money. In case there is a crisis in Saudi Arabia, the person involved would be brought back using that money.

Mr Speaker, we have confirmed that many people in this House, especially ministers, are the ones who own these companies and they are the ones “eating”. That is why they do not want us to form a select committee. They want us to go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that they have interacted with and will continue interacting with. 

We would like to form a select committee to look at the bank statement only. Let us leave the gender matters and look at the collection. I would like to propose that the select committee should look at the tax, which went on an individual’s account. Let us forget about those who suffer or pay and focus on the income. We should find out who was withdrawing this money at these frequent intervals and for what.

Mr Speaker, you may recall the time when they were moving the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I used to have a friend in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is now the Deputy Attorney-General. He wanted it urgently and they took it. After a short time, they transferred him to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and he wanted to take the fund back –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has told that blatant lie to this august House. Well aware that it was a deliberate and well planned Cabinet decision to transfer the monetary aspects of NSSF from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Cabinet directed me, as acting Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development then, to effect the Cabinet directive, which I was duty bound to comply with and I did comply with. 

When I was transferred from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – I would like to challenge hon. Nandala-Mafabi to lay on the Table any evidence that I, at any one time, sought to claim back NSSF from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Mr Speaker, is it in order for my former good friend to stand before this august House and tell a blatant lie that when I was transferred from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I sought to claim back NSSF when I did not? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it you? (Laughter)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, the precursor to this statement and an earlier statement of the same honourable member confirms that he is referring to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a saying in Acholi that when dogs are mating and you throw a stone, the one that makes noise is the one that has been hit. (Laughter) There are very many of us here but you can see the one who is coming up to – I think those are factual matters for correction and I think you should correct your records. I cannot rule the honourable member out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I had not known that you are the one. Thank you for telling the public that you are the one who took NSSF to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at that time. We have been looking for the person who took it; we had not known but now we know him. (Laughter) Since you said “my former friend” – although we are still friends - let me also say “my former friend”. 

Let me make the record clear. Everybody wanted NSSF to go back to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and you saw the war. The Attorney-General knows what we are saying. Having said that, now I can confirm that the reason you kept quiet in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is because you have got something to make you busy that you cannot follow NSSF. Therefore, I can withdraw that and say that you are not the one who took it or wanted it.

Mr Speaker, the Ugandans who are suffering are our children and the earlier we sort this out the better. If we are paying money for an individual to benefit, it is very dangerous. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has done its part. We want to form another committee. I would propose that maybe the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should handle the matter. Let us give it to another committee. We have given it to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development three times. If they had solved this problem, this would not have come up again. We would like to assume that they saw the bank statement and kept quiet. Did they see it or not?

Mr Speaker, it is only people who have died who do not change their decisions. I would like you to change your wise ruling because here it says that we should institute an inquiry. They never said the inquiry should be done by the committee in charge of gender. Let us come up with a five-man team to look at only one aspect – the bank statement. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development can then continue with the issue of labour. We are interested in the bank statement and the owners of these companies.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is common knowledge that the people who are running these labour companies are highly connected. Some are ministers and we have evidence to this effect. Some of them are MPs. Most of them are actually MPs and ministers. Those who are ministers alone – like my brother here – cannot do much. 

We would like to find out why these ministers who have formed these companies are happy that Ugandans are suffering. Money is not everything. You can use it to buy something but it will not buy life. We should put a stop to this money you are eating because it is very bad for our people. Why can’t we say the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development itself gets involved in the exportation of labour instead of putting agencies which are there to finish our people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request to make three or four things clear. I wish to remind the House that about three months ago, you directed us to investigate issues to do with externalisation of labour. I would like to inform the House that the committee has been doing this work with vigour and without fear or favour.

I would also like to inform this House that you had directed us to produce a preliminary report within two weeks. That report was produced and sent to the Members’ gadgets. That report is evidence that we have been doing our work, as directed by this House. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to say that the issue of Yasin and the movement of money came to our attention during our deliberations on his matter. However, at that time we did not have the amount of evidence that hon. Mpaka has laid on the Table. Due to lack of this evidence, we could not include it in our report.

Lastly, I would like to say that if the information provided by hon. Mpaka is credible, we have the capacity, means, skills and experience to study it and report back to this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we debate the motion? Let us hear from the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Hood Katuramu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the guidance you have given this House about labour export. I implore Members that we should not only look at the negative but we should look at the positive aspects of this labour export. 

We are aware that we have a big number of Ugandan youth – slightly above 100,000 – who are earning a living through this labour export. I am also aware, through empirical data I gathered from Bank of Uganda, that Ugandans working abroad are remitting $600 million annually to our economy as of financial year 2017/2019. We are also aware that there are some setbacks that need to be tackled. 

Mr Speaker, as the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we are at the tail end of the labour exportation process. Whenever they have any constraint, they report to our embassies and our embassies do not have the capacity to handle many of the issues that these young people report.

I have written to the Prime Minister to cause an inter-ministerial meeting involving the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as well as the ministry in charge of security, which vets the young people going abroad. I am yet to receive a response from the Prime Minister. It should supplement the decision that the Speaker has made that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is responsible for overseeing labour, should undertake this. 

I therefore, implore you, colleagues, that because labour export is a new business in this country - it is actually less than 15 years –(Member timed out.)

3.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This business of labour externalisation is very lucrative business. That is why you see it is failing to get resolved because a lot of money exchanges hands.

Mr Speaker, I was taken aback when the minister in her presentation said that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is in the final stages of concluding the report and she has a copy of the preliminary report. That sent doubt in my mind. How did the minister access the preliminary report of the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee has shared it with Members. That is what the chairman said.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the chairman confirmed what the minister had said. In the committee that I serve, we do not share reports of the committee, especially those of an investigative nature, with the minister before they are presented to the Speaker and before they go onto the Order Paper. Therefore, that sent some doubt in my mind. 

If I was the minister, I would not be fighting the decision on who should handle this matter. That is why I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we need a select committee. At an appropriate time, we need to move an amendment to the motion –(Interruption)
 
MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, my senior colleague. Mr Speaker, it is important to clarify the picture being portrayed here, that the report reached the minister before it was presented to the House. This report was officially submitted and all Members got copies. If you have not got it, check your iPad. 

The minister also accesses the report the same way we do. Therefore, if she has a copy which you and every other Member have, then what is the problem with that? The report was and is still on the Order Paper. Everybody has the report, which the minister has; it should not be portrayed that it was passed to the minister and Members do not have it. I just wanted to make that information clear to you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I think you are referring to the final report. What the minister referred to is the preliminary report. Is it the preliminary report that you submitted or not? However, that is for another debate because we are talking about preliminary reports and we do not submit preliminary reports but final reports. Anyhow, we shall discuss that.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the issue of the bank statement was part of the terms of reference. I am asking this because if it was not part of the terms of reference for the committees, then we need a select committee to specifically deal with this matter so that we resolve the issues surrounding this gentleman called Yasin, who was appointed by the Deputy Ambassador, Mr Ahmed Ssenyomo, to address this matter.

Mr Speaker, the reports of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of the third committee would be working documents for this select committee. This would enable us address this issue of monies, which hon. Mpaka - whom we want to thank for that investigative eye - has brought to light; he has told us what is happening with the monies that are collected.

Mr Speaker, I would like to join hon. Nandala-Mafabi in pleading with you to institute a select committee to deal specifically with this issue, so that they go deeper and understand it. Let it be given a timeframe within which to submit this report to this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, if you look on the Order Paper under business to follow, item No.9 is the motion for adoption of the preliminary report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on externalisation of labour. Therefore, let us not create unnecessary suspicion around this subject. It is a public document and has been uploaded on your iPads; that is how the minister got access to it.

3.35
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono North County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really would like to thank our honourable colleague for coming up very clearly on the issue of externalisation of labour, which has become a problem to many of us in our areas. I rose on this Floor on this issue after I travelled with hon. Nsereko and we even used our own money to transport our Ugandans who were suffering.

Mr Speaker, if there is a fund, emphasis should be put on that fund. No one is saying that external labour should be abolished. We know and appreciate all the efforts of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take our sons and daughters to work in some countries. However, when it comes to those ones suffering and they are not being helped, yet there is a fund and we hear that someone is withdrawing money from that fund, that is where our emphasis should be put. Who is that person? Why don’t we tell the ministry to recall that person from that foreign embassy as he is a civil servant?

Mr Speaker, many people are suffering because they sometimes go with high expectations but when they get frustrated, they want to come back and they cannot –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Thank you very much, hon. Ssenyonga, for giving me the opportunity to provide this information to the House. I had intended to raise this issue as an issue of national importance. However, when I saw it on the Order Paper, I now have this opportunity. Thank you, honourable member.

You are talking of the fund but the gravity of the problem we are talking about is presented in the case of a son of Uganda called Kamada Lusiba. He is from the Kamada Lusiba family in Mpigi. As I speak, he is hospitalised in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). He went as one of those seeking for a job in the United Arab Emirates.

His family cannot raise Shs 150 million right now required in that country to treat this son. He just collapsed yet they cannot find anything wrong with him. They have tried to reach the embassy of Uganda there but they say they cannot help in any way. Therefore, the family is stranded and they are asking hon. Kyambadde and a team from Mpigi to help them find a way of transporting their son back home. 

There are many such cases, Mr Speaker, and that is the information I wanted to give. Therefore, if such a fund is created, it would help such people. I wanted to bring this to the notice of the Member of Parliament from that place. Thank you very much. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, definitely we want to support externalisation of labour but when you look at the many companies the ministry is registering, you also wonder why. As we speak, companies have gone beyond 173. One might think you are watching football because every television station you try to switch on, you must see a company advertising with different appeals. They will say, “You do not need to come with a passport; we are going to pay for everything”, yet this is not true.

Therefore, if we have money for monitoring, let it be used by the ministry for monitoring so that we can get the best out of that arrangement, which is not bad. However, there is no way you can say that 173 companies - and many that are still registering. Some are even in areas you cannot identify; they will just tell people to go to Mengo and as you go down a certain road, you will find them. 

Mr Speaker, we feel that the ministry should do more if we are to continue solving the problem of unemployment of the many youth of this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

3.40
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpaka who has also been on the Gender Committee for some time, for raising this issue. 

Mr Speaker, when we interacted with some of the officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, one of the challenges they raised was that some staff at some of these missions collect their own money to look after these people who go out there.

Therefore, with information that there is actually a Fund, the staff would not be going through if the money was being utilised well. It was a very bad revelation especially from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

That brings me to the issue of how the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Gender are working on some of these issues. Mr Speaker, I also wanted to briefly clarify - I am a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and indeed, we were given instructions to give a brief report because we needed more time to get more information. 

Our terms of reference did not specifically talk about this particular document that has come up - which is okay; if we can get a specific committee just to look at this particular issue, it is also okay. However, I would like to agree with the chairperson that the committee has the will to work on this.

However, right now, we are dealing with the matter that was given to us by this House and that is looking at the challenges around the issue of externalisation of labour. This is the clarity I wanted to raise and to say that this is a matter that concerns all of us because many our children are actually suffering.

If you consider the money they spend before they are finally recruited on top of the money that they are now being requested to give, it is a lot of money, which needs thorough investigations.

I am also aware that the committee on gender, in the Ninth Parliament, made a very elaborate report on the externalisation of labour but it was not implemented. I wish the minister had implemented it; maybe we wouldn’t be dealing with some of these issues.

Therefore, this particular –(Member timed out)

3.43
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of leaders and Ugandans have accused the youth of this country for being lazy. It is said all over that we do not want to work, that when the young people out there are given jobs, they do not want to take them up.

Here is  a situation where young, bold people who are willing to work have chosen to leave their country and go out there and find something to do despite the fact that they went to school, tried everywhere - this is a good sign that many Ugandan youth are willing to work. However, it is a big challenge that our own have chosen to let us die in their hands. Mr Speaker, a number of youth have died out there not because they are guilty of anything but because they have no one to run to.

When they report to the authorities for help and they have genuine cases like situations where their passports are confiscated, these people are always told that there is no money to either transport them back or to bail them out. Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those Members who appreciated the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development - they have done great work. If it was not for their work, maybe, we would not have known all this.

I request that we get a select committee that will look into this. This will bring peace of mind to all of us and those who are suffering –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, honourable colleague and Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that we are concerned because we know that the externalisation of labour is not only in the United Arab Emirates. We have many Ugandans going to the United States of America, the United Kingdom and South Africa to work, why are we not concerned with where they are going? These people were formally selling us as slaves.

Secondly, the youth are being deceived. From here, they deceive them that they are going to work as nurses or in the restaurants but on getting there, they turn you into a slave. They take your passport and other documents. Even at your place of work, you are not connected anywhere. Therefore, in the end, they are treated as slaves and that is why we are really concerned. Thank you.

MS BABIRYE: Thank you my sister for the information. Mr Speaker, I still emphasise and request that let us have a select committee that will look into all these issues maybe country per country such that we can come up with the best solution. Thank you.

3.46
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly support instituting a select committee to work on this issue to ensure that our children are protected. If we do not work on that, even the good opportunities that they have to work abroad are destroyed.

Canada is looking for young and energetic people to work there because they want labour. However, because of what is happening elsewhere, they are even scared of taking our children. I, therefore, strongly recommend that let a select committee be instituted, the processes and procedures laid down so that our children are protected wherever they are.

When you go abroad, you find that people who are working in Canada, USA etcetera are not natives but immigrants and they are protected. Why is it that we cannot protect our own people? Thank you.

4.48
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Mr Speaker, human resource is a strategic resource for any country. When you hear these stories, it presents a very important challenge. Are we taking care of our strategic human resource? I think that calls for a pause.

Some countries even go to the extent of making sure their citizens are not tried anywhere except in their country. We have had these cases for a very long time. I have not heard of any recourse to justice where these children can go when they are abused, abroad.

I agree with the proposal that there is need for a select committee to clearly ensure that whatever protocols exist in this process including the memoranda of understanding that are signed and institutions that are involved have clearly defined roles so that we can hold the players responsible. 

I, therefore, would like to agree with the previous speakers that there is need for a select committee. Mr Speaker, I am one of those who would wish to be a member of the select committee. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly the problem and I will not go into it. 

Honourable members, the debate is whether to investigate not who should investigate. If you have already agreed that we deal with the issue that we should investigate, then, let us say that we have finished with that, instead of debating a question I have never proposed. Why are you being so rude to me and talking about things I have never proposed for the House to debate?

Yes, I did not propose that one for debate but you are insisting on debating it. Can we debate whether this issue of the accounts, Mr Yasin’s appointment and him managing the fund is worth investigating? That is the debate. Let me hear from the member from Dokolo.  

3.51
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, Dokolo is definitely very concerned about what is going on; this externalisation of employment. 

I totally support the appointment of a select committee to deal with this matter and for it to be thoroughly investigated. However, we should not only deal with what happens with these potential employees; we should deal with these companies that have been recruiting these people. We need to know who they are, what they are doing and carry out thorough investigation on their activities. 

I am saying this because when we were in India, we found so many women staying in the go down of the embassy because they had nowhere else to go. What we learnt was that the agencies involved in taking these ladies abroad were actually Nigerians. They were not Ugandan registered companies. 

Therefore, there are people doing things while using the backdoor and illegal means. We all know and are aware of them. Even the airlines need to be investigated. You cannot tell me that a human being can be smuggled out of the country like a refrigerator or cargo. It means that the airline is also part of this racket. 

Mr Speaker, we need a holistic investigation so that we come up with facts that will help us come up with a good law so that we can save our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mpaka for bringing up this motion. I would like to thank my colleagues, who have pronounced themselves on it and to agree entirely with hon. Ceilia Ogwal that this matter needs thorough investigation.

Mr Speaker, you have said it does not matter who investigates but in our opinion, the Committee on Gender has done its best and certainly, it has not been thorough. There are so many issues to be responded to and we think it could be because there has been some influence from the ministry, I am sorry to say. Hence, we would like a select committee to be put in place to thoroughly investigate this matter. 

I get surprised that the honourable minister, who should be working for the interest of all Ugandans especially our young people and should want to use every help necessary to make sure that there is efficiency in this matter, is against having a thorough investigation.

Mr Speaker, it is also surprising and some information has come from here, that some big people, including ministers and members of Parliament, although there is no concrete evidence, are involved in this trade. Is there nothing we can do? Are there no rules regarding this? 

With issues of integrity; why would you be a minister in this Government or Parliament and you are selling Ugandans abroad, knowing very well that they are going to suffer? Those people, whether they are taken by official companies or not, go into slavery. We are not interested in following them up but just dump them at the airport. Their passports are taken away - it seems our duty has been just to get rid of them; to just think that they have gotten jobs when we know that they are going into slavery. 

I would like to request the honourable minister to explain to us; why license so many companies to sell Ugandans outside of this country within such a short time? If we were to get the record of how these companies were registered, you would be shocked. We are worried that people are going out and are dying and but we still license so many companies. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not have the capacity to supervise its responsibilities in this country but they are so quick at licensing companies to go outside. I am sorry to make these derogatory statements but it is painful –(Member timed out.)

3.57
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. This is yet another attempt that this House is undertaking to try to close the gaps that exist with the externalisation of labour. 

Any system that is not formal, like the one of externalisation of labour, is prone to hiccups, like what hon. Mpaka has tried to point out here. What am I trying to say? A lot of families have lost their children through this business and it is very lucrative. 

A week ago, we got information that about 150 Karamojongs in Kenya are stuck in transit to one of the areas. Due to the poor paper work, they are stuck in some place around Nairobi and the committee is being mobilised to get money and get them back to Uganda. 

When we talk about the resources that are being pumped into this business, $ 800,000 is a lot of money to be in the hands of one individual. This is money that has been contributed by poor Ugandans in a bid to look for survival. We need to dig deeper and find out where this money is going. At the end of the day – Mr Speaker, you said it all the other day in Kololo. It was in the open and I would like to congratulate you for saying that. You are one of the honest Ugandans I have seen. Who is sharing this money? Where is it going? 

Mr Speaker, it is with pain – they have even gone deep up to our villages to collect young girls who are not exposed. At the end of the day, we are being called that their children are stuck in Nairobi and that we should organise money. He is stuck at the border, can we organise money? They are bothering members of Parliament to begin contributing money to bring them back. 

I, therefore, support the idea that we should try to give it another shot. Maybe this time round, when we dig deeper, we may be able to get the details; who are the directors of these companies? 

Mr Speaker, you may be shocked to find out that they are within the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and they are the ones making sure that whatever this House tries to come up with is stepped on. A lot –(Member timed out.) 

4.00
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by hon. Mwine Mpaka. To contextualise the debate, hon. Mpaka raised a very pertinent issue that public funds find themselves in a personal account of an individual. For that matter, it becomes a public account by law. Nothing should stop us from investigating that account. 

On 25 November 2019, I paid 1,600 dirhams to a one Musoke Yusuf, who is at our embassy in Riyadh, to help a one Joan from Jinja to return to Uganda because she had been externalised, her passport was confiscated and she did not have the money to return to Uganda because they had sold whatever they had in that regard. 

It is disheartening that funds, which would have gone a long way in helping children who are in that state, are put to personal use. What is in issue now is whether we should investigate this matter or not. We are just in the wake of the Anti-Corruption Walk. 

Today, as I walked to Parliament, I was stopped by a staff from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He told me that there is a cartel in this country that permanent secretaries in ministries can determine whether they should post a procurement officer and an accountant who they do not want. We have over 10 staff at the Ministry of Finance, Panning and Economic Development, who have been rejected by permanent secretaries because they are strict. They are in the Ministry of Finance, Panning and Economic Development and are paid a salary but they are not deployed because the permanent secretaries have rejected them. 

The same applies to the President’s Office. They deploy undersecretaries and the Permanent Secretary (PS) rejects them; that one is very strict and we do not want them. What has happened? We have over four who are in Government and are earning a salary and are not deployed. What we are dealing with now is state capture.

If an individual has money, which came from companies, which are dealing with Government, the question would be, how do we trace this money and where does it end? I would have expected the minister to be in tandem with the motion and say that we need to get to the depth of the recipients of this money. It is a Prima facie case made out by the mover of the motion; that as this money goes to those companies, it –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mwine Mpaka, for the motion. To me, it raises three critical points for investigation:

    1. Recruitment of public officers at Riyadh Embassy on conditions, which are strange to Public Service; - starting salary of Shs 6 million. I would like the committee to find out; did the embassy seek clearance from the Public Service Commission? Is this the only case or there are several other cases? What salary scale is that one?

    2.  The role of the ministry in managing externalisation of labour. I heard very well when the minister told us that the inter-ministerial committee decided that recruitment companies should supplement Government in the management of this public duty and collection of the fund. The recruitment companies are the ones supposed to be monitored by the ministry but the ministry said, “Supplement our work for us to monitor you.” This is serious and I would like to find out why? How can you handover a public duty to monitor a private company to the very private company you are supposed to monitor?

    3.  To what extend should the ministry be held accountable for the suffering and abuse of Human Rights of our children working abroad, as a result of negligence of their duty?

Finally, Mr Speaker, the minister said, “…where funds belong to a private company and are outside the eye of Parliament because that is their own private matter.” However, money paid by Ugandans to a public officer to execute a public duty called “monitoring” cannot really escape the eye of Parliament. We must investigate this and find out the broader question of how this fund is managed, how much is in this fund and why the minister is asking for a supplementary budget yet he is not interested in the money, which is collected under her ministry? 

Furthermore, the wider –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.07
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support hon. Mwine Mpaka’s motion because the issues he raised are not covered by the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is very surprising the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have been handling externalisation of labour. 

Hon. Janat Mukwaya, a good friend of mine, appeared before us and we told her of the problems Ugandans are facing abroad. It is very painful that Ugandans are suffering and this is blood money and this money is put on an account of an individual. This one person was recruited as a local staff in the mission in Riyadh by Ambassador Muhammad Sseyomu. Honourable minister, if you are handling this issue, this money should have come in as non-tax revenue, which should come to your ministry and the Auditor-General should have been able to audit. 

However, you form companies and leave all the powers to the companies. These companies get money and the money is handled by a single person, a one Yassin Musoke recruited locally by the mission and he is sitting in the mission while handling money of a private company. How does this come about? Does the Auditor-General audit this money? This person is taking this money on his personal account. This is very unfair and as a ministry, you are just there. I once advised that you did not know how to handle externalisation of labour; I told you to go to the ILO in Geneva and look at the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Philippians. 

The Philippians have got more than 10 million people working abroad and the Government is very concerned and is handling the issue of their people working abroad. You have abdicated your duties and have passed this to private individuals, who are making blood money and Ugandans are suffering; they are being tortured and are dying and you are here protecting private companies. Whenever you talk, you seem to be on the side of these private companies. You do not even mind about Ugandans who are suffering and dying. 

Mr Speaker, I support that we put up a select committee to investigate this matter because in the chairman’s report that is already out, they do not even talk about this money - the $800,000 on the account on Kampala Road –(Member timed out_)

4.10
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise to support what hon. Mpaka raised, which is very fundamental. It coincides with today, the International Human Rights Day, and I had also expected the minister to make a statement.

We have been very pained in the Committee on Foreign Affairs over this issue. In the Committee on Human Rights, this is a matter of human rights concern. What has come out is that Yassin is walking free out there. The first thing that should be done today is to cause an arrest of this gentleman. (Laughter) How can this gentleman sit in the Ugandan mission, pick money and get busy buying perfumes, biscuits and work for a private company? This is amazing. 

When we adopted the policy of liberalisation, it did not mean abandoning the national interest of this country. Given the way it has gone – I think since the report of the committee is out and this matter is just an emerging issue, unless we agree that the terms of reference of the gender committee be extended to deal with this matter, we should move to insist that the select committee be put up to squarely investigate the mission in Riyadh and all other missions in the Arabian Peninsula. 

Yassin is not the only one; we imagine that there are others who might be at large and doing the same thing. I pray that this select committee be put in place, if we cannot extend the terms of reference of the gender committee. I beg to move.

4.12
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I thank hon. Mwine for a good job in preparing this motion and substantiating it with evidence. I support the proposal for the establishment of a select committee. 

If you look at this document that hon. Mwine has submitted, you will find a lot of authenticity and that indicates the magnitude of the problem at hand. We have debated the issue of externalisation of labour several times in this House. It is a bit worrying to listen to some of the ordeals of our children who go out in the wilderness to work. 

Every time I am at Entebbe Airport, I see girls dressed, covering their heads. There is a time I was with hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and he took time to speak to some of the girls. Of course, one would get convinced that they deserve to go out there and work. However, what they go through later is painful.
	
Mr Speaker, the collection of this money starts right away when these companies advertise, inviting these children to come for interviews. Those who are successful have to make some payments. That is why the other day when Nakalema arrested one of the proprietors of these companies, a number of youth came up asking for the money that they had paid to these companies; totalling to about Shs 3 million. To raise the money, people sell land and animals. It is shameful for such money to end up with an individual and the ministry has nothing or no explanation to give to Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the negligence of the ministry that should be supervising all these agencies here and abroad. Imagine a situation where – (Member timed out_)

4.15
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate hon. Mpaka for the motion and the research he has done. I do not think there is a Member who is callous and completely insensitive to the pains that our sons and daughters go through when they go out in search for these jobs. 

We have all witnessed the experiences these people go through and it is a concern to all of us. I am saying this because of the proposal some Members are putting forward, despite the fact that you have made a ruling which I would not like to depart from, is that there is need to create a select committee. Mr Speaker, even immediately after you made the ruling, the next Speaker said the same thing. 

Our rules are very clear; for a select committee to be formed, it has to be by a motion on notice to this House. We have a motion before this House and it says the committee on gender should investigate this matter. I wonder why we want to bend our rules.

Mr Speaker, it is in our rules that if there is any special skill that the committee needs, the committee can actually call for that peculiar skill to be provided. Where do we think members of the select committee are going to come from? The committee on gender –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you for giving way. Hon. Lubogo, the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has said that the issue of this fund – this crucial fund, which is supposed to provide shelter, food or transport for Ugandans who find themselves in problems – is not catered for in the report yet this House clearly gave the responsibility to the committee to investigate all these matters. The committee has not been thorough and we want a select committee because we think it will be impartial. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Mr Speaker, I know my colleague knows well and has seen that the report which we are talking about is the preliminary report. Being “preliminary” means that we have a conclusive report yet to come. Sometimes we constrain the performance of the committees by creating other committees on the sides, facilitate them when the substantive committees -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the debate has been long enough but let us clear a few things and see how we go. One, I would like to ask you; do we want this Parliament to stop externalisation of labour? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] No, I need a clear guide. Do we want this Parliament to stop externalisation of labour? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Of course the answer is no.

Honourable members, the debate has been intensive but in all - can I have some order, Members? In the end, what will work is what will count and not how beautiful it sounds in our ears. What will work is what will count.

I sit on the Parliamentary Commission and we have some challenges. You may recall that some of the select committees that were put in place have not been able to report because we have not been able to service them. What will work is what will count.

We can decide to create a committee and the committee will sit up to the end of this Parliament because there will be no resources to facilitate them. Is that what you want, hon. Wamanga Wamai? So, we are again just doing showbiz here; I thought we were serious. I was under the mistake that we were serious about this matter. 

However, hon. Wamanga Wamai is now saying, yes, let this committee be created and it sits up to the end of the term of Parliament without doing anything and it is okay. Is that what we really want to do? I do not think that is where we want to go. What we want are results; something to come back to this House and we can debate and take a decision on.

What will work is what will count for those people and families that have children stranded in those places. Let us not just speak for the - and you can even see the interests - the honourable members have said, “Put me on the select committee.”

Last time when hon. Sseggona moved this motion, I was under pressure from honourable members lobbying to be on the select committee. (Laughter)- Yes, please. No let us be straight. I am not going to entertain any procedure on this matter; let us be straight. You have just heard it publically declared here.

Personally, my sentiment is that this matter is so serious that we should handle it properly. We do not want anybody again to be accused of anything. Secondly, we will not have the resources to deal with this in the meantime.

Thirdly, the timing – we all know what is going on. Do not let anybody tell me that they do not know what is happening at the moment with our engagement. I hear some people now have new terms. We are bonding and all kinds of names that are being created to explain just one thing; that the times are closer.

We also have a preliminary report that is on the Order Paper, which was asked for by this House. The chairman was clear and said that they heard of this fund but they did not have sufficient information on it. If the information given by hon. Mpaka can help them, they will be able to handle this comprehensively. They have the capacity and commitment to do it. That is what the chairman said.

We cannot down grade our committee or take away business from them for any other reason except when the matter is so multi-sectoral - I do not know what the rules say - then you can create a select committee.

We cannot just say that it is because the committee has not done – no, that cannot be a reason for the House. We extend courtesy to each and every Member of this House and the responsibilities that were given to them are respected and expect them to execute with diligence and to the best of their abilities. Therefore, that kind of argument hurts other members of Parliament who are doing their best in the circumstances. If it were said about you, you would not feel very comfortable.

Therefore, let us strike a balance - and I am not going to entertain procedure when I am guiding. The balance we are going to strike is this: we will allow an urgent intervention on this matter; that means that we will not take a decision on this motion. However, we will refer it to our Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The committee will then come back after seven days and brief us on the specifics of this particular issue raised in the motion and then we can take a decision on the motion. Is that fair? If it is fair, honourable members, this motion stands substantially referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle and report back to the House and see how to proceed from there.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES UNDER ARTICLE 179(1) (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND DECLARATION OF CITIES UNDER SECTION 7 (2A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT CAP.243

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we seem to have the same situation that we faced on Thursday last week. For purposes of our Rules of Procedure, these items are important and they cover items 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Those particular items require a certain class of decision under Article 179 (2) that we should take by a specific kind of vote.

Looking at the numbers that we have now, we will not be able to take that decision. In the circumstance, I do not think that even if I suspended the House - instead we might lose more Members going by the experience of last Thursday. 

Therefore, I will defer these items to next week so that we can do the proper mobilisation. I am told that some Members are engaged in the East African parliamentary games. We have tried and the whips have also tried. Therefore, we will not be able to handle these various matters today. Can we go to item 9?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 51 OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT ACT, 2019, ACT NO.5 OF 2019 TO APPROVE THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT (DECLARATION OF KALANGALA – ITANDA FALLS SPECIAL CONSERVATION AREA) ORDER, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not Kalangala, it is Kalagala. They look very similar but they are different. Honourable members, you will recall - can we have some order? You will recall that this motion was moved and a question proposed to its debate. The only issue that arose was that we received some notification from concerned people that some of them had not had their time with the minister in terms of consultation.

We are now hoping that the minister can advise us on whether the consultations were completed or not and then we can open debate.

4.29
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Mr Speaker, as directed, we only held a meeting this morning with the stakeholders. I would like to request that I come back on Thursday and present what we agreed on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item. Procedure?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised a matter pertaining massive deforestation of forests in Bundibugyo and the Speaker then ruled that the relevant committee should go to Bundibugyo and report in one week’s time. As I speak, it more than one week and I have not seen the report.

Mr Speaker, looking at what is happening in Bundibugyo - the disasters that are happening there - we really have to worry a lot. I, therefore, seek your indulgence to see how far the matter has gone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources here? Is there a vice chairperson or any member of the committee? Yes, honourable member for Kioga.

4.31
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. It is true that the matter was raised and referred to the committee. 

However, we had equally pending issues that we have been handling as a committee. I am going to get in touch with the chairperson of the committee to make sure that sooner than later, preferably next week, we can get back to the House and consider the matter appropriately. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Learned Attorney-General, Bills second reading.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2019

4.32
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just to guide, your motion was moved, question was proposed and the House is ready to debate. Proceed.  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, it is true the motion was moved, I gave justification and this House was preparing to debate. However, at the time, I informed the House that new events had occurred and as Government, we were still consulting. We want to better the Bill in some material aspects and we sought for time.

We have carried out consultations, we have involved everybody but there are some sticky issues that remain unresolved, for which we seek your indulgence that you allow us to resolve them so that when we come, we conclude this important Bill.

Mr Speaker, this Bill is very important because it is a Bill that is supposed to implement the doctrine of separation of powers so that there is independence of the Judiciary as opposed to how the situation has been. I pray that we move very cautiously and carefully.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, as Parliament, we are ready. You brought the Bill; the parliamentary committee examined it and reported. Therefore, we are ready.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I know you are ready but because of those two or three sticky issues which I do not want this House to debate unless and until we have cleared them and resolved them, I seek further indulgence that we be given more time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable learned Attorney-General, can you share with us those areas so that we also know the ones which are disturbing you. We might have some ideas.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I cannot share with you because they are not yet definite. When they are definite, I will bring them here because in the event that we conclude them, I have to come back and seek your indulgence because the report is ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time do you need, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUKUTANA: Two months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two months – point of procedure

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, this Bill is a property of the House and it is on the second reading. The mover of the Bill already presented the motion. The Bill touches one of the three arms of Government, a very critical institution called the Judiciary. 

The mover of the Bill has been dillydallying with proceeding with the Bill and talking about matters, which matters I believe can be moved at any stage of the Bill especially when it comes to committee stage. 

Is it procedurally right for the learned Deputy Attorney-General to drag this House and continue requesting for postponement of his own Bill when the House is ready to debate and pronounce itself on the Bill once and for all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that once the motion for second reading is moved, what we debate is not the provision of the Bill. It is the principle of the Bill. Do we agree to the principle of the Bill? Is it for good purpose? Does it serve a good purpose for this country; does it help in any way? Does it improve on the existing body of laws that we already have? Those are the questions of principle that we will be debating. In addition, once we pass that stage and adopt the principles, we take that vote on second reading.

Then we go to the committee stage of the Bill, where we are now dealing with the actual provisions of the Bill. Maybe that will be the proper time for you to go specifically and deal with the clauses of the Bill or deal with your consultations specifically, not on the general issues but specifically on the provisions of the Bill - the actual clauses; whether you want to change or whether you want some clauses withdrawn or whether you want them amended. That would now be the consultation you would be doing.

However, to keep it at this stage means that even the principles of the Bill - you do not want us to talk about it. I do not know whether it would not make sense for us. You remember how the House actually pushed Government to have this Bill passed because the whole arm of Government remains the way it is - we did not think it was fair. 

There were consultation meetings that were done with the Judiciary people and members of Parliament. A private Member’s - actually hon. Okot Ogong even moved a motion and was granted leave because the House is interested in this Bill.

Therefore, I do not think there will be a problem with debating the principles of the Bill and if you are going to have differences in the actual clauses of the Bill, then that could be an issue. However, let us move one stage.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, you are very correct that when we debate, we debate the principles of the Bill.

However, when I tell you that there are still some sticky issues, those issues touch the principles. It would be unfair and we would be debating in disregard of those areas, which touch on the principles.

If we are going to present those areas at the consideration of the Bill clause by clause, we will have lost out on those principles, which as you said rightly, should be debated here. Hence, the areas we are considering touch the core principles of the Bill – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, learned Attorney-General, if the principle of the Bill is going to shift, then, it cannot be the same Bill. It will now be a different Bill. If the mover of the Bill is departing from the principles of the Bill, then it is a different Bill.  

MR RUKUTANA: That is exactly what I intend to avoid. You are totally right. If the principles change or differ, then, it becomes a totally different Bill. That is exactly why we are asking for a little bit more leniency so that we present the principles as we conceive them now. When we debate, all the principles, new and old, are considered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, the motion for the second reading of this Bill was moved on 20 December 2018. We have been limping like this because the Attorney-General wants to alter the principles of this Bill. 

4.41
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know the Deputy Attorney-General very well and I am quite surprised. He is somebody that always says what he must say but today he is saying there are three things, two things and what have you. I think he means well and we should probably give him benefit of doubt and he comes up. 

However, the period he is stating is what I do not quite agree with. Secondly, this report was read several months – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A year. 

MS ERAGU: This report was read a year ago. The problem we have today – even if we are to start the debate – I really do not know how many of our Members have it fresh in their minds – (Interjection) - well, I am not thinking for you but for the benefit of the debate, my request is to have the Bill re-uploaded so that Members go through our report. I would like to thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is another way of handling this Bill; we agreed to the principles and supported the private member to move the Bill. We agreed on everything. 

Can we adopt the motion for second reading, vote and then wait for the minister to consult on the clauses? We cannot go on the same pace like him. His motion is that the Bill be read the second time and we had already agreed to these principles. We even supported a private member to move this Bill. The House agreed. Can we adopt the motion for second reading so that the minister consults on the clauses of the Bill? Can I put the question? 

Honourable members, I will put the question for the motion for second reading. I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, it is Bills, Committee Stage and now you can speak properly. He has read the Bill for the second time; you can just restate your prayers.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I thought we would move to the committee stage so that I address the chairperson. However, I would like to reiterate what I said earlier. In order for us to debate, basing on the real issues that we intend to present, we need time to come and present to you those salient features of the Bill that we want to reintroduce, with your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will it be in the clauses? If it is the clauses, then, we will handle them at the committee stage.  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, at this stage, I cannot say whether it will be in the clauses or they will shift the entire scope of the Bill. That is why I said that we should be patient. After all, we have been patient for a year. Let us be patient for only two months so that when we come back, we have the entire spectrum of the law, as we perceive it as Government. 
As I said earlier, and I am happy that hon. Niwagaba, the Shadow Attorney-General, has agreed with me that this is a very important Bill. It should not be rushed. It should be considered with all the patience and care. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the time that the learned Attorney-General is going to consult on the clauses of the Bill. Usually, if you have amendments that you would like to propose, we also ask you to submit them in advance and share them with the Attorney-General. This will enable us process the actual Bill and not take too long on them because we will all have the documents. 

Therefore, no amendment will be entertained from the Floor. That is the rule we have adopted and it has worked. If you should wake up the day of the debate on the clauses of the Bill and say “amendment”, we will reject it. The amendment must be in writing because this is an important Bill. It must be circulated. Our legal team must look at them to check the textural integrity of the proposed amendments so that when we incorporate them, they make sense in the context of the flow of the Bill. 

Honourable members, we will pause it here and allow the learned Attorney-General the two months. The two months are also for us to consult and see what we can do to make the Bill even better. Committee stage is hereby extended for two months. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

4.47
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I already moved – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, you moved the motion and the question was proposed – 

MR WAIRA: Yes, it is now the chairman to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question was not yet proposed because we were waiting for the chairperson to report. Usually, to kick off our debates, we listen to reports from the committee to guide us on how we debate the principles of the Bill. 

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018. 

Before I do the presentation, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to present our report. Secondly, I would like to thank the mover, hon. Majegere, for introducing a very important piece of legislation that we hope will make a positive contribution to the welfare of young people in this country. 

Thirdly, I would like to place on record our appreciation to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for taking up this initiative by working with us in the process of deliberations on this Bill. 

Mr Speaker, the report was sent to the Members’ iPads. Therefore, I hope that we are all moving together. 

The National Graduate Scheme Bill was tabled for the first reading on Wednesday, 9th January and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in accordance with the rules of procedure.

The object of the Bill:

    i) To establish a National Graduate Scheme; 
    ii) To provide a mechanism of bridging the gap between university education and employment opportunities;
    iii) To provide young graduates with employment training through work-related learning; 
    iv) To enhance graduates’ employability and self-employment through career guidance, job placement, mentoring and connection to enterprise models;
v) 	To enhance the technical capacity of graduates over and above their academic qualifications prior to employment; 
vi) 	To provide a mechanism or avenue through which experience, practical skills, patriotism, volunteerism, discipline, handiwork, professional altitude, and social responsibilities can be implemented prior to their employment. 

Methodology 

Mr Speaker, we held meetings with among others the following stakeholders:  

i. 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
ii. 	The National Council for Higher Education
iii. 	The Federation of Uganda Employers
iv. 	The Private Sector Foundation
v. 	The National Youth Council 
vi. 	The Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Youth Affairs
vii. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports; and 
viii. 	The mover of the Bill, hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere. 

The committee also reviewed the following documents;

    1. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 
    2. The Employment Act, 2006 
    3. Business Technical Vocational Education And Training (BITVET) Act, 2008
    4. The International Labour Organisation's Employment Policy Convention 1964.

Legal justification for a Graduate Service Scheme

Uganda ratified the Employment Policy Convention, l964 on 15 July 1966. The said policy aims at ensuring that:

(a) 	There is work for all who are available for and seeking work;
(b) 	Such work is as productive as possible; 
(c) 	There is freedom of choice of employment and the fullest possible opportunity for each worker to qualify for, and to use his skills and endowments in a job for which he is well suited.

Therefore, by enacting this law, we are complying with the obligation under this international convention.
We have pointed out that this Parliament should make laws appropriate for protection of young persons. This law, among others, provides an opportunity to enable young people to get skills for the right employment. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament is required to ensure that there is compliance with gender, human rights, equity and Sustainable Development Goals while carrying out its legislative mandate. This Bill contains several provisions, which will enable us to realise the requirement of gender, human rights, equity and sustainable development.

The purpose of the National Graduate Scheme Bill is to establish a National Graduate Scheme and designate a secretariat responsible for administration of the Scheme.

Graduate skills development is very important for the production of critical skills in Uganda. It is a sound investment for the individual, the employer and the economy. 

On page 5, the committee made some observations and recommendations. The committee observed that there is need to emphasise the scheme as a service with several volunteer schemes under it. This calls for the title of the Bill to be amended from “The National Graduate Scheme Bill” to “The National Graduate Service Scheme Bill.”

The committee observed that the Bill is silent on a stipend. In a meeting with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the committee took note of the minister’s analysis that there is no provision as to a stipend allowance for graduates that may cover their transport and lunch during work hours.

The committee recommends that graduates be provided with a transport and lunch allowance, which necessitates the provision of a stipend allowance in the Bill amounting to at least Shs 370,000 per month. The committee recommends that 20 per cent of the stipend allowance under the voluntary savings scheme be saved with the National Social Security Fund. 

The committee recommends that an experience and skills development levy as necessitated by the Business Technical Vocational Education and Training (BITVET) Act, 2008 be operationalised under the scheme to enable the smooth running of the scheme.

Removal of restrictions on the age of the graduates

During meetings with various stakeholders, including the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, the National Council for Higher Education and the Federation of Uganda Employers, the committee was informed that clause 3 of the Bill that restricts graduates under the scheme to the age of 30 and below, is discriminatory. 

Accordingly, the committee recommends that the age of 30 be raised to 35. It is provided for in our recommendations as attached in this report.

The committee further recommends that a clause be included in the Bill to ensure accreditation of organisations that seek to run independent volunteer service programmes/schemes. This shall inter alia ensure that apprentices under such independent schemes do not replace employees and that such apprentices are not exploited by the said volunteer service schemes.

The committee recommends that the roles of the different stakeholders be specified in the Bill. We have accordingly proposed recommendations to ensure that those different stakeholders are streamlined including the coordinating ministry and companies.

Mr Speaker, those are the major recommendations. I would like to request this august House to adopt these recommendations and also pass the Bill with amendments.

Finally, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings, generated during the consideration of this report. I also beg to lay on Table the submission by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and submissions by other stakeholders. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report and its recommendations. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that the Member moved the motion and I actually proposed the question but the committee requested for some hours to have their report signed but those hours turned into months. However, it is okay because we got into some other activities and we were not able to handle this. I am going to propose the question again so that we can start the debate. 

The motion that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. Let us debate whether we agree with the principles of this Bill or not. Each Member will take three minutes. Let us start.

5.00
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for doing a good job and I also thank hon. Waira Majegere, for proposing the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is noble; that is to provide employment training to our graduates. The Member is proposing that when you leave school, you are given a year of service to strengthen your employability skills and capacity. However, I have been reflecting on this principle; is this best after graduation or should it be part of the undergraduate training? I seem to favour the latter. Why?

Internship or industrial training by the various universities is part of the training of the students. It is even scored and taken into account as part of the requirement for attainment of a degree or diploma. It is part of the course training for the students. When you put it after the training and the student has graduated, is it automatic? Does it add to the professionalism of this student? Why not embed it as part of the requirement of every course before the student finishes campus? This is the question I am putting to the chairperson of the committee –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Raphael Magyezi that what he is proposing – embedding the practical aspects of the training in the curriculum – is already being done in our universities. 

When I was the Minister of State in charge of Higher Education, we came up with a programme known as “field attachment,” which is compulsory for every course whereby from year one, a period is allotted for a student to go to the field and work for two or three months. That period is examinable and contributes to the certificate the student gets. Hon. Magyezi, what you are proposing is noble but it is already being done.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. The second issue is the budgetary implication. The committee is proposing a stipend in terms of transport and lunch allowance of Shs 370,000 per student. If you multiply that by the number of students you are talking about, how much money is it and what is the source of that money?

You also propose that 20 per cent of the money be saved under NSSF. I thought NSSF applies to salary earners. This is a training allowance; I do not support putting the 20 per cent.

The proposal is that this law should be applied to people who are below the age of 30 and the committee proposes to raise this to 35 years. I think we should even delete this limit because a graduate does not have to be 30 or 35 years. Actually, we have very many people who are beyond that age who are training at universities. Why do you deny them the opportunity? Remove the age limit on this. What is it for? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Bill. However, even if we talk about voluntarism, it remains a challenge in our country. You are aware that under the health sector, we have the kind of placement that is being proposed by this Bill. Our medical doctors that qualify from universities are supposed to be equipped with practical skills for one year before they can be taken up as medical doctors in health facilities.

However, you are aware that we have been having challenges of interns striking because they feel that they are an additional labour force in our health facilities and they demand better pay. We also have the Village Health Teams that were started in the health sector with the idea of them being a voluntary force to promote health at the community level. However, over time, we have heard voices demanding that they be considered as an additional workforce in the health sector because their role is to prevent diseases and provide health information to the population at the community level.

Therefore, even if this is supposed to be voluntary – I know we have over 4,000 annually – over time, there will be a demand that they receive a pay because the unemployment rate in this country is high. While you say these people should simply be placed to acquire additional skill and experience, they will definitely be providing labour to these institutions and they will definitely want some pay. 

I think we need to be clear on this and I would have appreciated if the Minister of Public Service was present here so that they could give us professional advice. Otherwise the Bill is well intentioned but I know that many of the graduates look forward to being employed and they will take this as employment; they will want to be absorbed into the system. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would it help you with, for example the graduate doctors - are they called graduate doctors? Because right now, there are no regulations - Would this law help to regulate so that there is a way that it is interpreted so that they know.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, it is true and you are aware that we came up with an internship policy to try and help us handle the matter better. However, we face a challenge that the matter was in court. It may but as of now, you cannot pay the doctors and leave out the other professions. They will also demand for a pay; this is why I am raising this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.09
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my brother who has initiated this motion. I know Kenya runs a similar training programme for graduates but for this particular case that is before us, I am still doubtful about the management structure because in Kenya, it is not a lump sum. It is specialised, just like for example in the case of Uganda if you have to bring in the issue of doctors.

Doctors cannot just be trumped up together with social scientists in a training school whether it is going to be in Kyankwazi or elsewhere. These are supposed to be professionally engineered curriculum such that you get people of different professional backgrounds in a certain specific institution where they are oriented. 

Having said that, although it looks good, it does not in the end, answer the problem of unemployment. In countries like Kenya, it is a precursor for Government absorption or to be absorbed in other employment institutions.

If we are looking at the employment aspect, it calls more on the issue of broadening the economic base so that it is not only Government that is looked at as an institution that guarantees employment but other private sources like factories and many more; where once they have acquired that vocational training and technical internship knowledge, then they can go and practice.

However, in our situation here, I am yet to ask my brother - probably he will assist me explain how he wants to conceptualise it because it is a very broad aspect. In countries like Kenya where, given as an example, the whole thing is compatibilised such that we find the lawyers are on their own, the social scientists, agriculturalists are on their own.

The only unifying factor for them is that of patriotism and national belonging but for professional in depth training they need to have those compatibilised training schedules. Therefore, you need to help us on how you want this particular programme to run so that we can best understand it. Otherwise, in terms of national building and patriotism, it is a very good idea. 

However, when undergoing such, it is not free. You must provide for the needs of these people. If a person is going for such training for one year, you are not going to allow him or her to go in and come out empty handed. During that time, how will the person get for example soap for his own personal upkeep and other incidentals?

Therefore, in this particular case, you will need to sit down with the relevant ministries like the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - good enough, my senior minister whom I have worked with for long is here and is very experienced in those things - so that they are able to come up with all the modalities that are required for operationalisation of this training programme.
Otherwise in collective terns, it is a good programme but I do not know how it is going to operate under our Ugandan circuits or environment. However, it is worth investing into. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
 
5.13
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to join my colleagues to support the Bill. The intentions and the principles are noble and if supported, we shall shape and improve whatever is being doubted. 

However, this practice is worldwide and it is intended to build or impart nationalism, patriotism, pan Africanism especially in African and it is even done in America. When you join the university, in the first year, you spend it doing political economy, nationalism and all that.

Mr Speaker, in Africa where it has been practised like in Tanzania and Kenya, it is done in a protracted manner. After senior four, you go for voluntary training and after senior six before you go for university, you do the same and even after selection when you join the other institutions of higher learning, those who are being selected either to join the forces still undergo this process until they get absorbed in Government institutions.

Therefore, this Bill is noble and should be supported and improved to include all these ideas as we go on. It should be supported and it is practised all over the world. Therefore, Uganda is not an island and we should benchmark with other countries and see how it is done so that we carry it on. We should have done it many years ago. Thank you.

5.15
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the committee for the report. Much of the learning that our students get in schools is theoretical. The practicals are limited to certain periods like internship, industrial training and school practice, among others, which takes a very short period.

I recall when doing my school practice, it was for six weeks; that is about a month and two weeks, which was very little time. If the student does not have the heart to work after that short time of training, the students may not do well in the places of work.

Mr Speaker, I watching a certain engagement where youth were engaged on the topic, “youth and unemployment” in some forum and one graduate was very furious about this issue of work experience. You will agree with me that in most of the advertisements that are placed, they want work experience of certain years. They do not put it as an added advantage but a requirement and this poses challenges to these fresh graduates.

Therefore, the answer to this work experience is in what is being proposed in this Bill. I believe that if our graduates are provided with extra training after they leave school for one year, I believe they will gain a lot of confidence, which will aid them to perform properly in their places of work and we shall have efficiency in service delivery when they get employed.

If Government can provide the Shs 370,000 for lunch and transport allowance as suggested by the committee, then when this Bill becomes law, it will go a long way to help our graduates to work in the various places where they will find themselves. I thank you.

5.18
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Graduates are at all levels. You will go to Elgon Technical and there is a graduate in engineering and plumbing, whatever the case. Why are we specifying only university because skills are rarely got at all levels? In fact, nowadays, even nursery schools have graduations but that is not a big issue.
Mr Speaker, if it is for graduates who are going to the field to work, then all high institutions of learning, like technical or vocational schools must all participate in this programme. For example, if I have learnt brick laying, I must be placed somewhere to practice how to make bricks.

I am a product of civil service - I am sure my colleague hon. Oboth knows. Whenever we would join civil service, they would give us two years’ probation. In those two years, you were supposed to be trained in what to do before they confirmed you in service. I would like to find out, are we removing the probationary period, which is given to people who join civil service? That also applies to private entities.

When you join a private entity, they will give you, say six months and the moment you finish, they confirm you in service.

Mr Speaker, this thing looks good but it has financial implications. How many graduates do we have every year? I do not know whether we multiplied. If, for simplicity, we said 20,000 graduates and we multiply with this money, given that this money will now be paid on a monthly basis, if in the current state we are failing to sponsor private students in the universities who need to borrow money to go and study, how will we, this time, get money to fund this activity?

Unless they find their way to university and other institutions and after training, they come. However, to say that Government will again invest money here, this will collapse on day one. Even when you tell me that you give me a trainee whom I should pay for, first of all, I am going to give you free knowledge. You do not expect me to pay you.

Mr Speaker, right now, there is internship every year. In our professional firm, we get boys and girls who come to study for three months.

At the end of the year, if you compute the number of days these youths finish on internship, it is already a year. Therefore, what is the purpose of that internship? They come and work while they are still at the university. 

I would propose that we either take our youths for three months in Kyankwanzi and say, “you are going to be trained on how you are going to behave when you get a job or you go to this place for three months.” But, a year to train on internship yet under normal circumstances, if I have finished accounts or law, I should practise after doing my clerkship, why should I train for one year?

Mr Speaker, I would like to make a proposal that at an appropriate time, we include technical schools and remove the issue of payment. What we can do is that anybody who takes these graduates for training will maybe have a percentage or reduction in taxes. When you maybe pay them transport allowance or whatever else, you will gain tax incentives so that you keep train them. This would be helpful so that people are given tax incentives to have graduates training in their firms; like we passed a law of saying anybody who employs more than ten disabled people would get tax incentives.

Therefore, we can say here that anybody who employs maybe 20 graduates, for training purposes, will get a tax incentive. That would be the best way to deal with it.

However, to say you are going to come here and appropriate money that you are going to pay these graduates, I will tell you the Government will say “there is no money; this year, we are not going to train.” What will you do? Thank you.

5.23
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I look at the Bill as described here as a scheme. If something is a scheme, it has a limit. The challenge we have in Uganda today is that people no longer love each other.

When they are at school, people come from different walks of life. There are those who even tell their fellow students that “for me, I am studying but the job is already waiting for me”, telling the one who can spend five years after school and graduation and they cannot get a job.

Therefore, I see this scheme as a Bill, which will bring people together. If my fellow student after graduation got fixed at a certain place of work, at least I will also be somewhere while expecting one time to access a job. Therefore, we should take this Bill seriously because it gives graduates great hope.

Outside there, many graduates are jobless and exploited. You can see these labour companies telling a graduate that - yes, you are a graduate but you must accept to go and work as a houseboy in the Middle East to earn Shs 900,000. Imagine such a situation. When they go to the Middle East, they face all sorts of challenges.

Therefore, the Bill should be supported with a lot of attention. At times, there is money from parastatals, which they fail to utilise and it is returned to the Treasury. If it is planned very well, such money can be distributed to cover such areas. We are talking of oil; when it comes, there will be a lot of money to see that these graduates can be brought on board. Thank you very much.

5.26
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a good Bill, especially in terms of bridging the gap - the transition from training to employment.

I have a few concerns. They are closely related to the one raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. First, the question of implementation, we would wish to get commitment from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. How many private Members’ Bills have been implemented by Government institutions? Recently, we passed The National Children’s Act; how far has that Bill been implemented by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

Mr Speaker, this Bill attracts resources. It needs a secretariat that should be resourced, proper planning to match job creation with placements. I have seen one of the provisions here that it becomes a condition of eligibility for employment in Public Service. 

We do not want to create a situation where many people initially fail placements and once you get a placement, you cannot be employed by Public Service. You will be frustrating the youth more than what you thought you are supposed to resolve. Therefore, some of these provisions require a lot of planning and require a structured economy where you are able to forecast the number of jobs you believe you can create in a year vis-à-vis the number of graduates that the different universities are training and who will be available for placement.

Therefore, it is a good Bill but it requires resources and for these resources to be available, it needs the commitment of the relevant Government ministries.

I hope the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Labour and Social Development will not chicken out as we debate this Bill because we do not want Bills to gather dust in shelves. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Administration of Parliaments Act, the Budget Act and very many others that have been agreed upon and are working very well were all private Members’ Bills.

5.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Majegere for the Bill. I think we need to establish what it is we really want. It seems to me that this one year that we want to give to the graduates is just keeping them for the one year, assuming that after the training, we will be able to find employment for them, which is not the case. 

Why keep them for this one year? What is the purpose? Is it to equip them with skills and what specific skills? If I am a professional, for example, and I have studied as a medical doctor or an economist, I am already equipped with the skills. I should know what it is I want and how to do it. Are we just merely going to train people as to how to find jobs and then how to keep them? Is it just that? 

As hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, in the Public Service, you employ people and have an induction. Every graduate does not know what exactly is expected of them in the specific job that they get and so, it is up to the institution that recruits them to train them in what they want to achieve, even if it was a single office or company.

I know that as Ugandans, we have a problem of employment culture, working culture, issues of integrity and competing with Kenyans. We need to study the Kenyan case. Have they acquired this because they have an institution or is it because they have grown? It is a culture and so, you grow it right from childhood. 

Issues of integrity, teaching our children about national values and issues of integrity that you get a job, you work, you do not keep your coat on the chair and you go to do other things but you do your work and you are paid by what amount of work you put in, which I think can be handled by the education system. For example, we have national values in our Constitution but people do not know them. Can we include these in the school curriculum and start teaching them? Would this not be a solution rather than have this scheme that we want to put in place? 

Secondly, we have various institutions for various professionals, for example, administration and management. We have the Uganda Management Institute and the new college in Jinja that trains administrators and managers already in service by giving them the necessary skills that they require, as they go through the service. 

I really do not understand how this scheme is going to help us. Are we going to give general skills to professionals, for example? Would we not rather have the different professions have a scheme within that profession to ensure that they bring out graduates that are capable of getting jobs and doing a good job while they are at it? 

Finally, nationalism and patriotism; I think that is a different case. Unless we want this scheme to handle that, we also need to be clear that part of what we are going to train in is a patriotism and nationalism. I think what hon. Fred Mwesigye was assuming is quite different. Do we want to train our students in issues of nationalism or is it just general skills? We need to find specific results that we want to get out of here and how practical it is in terms of funding and getting jobs for these people. (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to share with you and the whole House is that this Bill, in the way I understand it, is inculcating the spirit of nationalism through services like national service. Regardless of the profession that you belong to, you have that; whether you are in the army, you are a lawyer, an economist or a doctor. 

That generic training is given to you and it is not specific to work the way you and I met in Uganda Management Institute. It is not so work-related; the way lawyers go to Law Development Centre; it is not so job related, the way doctors like hon. Baryomunsi after the university go for internship. It is a national service where all of you are brought together, prepare yourselves and open up your minds to look at things in a broader sense. Then, thereafter, you can go to your specific professional belonging. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable colleague. If that is the case, this Bill needs to be improved and needs to –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get some few clarifications from the mover. You are aware that our economy is largely private sector-led. Every other day, the Government sector is shrinking as opposed to the private sector but –(Interjections)– yes, I am speaking from a point of knowledge. 

If you count the number of people, for example, who get attachments to the Government institutions, especially those who are still studying and those who have finished, compared to the private sector, the numbers are very incomparable. The private sector has more than the Government sector.

I would like to seek information from the mover in terms of regional considerations. We have a number of regions and sub-regions, which have different advantages. For example, there are sub-regions, which have an advantage in agriculture, tourism, mining and trade. 

As you are aware, we also have different professionals. I do not know how we will address that to the extent that we do not create a situation where the majority of people, who get into this scheme, are not concentrated in only one region and then the rest of the regions do not have that advantage. I would also like the mover to assure this House how the issue of regional and sub-regional considerations is going to be managed –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: He is my colleague. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is not? 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, honourable colleague. The information I would like to give you is, apart from the regional imbalance in skills, recently during the Anti-Corruption Walk, His Excellency the President directed that recruitment should be based on integrity rather than skills. How is this Bill going to address that directive? Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable colleague. I think that the mover is listening and he will give us an explanation on that so that we all move on the same page.

Finally, we have the National Curriculum Development Centre as well as the term and semester system in the education system. I do not know what the mover envisages. One, there are already loan schemes that the Government is undertaking. We have people who have benefitted from the loan scheme and Government is taking them on in this graduate scheme. Won’t this be double funding and yet, they still have a loan to pay? 

Mr Speaker, we have about 100 students who are benefitting from the loan scheme and the guideline is very clear that as soon as you finish and secure a job, you begin repaying this loan. However, before the person possibly begins repaying the loan, he will again access funding from Government and yet, there are other people who will not have accessed or even had the opportunity to access the loan while they are in school. There are these ones who have accessed loans and not even paid them back and this is tax payer’s money. How are we going to create equilibrium where students who have not accessed loans and those who have accessed loans can match fairly? 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I think what hon. Nzoghu has brought out is what brings fundamental departure from what we have been running in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and with what my colleague is introducing. The former Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Mr Bigirimana, introduced the National Graduate Scheme. This was unique in the context that when you are done with education in the universities, if you have no job, they improve on your employability and also give you some money to start income generating activities. They train you in skills related income generating activities so that in case you do not get a job, you can self-employ or if you get a job and you later lose it, you would still benefit from that training. 

This scheme has already been running. I have read through the object of the Bill of my honourable colleague, which includes:

    i. To establish a National Graduate Scheme; 
    ii. To provide a mechanism of bridging the gap between university education and employment opportunities; 
    iii. To provide young graduates with employment training through work-related learning.

Mr Speaker, the component of Graduate Scheme, which is already being undertaken, is not captured in this object of the Bill. That is where the fundamental departure is. This scheme has already been running as the National Graduate Scheme and we are introducing a Bill, which does not capture that component. 

I am wondering whether my honourable colleague compared notes with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to harmonise and also include the scheme, which has already been on going. Is it procedurally right to continue debating the principles of the Bill and finally, go to the Committee Stage without first capturing what has been in practice by the ministry? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was hoping that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development would speak to clarify on some of those issues. Honourable members, what we need to understand clearly is, is it a Graduate Scheme or a National Service? National Service, in my understanding, is done when you finish Senior Six and everybody is the same. The only difference is that some did sciences and others did arts but they are all senior six leavers. They then go for National Service. In Tanzania, I do not know how long it is; one or two years. This is done to re-orient the mind of the students to be ready when they go to university and that is the point that the honourable member was speaking to. 

However, when you talk about Graduate Scheme, it is skills oriented and it is already discriminated by the area of study. You cannot say that the Graduate Scheme is going to collect lawyers, doctors and engineers and put them together in one box. They are very different people by that time. Can we be assisted on these things? I will leave it to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to deal with this.

5.45
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this Bill, hon. Majegere, for trying to think that we could have this scheme, which will help our graduates. It is a public outcry that most of our graduates are unemployable. When we look at the outcry of the public sector, we have doctors who have graduated in various universities but cannot practically do what they are supposed to do. We have agriculturalists who got first class degrees but cannot put it into practice. It is very important that we have such a scheme, which will help our people. The issue of quality crisis in our higher institutions of learning is real. 

When we look at graduates, we should not only look at university graduates but other tertiary institutions like the Primary Teaching Colleges and other certificate awarding institutions as well. We all have people who really need training because when we look at the level of teaching and learning, that is where our problem starts from. We have the Education Standards Agency, the National Curriculum Development Centre and the National Council for Higher Education that are supposed to regulate teaching and learning in institutions of higher learning.

However, when we look at the quality of teaching in our institutions of higher learning, one finds that very little of what is learnt is actually practiced. In fact, there are some institutions who are already saying that they are going to start offering internship placements because what they do in the institutions is very bad. Much as we may think that students will have compulsory training after –(Interruption)   

MR MAGYEZI: I have been listening to the honourable member very attentively and you are making a serious point. Training in institutions is not good and does not produce the required results. 

Therefore, in one year, we would like to improve that. Honourable member, are you actually telling the Ministry of Education and Sports to help these institutions to review their curriculum so that the students produced from these institutions are up to the task? I find your statement almost a vote of no confidence in the entire Ministry of Education and Sports. Help me to understand this.

MR ETUKA: Thank you, honourable member, for that clarification. Mr Speaker, when we look at the National Curriculum Development Centre – we have a national development plan. Ideally, the National Curriculum Development Centre is supposed –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, like most of my colleagues, I rise to support this Bill because it helps to bridge the experience gap. It gives the graduates an opportunity to achieve hands-on experience.

When I graduated from Makerere University in 2000, my first employment was as a graduate trainee in the Directorate of Water Development. I was posted to Rural Water and Sanitation Project in Mbale, where I worked and after one year, I was interviewed. I emerged as a good performer and I ended up being employed in the water and sanitation sector for 10 years. 

Therefore, I think this is good but it is job-related not national service as such. If I may comment on welfare and the stipends as indicated here, the committee has indicated an amount but if you try to dig into the definition of “a stipend” you will realise that “a stipend” is a “fixed regular sum paid as salary” or you can refer to it as “a price for service rendered”.

I am not sure whether we should legislate on the amount of the stipend because there are many factors that lead to the determination of the amount and these factors change. The factors include inflation, cost of living adjustments and the ability to pay. This House legislated on the minimum wage but it was not assented to because some companies complained about the ability to pay and up to today, we do not have the minimum wage law. 

These are some of the factors that we –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, we are talking about the National Graduate Scheme and following your guidance, even the committee should have benefitted from your earlier guidance and the debate. They proposed the “National Graduate Service Scheme” – very many “Ss” there. Once it is a service, why should it be a scheme? 

I think the spirit of this Bill is very good. Hon. Majegere had an idea. When you look at the Bill itself, it is entirely on filling the gap on skills. It is a skilling Bill not service. However, the committee went about – even the Bill also goes about – national volunteer service. “Voluntarism” can match with “service” but not a scheme. A scheme is a plan or project but that title can be changed. When you come to the real beauty of the Bill, can’t we do it better?

I looked at the list of stakeholders invited and the National Curriculum Development Centre was not invited. If they were invited, their input was not in the Bill. The Ministry of Public Service, which should have been – in addition to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – a parent ministry, did not participate, at least according to the list of the stakeholders, which I have read.

If we take 25 graduates, for example, the proposal of Shs 370,000 per month means you would need Shs 105 billion annually. Public universities alone can produce the 25,000 graduates and I do not know whether you took into consideration –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Oboth-Oboth for giving way. Public universities alone produce 32,000 graduates. If you add, say, 2,500 graduates from each of the about 30 private universities, it is about 75,000 graduates. When you multiply the over 50,000 graduates by Shs 370,000 you would be talking about Shs 300 billion.

MR OBOTH-OBOTH: This Bill is very good. What can we do to save the spirit of this Bill? “Scheme” and “Service” – like what hon. Wadri of Arua Municipality is talking about. When you go to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, you will see the youths in uniform who are under the National Youth Service. When you go to Tanzania, it is the same and those are people who are yet to go to universities. I think the guidance the Speaker provided was brilliant. When they tried it here in Uganda, some of us complained.

It is even the cure to corruption. One of the things we need is the skill against corruption. (Laughter) Nationalism and patriotism is a value system. If we teach our children these right from our homes – some of those who have gone through the training are less thieving. In Kenya, at least, they are bold to say: “Wio muwizi.” Is that what hon. Majegere wants in his Bill? He is talking about the skills – the employability. I do not know whether the private sector or Government had conducted research and established that the very missing point is the skills.  If it is so, then there should be need for curriculum enrichment as hon. Magyezi said -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Just to tell my chairperson that when a point of procedure is raised, the person holding the Floor takes his seat. 

Mr Speaker, my chairman and young brother, hon. Oboth has made good fundamental points. Most important of which was to say that this is a good Bill and well spirited. He asked what we should do to save the spirit.

The first initial minutes went and he did not give us a way forward. I noticed that at the last minute, his extended time by grace was also ending without him giving us a solution.

Having known him for more than 20 years now, I saw him almost asking Parliament to send this Bill back to the committee with clearer terms to save the spirit of the same. Wouldn’t it be, therefore, procedurally right that you guide him to move in the proper direction? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Quite frankly, you two must have gone to the same school. However, I get the point. We cannot send it back to the committee because the committee has reported and the motion for second reading of the Bill has been moved. It cannot go back to the committee. We will have to find a way.

If the principles are okay, we adopt the principles. If we have to improve them in the provision, that is where we head and improve on them, which will in turn save the principles of the Bill. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Well, I believe I was concluding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are concluding out of your time already. Please, wind up.

MR OBOTH: I must thank hon. Seggona. It is true he had the benefit of going to school with me at the same time. That is why he talks the way he does. I trained him. (Laughter) However, the main issue is that he spoke my mind and I can say he knows me very well.

Refining this Bill should be the preoccupation of this Parliament. The refinery without losing that could be - because national service - I believe Government and everyone would be interested in that.

The scheming is where I have a problem but –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Majegere. As a senior cadre of the NRM, I would like the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I used to think that you are a Member of Parliament. (Laughter)

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, cadres are Members. What I was saying is that the Bill is brought in good terms. However, I would like to warn Government that they should not - if the service is brought, it should not be taken the way Kyankwazi things are done because other Members will shun it.

This is a national programme and I would like to request that instead of considering a graduate, I do not know how you will put it but at least, the youth scheme so that after senior four, everyone enrols - (Interjections)-  even senior six.

However, Mr Speaker, after senior four, everyone should enrol. I would like to request hon. Majegere - you brought the Bill in good faith but I would like Government to shoulder this Bill. Where there are issues of saying that people will be paying Shs 300,000 - I want Government to shoulder it such that people go there for the training.

Mr Speaker, I have seen people from the UPDF - when you tell them to do something, they will do it as per the instruction. Therefore, we shall borrow a leaf from that when we have such a training of national nature.

Therefore, this is the issue I wanted to bring about - if this scheme is brought and it is nonpartisan and it is at national service level, it is going to serve. I thank you.

6.03
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the mover of the motion. I have some concerns. What we currently know is that with our students at the university, they go for placement. This placement is an academic requirement, which they need to come with a report because it is examinable.

There are few places for such placements and students are left to look for placements on their own, some of them end up going for placements not in areas of their training.  Apart from the medical students who, on completion, go for one year internship in hospitals, others professionals go to just meet the requirements and not necessarily in the area of their training.

Coming to the scheme, we still do not have a database clearly telling us that within the private sector how many graduates are going to be absorbed in a year. Within Government, we do not ask the data of how many students can be absorbed within a year.

Therefore, I see that this is going to cause us a lot of problems. This scheme is now giving us employment requirements. Are we going to absorb all these graduates?

Thirdly, for one to gain skills, they must be placed under somebody’s supervision. Is the ministry going to have enough manpower to train these graduates within the private sector? Will they have enough people to supervise? Therefore, I see that there is a lot that needs to be done for us to come up with something that can be sustained. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Majegere for the Bill, which in my view, is well-intentioned and in good faith. 

However, like the debate has gone, we have to be clear on what kind of law we are making.  When you look at the objects of the Bill, they mix many things. One aspect is on the issue of giving the graduates technical, vocational and practical skills. Like we doctors, when we complete the medical school, you cannot be registered as a medical doctor until you have done internship for one year where you go for clinical practice; that is when the consultants will clear you. Therefore, that aspect is in the Bill.

Then the other aspect is patriotism and voluntarism like the way, after senior six, students used to be taken to Kyankwazi to be given those courses in patriotism, nationalism and so forth. Therefore, we have to distinguish between the two aspects and appreciate what exactly we want to do.

Therefore, we have to help the mover so that we distinguish those aspects and be clear on what we want to create. 

Secondly, this is one of the Bills, which has proceeded without a Certificate of Financial Implications because we changed the law to provide that if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development delays to provide a certificate, Parliament shall proceed.

However, as we note, even from the recommendations of the committee, there are huge financial implications. Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will have to pronounce himself on this because we would want to pass the law and have it effected.

When we talk of a stipend –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, we made a law called the Public Finance Management Act and we made a provision catering for default on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. My brother, hon. Chris Baryomunsi –(Interjections)- I am not embarrassed to say he is my brother.  (Laughter)

I need protection from the Attorney-General, Mr Speaker. My brother had moved very well in taking us through the history of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failing to respond to the request for a certificate and the law we made is to the effect that if they do not give it, then the certificate is given by operation of law. Is he in order to take us back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to pronounce itself?

I am asking this question with hindsight that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development hides in that mentality that they have overriding powers even when Parliament has pronounced itself, one by making a law and by you making a directive. Is he, therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, courtesy is one of those things you should handle with grace. This issue of the Certificate of Financial Implications is actually a courtesy that seems to be interpreted as a right, which is a mistake.

Why is it a courtesy? It is not required; it should not be required. It is a courtesy because it has to fit within the planning framework of the Government. 

Ordinarily, that is why you have a legislative agenda. They must all have financial implications to implement whatever Government programmes are there. Therefore, how do the ones coming from a private Member fit within that framework? What implication will it have? 

Therefore, what is required of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is to say, “this Bill will not have any implications in this financial year, this Bill will have implications in this financial year.” It flows from Article 93 and that is where the trap is for a private Member. Therefore, you do not have to come to the issue of a Certificate of Financial Implications because there is Article 93. 
Once Article 93 bars a Member from proceeding with a particular proposal, you cannot have this backhand blockade that you now seem to deploy at the certificate level because that is already after the event. Parliament has given the Member the authority to proceed. They can proceed with or without your certificate because it is a proposal from a Member protected by the Constitution and reinforced by our Rules of Procedure.

Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has no authority to use a Certificate of Financial Implications as a way of blocking a Member. It is wrong; actually, it is bad manners to try to do that. It is not something we are begging for because the law says so.

If you say it cannot be done this year, what happens is, on the commencement date, they will make an adjustment so that it can commence on another date when the finances can be made available. However, for this financial year, it cannot be accommodated because the money is not there. That is the advice that Parliament seeks from you. Parliament does not seek from you the advice of saying “no, I decline to issue the Certificate of Financial Implications.” I have seen a letter like that - completely outside the law.

I have seen a letter saying, “for the following reasons, I decline to issue the Certificate of Financial Implications.” That is really bad manners. (Laughter) Therefore, honourable, please, leave that line. Present your point but without that line.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, when I was still backbencher, I moved two private Members’ motions in this House, which were processed into Acts of Parliament. 

My intention of raising that concern was not to impute what hon. Sseggona is raising. My intention was, if we pass the law, it should be implemented and I just wanted to inquire from the Member whether he has worked out the financial implications if we are going to implement this Act, which I believe we should implement. 

Otherwise, I would like to thank the Member -(Interjections)- Can I be protected from hon. Wadri?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member from Arua, can we have some order, please?

DR BARYOMUNSI: My honest view is that once we pass a law, it should be implemented to it its fullest. That was the point I was driving at. I would like to say that we need to distinguish between what kind of scheme we are talking about; whether it is to give vocational and practical skills to students, which actually universities are doing these days because we receive interns every year in all our ministries and departments. 

Therefore, we have to distinguish whether we are skilling graduates or whether we want to train them in patriotism, nationalism and volunteer service so that we have a clear law, which all of us appreciate. Thank you.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank hon. Majegere for this Bill. However, like the Members have raised, I honestly have a similar opinion.

Much as the object of the Bill is good, the question has always been, if these graduates are placed in these institutions, who is going to pay them? Where is the money going to come from? 
If you take the example of the interns in the medical sector, they are paid because they are providing a service. These graduates will also be providing a service in the institutions where they will be working. 

I am glad that the committee has raised the issue of a stipend of at least Shs 370,000 but the biggest question is, if these graduates are placed in Government institutions, this implies that the Government will be mandated to charge the Consolidated Fund to pay that stipend.

If they go private institutions, are we going to compel private institutions to pay the stipend? Under what law or policy will we do that? These are the kind of questions that we need to answer.
In addition, we have had a challenge with our students who look for placement for internship. Some of them, to be sincere, have even failed to find where they can do their internship. When it comes to graduates, how will it be if it is by law? These questions have to be put in place. 

Thirdly, if this Bill is to be passed as it is, I will find it unconstitutional, especially when you look at Article 93 of the Constitution. I find this very complicated. 

Furthermore, much as I appreciate the spirit, I am asking myself questions; did my brother do enough research before coming up with this Bill? When you gather the issues and the spirit with which the Members are debating, you will realise that this would be a good Bill but the challenges are the complications around it. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to request - and moreover –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Absolutely, my twin member of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I had intended to give information to hon. Seninde in support of her arguments. The Employment Act defines an employee to include an apprentice and I look at this partly as an apprentice. I do not know why I suspected she would cede ground and I am now vindicated that even on a point of order, she was insisting – her debate is good and it is a matter that we need to give to address our minds to. 

However, along the way, she said that the Bill would be unconstitutional. Looking at Article 93, my point of order is two-legged; 

    1. Where the Bill has passed that stage when it came as a motion on this Floor and we cleared the private member, whether the Member would be in order to say it is unconstitutional on that account. 

    2. Where the honourable member does not tell us the unconstitutionality of the Bill but simply asserts that it would be unconstitutional; would it be in order for her to leave us guessing, knowing that it is our mandate to detect the unconstitutionality and stop it now?  However, she now leaves us hanging in the air without telling us. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I was hoping that point of order was not going to be raised so that we can facilitate this debate. 

The reason that Parliament gives permission to private Members to process Bills, that they know have financial implications, is because of the nature of the discussion they expect. This is in order for the consent to eventually be given and the Bill progresses. That is the understanding. Ordinarily, that authority would not have been given on the basis of Article 93 of the Constitution. However, it is given on the basis that there is going to be a consultation.

Hon. Okot-Ogong was granted such leave but they are regulating judges and their pay. It has financial implications but they told him to go, have a discussion with the concerned and we see how we can process it. That is the basis of how it passed that stage. However, if there is evidence that no such agreement has been reached, then, of course, you cannot bypass it. 
I was hoping that I was going to hear from the ministers that there is consent and this is a good matter so that we see how to accommodate it within our frameworks and see how to proceed with it. 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, the other concern is if we need the money and have to look for it. I remember, recently, we were here on the Floor debating the issue of the loan scheme. We were only requesting for about Shs 3 billion to add to what we had in order to cater for the remaining numbers and that money was not available. We need to put some of these things in consideration. 

Finally, as I conclude, with due respect, I find this Bill segregative –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, am I getting it right from the Executive that they are not in support of this Bill because of the financial implications? It looks like that is what I am picking. If that is the case, should we proceed? Can I hear from you clearly whether you are in support of this Bill or not because of its financial aspect? 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, it may be very difficult to support the Bill in the form in which it is in now. I must be clear on this; it is difficult to commit Government now. That is why we are raising these issues. 

Nevertheless, allow me to conclude by saying that I have looked at the Bill and the kind of category of graduates it wants to cater for; the university graduates. Remember, we also have certificate and diploma holders so I find this a bit segregative. It should have catered for all those kind of graduates.   

These are my opinions. Much as I support the objectives of the Bill, the way it is, it is very difficult – what will be the purpose of supporting a Bill and then, at the end of the day, it does not work. That is my genuine concern as well as that of the Ministry of Education and Sports and Government. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When my sister declined to take clarification, of course, I took it in good faith. I was trying to seek clarification from her whether it would not be possible to have a meeting of minds. Saying that the Bill is good is well-spirited but it needs to be re-oriented, especially where we have a ministry that is already undertaking the skill in Uganda so that the framework would be integrated. 

However, when she forced me to rise on a procedural point, I decided to ask whether it would not be procedurally right for the minister to advise whether this Bill and their Skilling Uganda, which is ad-hoc and is being financed without legal foundation, would not be integrated for us to get a better scheme? 

Part of the issues they are raising of the money, I can perfectly understand. I would also not agree with a law and a legislation that even puts figures. Would the principles not be integrated so that we can come up with a better scheme? 

As you have always advised us on the usual channels, is this not a fit and proper Bill to subject to our usual channels, have a few people from this side and that side to discuss and probably come up with a text that may be acceptable and affordable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, it is a proposal. The Deputy Attorney-General has set a different precedent. -  No, I am ruling.  (Laughter) The Deputy Attorney-General has set a different precedent. Motion for the second reading for a particular Bill was moved here last year in December and up to date, he is still consulting. That is the precedent set. I hope he is not going to come and say, he objects to what – he will not have the moral authority to say that having done exactly what he would be opposing. 

It might be a good place to start from that further discussions could be held on this matter. However, I would like to first hear from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Janat Mukwaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am persuaded to withdraw the ministry’s support for hon. Majegere because the way the report has moved deviates from my earlier understanding. Hon. Majegere told me that Parliament and Cabinet approved the green jobs with 12 pillars, which is a scheme construed in a project where there is volunteerism, apprenticeship, placement, Juwakali creating common user facilities, which addresses import substitution. Our young people, who are making bags, shoes and find difficulty in finishing, would come to these common user facilities and perfect themselves. I stated it in the committee and hon. Kyewalabye promised me it was going to be a pilot project but you do not have a law to back you up. I said, “Okay, if you are creating a law to backup these pilots, then it is okay.”  

However, the way we are moving now, it appears that it is not in that understanding. Last week, we passed out a batch of volunteers who were placed with the private sectors. These are graduates who have gone to school whether you are a lawyer, doctor, environmentalist or scientist but who float on the market and the market indicates that we want this one and we place this individual within an institution both Government and private. This volunteer goes into that workstation and is guided through how the factory or office works. You are retained for one year and we provide you with transport and lunch. You have been dying to get an address and to show that you are able and have the skills. 

I am glad to report that out of 150 volunteers that we placed in 63 institutions who volunteered to work with us, 100 were retained. However, 50 of them said that they do not need to be placed because the skills that they had acquired can enable them to start on their own. 

We are not on the same space because Government is the biggest employer but we have put a ceiling on recruitment because many governments operate at 30 or 50 per cent. I do not think this law is going to force Government to open up full scale. It is not going to and I am going to be the implementer. 

That is why I am saying that it is the private sector that we are going to rely on or even informal -(Interjections)– Lawyers, you really want to be steady. As a peasant, can I also be steady, then I will allow you. Otherwise, I will lose track. 

I am saying that if you were on the National Graduate Scheme and that is what you presented to me, which is the reason I supported you because that is what we are practising actually fewer than three pillars - when I was reading the report, I saw that you had included service, certificates and diplomas, which are too huge to bite. 

The Government does not have the capacity. You are talking about employment services to be at the secretariat under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because this Graduate Scheme, like hon. Sseggonna said, is premised on the Employment Act; it is not outside the law. The Employment Act requires that – Hon. Seninde’s ceiling is still pedagogy. 

For us, we are looking at transitioning from school to workplace. Once you are placed, you are getting employable skills and you must be in a place, which will give you these employable skills. It is not placement just for fun.

I would like to also inform you honourable colleagues that we should not mix nationalism with this scheme because we have another Bill called the National Service Scheme, which was deferred by Cabinet because of the volume. How are you going to implement it? Is it going to be residential? Where do we operate from? The two are different and you cannot mix acquiring employable skills with national service.

Mr Speaker, I would like to buy hon. Oboth’s proposal that we should be given more time. I supported hon. Kyewalabye because he was making a political point but implementation – (Laughter) – I must be frank. I supported him because he was making a political point. Everybody wants to come from here when he has something to deliver. However, if you get something, which is not well packaged, then it will not be implemented. 

That is why I would like to support him that he gets something that is good, pushable and I will support it. However, in this form, no, my brother. I am declining to support you. Thank you.

6.35
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, this time, I am not asking for more time. I am saying that it is very important that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Ministry of Education and Sports together with the mover get time to harmonise. 

Mr Speaker, you are very correct even when there is no Certificate of Financial Implementations, Parliament goes ahead with business. However, that realisation does not wash away the provisions of Article 93. I noted that in the original Bill, this issue of stipend was not there. By the time the Bill was presented to the House and when it went to the committee, it had no problem. 

However, during the committee debate, there was a proposal to insert a provision that stipulates for getting money from the Consolidated Fund in the event that these students are deployed in public institutions. Where else can you get stipend in a public institution other than from the Consolidated Fund? 

We have been handling cases touching this Article 93 and their Lordships in their ruling – and I am happy that my younger brother, hon. Sseggona, fully attended these proceedings although he did not participate - said that at any stage, the moment it occurs to Parliament that any proposal in a Bill has the effect of causing a withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund, at that stage, Parliament should know that the Bill has become unconstitutional because the law is very clear that Parliament “… shall not proceed on a Bill whose effect is to cause a charge on the Consolidated Fund”. I think this is a simple matter, which can be cured. 

All parties have agreed that the objectives of the Bill are noble. It is a matter of the parties meeting to see how to iron that out and if need be, to obtain a Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I do not know whether there is provision for co-sponsoring. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is just consent.

MR RUKUTANA: Yes, so that we move in an orderly manner.
 
MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify two points. The first concern was about harming the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution. I would like to say that the committee is mindful of this important provision of the Constitution. Our answer is that no provision in this Bill and no amendment from the committee imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund.

When you talk about “imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund”, you must mention figures as we do with the Appropriation Bills. If you read this Bill and the amendments, you will notice that we do not have any figures. You can only violate Article 93 if there are figures indicating how much money you are going to withdraw from the Consolidated Fund.

I also need to clarify the issue of the stipend. It is true that there was a proposal of Shs 370,000 as stipend in our report. However, there is no provision for that amount in our amendments. We agreed with the spirit of paying a stipend to the interns by saying that in view of Article 93 of the Constitution, let the ball be returned to the hands of the Executive.  

We said that the Bill has a provision for the minister to make regulations. When the minister is making regulations, he or she can put in place a provision for the payment of stipends. There is also the provision for enacting the terms and conditions of service of the interns. If the Executive is interested, they can also use this provision to ensure that a stipend is provided. 

Lastly, there will be the Budget process. If the Executive is interested in the stipend, at the time of budgeting, they will bring it as part of the Budget and this House can pronounce itself on the matter.

As the committee, we tried to do our work. Our report has been presented and it is up to the House to take a decision on the matter. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my colleagues for their input. I moved this Bill sometime back and the challenge was that I was unable to refresh the Members’ minds. That is why I see people mixing internship with employment training. Internship is the academic part of it but we are talking about employment training through work-related learning. In simple terms, it is job training. (Interjections)– Yes, you can call it “on-job training”.

An employer would want an educated person, who is skilled and who has work experience. Work-based behaviours differ and there is no way you will take these work-based behaviours to the academic institutions. We are looking at a graduate. Colleagues, I have very many graduates in Mayuge – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a substantive issue raised, which may not allow you to speak any further. I wanted you to respond to that issue first. If you respond in support of it, we will have another opportunity to have this discussion. However, if you want us to proceed the way you are attempting to do, you may not be able to proceed further. 

The proposal that has been made is that we pause at this stage for you to re-engage, make those adjustments where necessary and get the necessary consent. I have just given you the example of the learned Attorney-General whose Bill we are still trying to process a year after the motion was moved. (Laughter) 

It might be something to learn from; that you may not achieve everything. If you find that the hill is becoming tougher and the bicycle is not moving quickly upwards, instead of ruining the bicycle, you might want to step down and start rolling it; ask support from other people so that we can move together. 

What is your view on the proposal that we could have further engagement, clean it up a bit and have consent from both sides and you sail like you live near the waters?

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that fatherly guidance. Actually, the minister invited me. When she came before the committee, we agreed on some issues and she said, “Come to my office so that we can try to agree on some aspects.” I went to her office and she gave me certain commissioners with whom we agreed. However, that meeting did not yield much because it is as if the minister did not get the information on what we agreed on. (Interruption) 

MS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, Members should not tell lies. I am not operational. A commissioner is the technically competent person to handle your issue. When I sent you to the technical people, they reported and I have the amendments here. Even when I was not around, hon. Mutuuzo appeared and our amendments are handwritten here. 

I am saying that we supported you earlier but there are things that I cannot commit Government on.

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I would like to take your piece of advice that –(Interjections)- concede is different -(Laughter)- I would like to take your advice that I will consult with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development because she has volunteer graduate scheme, which is similar to mine but without a law.

I will consult with the minister of Education and Sports who also has a similar scheme funded under Uganda Manufacturers’ Association, which she is not aware of. However, Uganda Manufacturers’ Association is doing the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me suggest this. Do not even meet them individually. Prepare your brief and they will each prepare a brief including the chairperson of the committee, then, you have a joint meeting and say okay, where is the problem? How do we cure this?  All of us are interested in this Bill. And then, you come out and they say “okay.”

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, I pray that you give somebody to preside over. Please, give us somebody; if it is Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to invite, I am willing.

6.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, may we help hon. Majegere. I would like to appeal to my colleague hon. Majegere originally from Soroti. (Laughter) He was born in Gweri in Soroti, if you did not know and that is why I am calling him my brother.

It is in good spirit that hon. Mukwaya here has been motherly in her approach in handling this matter. When she got and said she is withdrawing her support, it is for now but not in total. The words the Rt hon. Speaker used are for re-engagement. What you need to get here and if there were some misunderstandings here and there, let us put that at the back and see how we can be able to move forward.

Like hon. Mukwaya put it, that she wanted to help you because there is also a political gain that you will need to achieve out of this, it pays and gives you a mileage that you passed a law through private Members’ Bill. Let us have the spirit and go with it and get back and arrange for the – there will be an arrangement even with the leadership of the chairperson of the committee. He can be there and we sort out the issues identifying those we can be able to take.

Therefore, what we will expect from you, hon. Majegere, is just to concede that, “Mr Speaker, I concede. We are going to reengage and then come back to you.” Like the learned Attorney General asked here for two months, if you want time to be given, then, the House and the minister can give you the time that within this period, we shall be able to reengage and conclude and come back here with  a refined Bill for us to engage on.

Therefore, hon. Majegere, that is our appeal. It is not that they are throwing away everything. I know how eager you are to have this go through but in a refined form. That is what we are appealing to you and I will support you on reengagement, then, we see how to move forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for purposes of handling this, this matter is still in Parliament and the person who heads meetings outside Parliament on our behalf is the chairperson of the committee. 

Therefore, under the convening of the chairperson of the committee, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will be there with her technical people. I hope the learned Attorney General will make himself available to give some guidance and  the Minister of Education and Sports so that - this is a good thing really - and then, you break down the issues and they are clearer under the leadership of the chairperson and the chairperson will come and communicate and we finish this Bill.

MR MAJEGERE: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS MUKWAYA:  Mr Speaker, I was thinking that if you take us to the chairperson, we shall be in Parliament and yet, the issue we want to sort out with him - but he is now nervous with me - I was proposing that the Attorney General chairs the meeting between Ministry of Education and Sports, him and I and then when we are done, we then go to the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct. There will be consultation. You can do whatever consultation you need before you come to the formal meeting. Those meetings that you are going to have with the chairperson will have minutes, which will be laid before us here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that in the Bill, it never put any money. Hon. Majegere was very careful that he never put money in the Bill. It is the committee which rose -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I say that we have already finalised on that issue and we are moving forward with this proposal? Whichever way you go, this Bill will have financial implications. If it does not have financial implications, then it is a useless Bill.

That is why I am saying that you harmonise and then come back. You cannot have the National Graduate Scheme without financial implications. It will be a dead thing. You are forming committees and many more, who is going to pay the committees?

Honourable members, we have gone this far. Thank you very much for sitting this long. House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 




