Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 5 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE deputy SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The main communication was made yesterday. We have lots of business to handle today so we will proceed straight to business.

However, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have councillors from Mbale District led by the District Council Speaker, hon. Muhammad Mafabi. They are represented by hon. Sizomu Gereshom Wambede and hon. Connie Nakayenze Galiwango. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Are they here? We will do it again. 

Let us proceed with the Order Paper. There is a point of procedure. Which one do we take first? The Leader of the Opposition takes precedence and even the issue of “ladies first.”

2.05
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for accepting the procedural matter, which I raise today.

I have been following rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda – and it is mandatory when it states, ‘Shall’; those who have the books can check – it states, “Every last sitting day of the week, the Leader of Government Business shall make a statement in the House regarding the government business of the succeeding week.” 

He is supposed to update us every Thursday on the priorities of Government business. I know we have Notice of Business to Follow on the Order Paper. However, we do not only rely on that Order Paper for Government business, which is our priority, to make us also prepare a little better. Can the Prime Minister or his representative tell us today why rule 28 is completely violated when “shall” is used?  Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, Parliament operates in a very structured way, which runs as follows:

At the beginning of every session of Parliament, the President makes the State of the Nation Address. In that statement of the President, an outline of activities that are going to be engaging Parliament or the legislative agenda of the Government is always presented by the President.

When the President does that, normally the Prime Minister extracts it and presents in the Business Committee of Parliament what they call the “Legislative Agenda of the Government” for that year. The projections and timelines notwithstanding, the whole list is presented.

When the list is presented to the Business Committee of Parliament, the committee then becomes aware that we expect the following business to come.

The way that rule was structured was to take care of a situation where we work properly. Parliament would say, “This particular week, two Bills are going to be finished in which case it leaves us with next week. Which of the other legislative activities that have been proposed is coming the following week?” Then the Prime Minister will come and outline that.

The Prime Minister will not come out with priority on something we do not know already. The Legislative Agenda is known; so, it is on that basis that he breaks them down on what they call the weekly Order Paper, where he outlines what would be handled the following week.

Honourable members, you can see the challenges we face. We have Bills that have stayed with us. If the Prime Minister came and said, “We are going to bring these two Bills next week,” they would do so and then we proceed. I have not seen any specific damage that has been done by the lack of that Weekly Order Paper because we have a lot of activities in the committees that have not come out quickly as well.

Therefore, it is neither here nor there but we need to start functioning properly. If we did, it would be critically important; actually inevitable for the Prime Minister to come up every week and say, “Honourable members, we have finished these activities. The following are our priorities for next week. We will bring the following Bills or do the following things.” That is how it would work if we were doing things according to the rules in totality.

However, that is the challenge we face that we have to stand up to so that our rules start making sense to us. Thank you. There is another procedural matter.

Mr okupa: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday, 05 November 2019, item number 4 on the Order Paper read,
“Laying of papers in accordance with rule 31 of the Rules of Procedure:

    a) The Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.
    b) The Annual Macro-Economic and Fiscal Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.”

Again on the Tuesday, 03 December 2019, the Order Paper read under item 5,
“Laying of papers: 
    i) The Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.
    ii) The Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.”

Mr Speaker, this is meant to be the same document the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid on 3rd and again on 5th. Is it procedurally right for the minister to lay the same document twice without withdrawing the first one? Or is there something we do not know?

I have a copy of the Hansard of those two days with all what was laid to this House. Is it procedurally right for us to continue receiving two similar documents laid without any clarification on what happened to the previous one? I do not know whether this has come to your attention.

The deputy speaker: Thank you, honourable member. All those documents are laid within the framework of the Public Finance management Act. Usually, the institution of Parliament operates on the basis of trust between it and the Executive arm of Government.

Therefore, regarding documents that are brought from the Executive, the presumption on which we operate is that they have been scrutinised and prepared properly and when they come to the House, it is for scrutiny. Therefore, our process is that we start with the documents.

However, experience is beginning to show that sometimes when we receive documents and look at them, they are not the ones. Therefore, that trust is now under attack and it is going to make us double our work. Instead of receiving documents and trusting them, we are going to start receiving documents and querying them, which would complicate procedure for both the Executive arm of Government and ourselves.

When the Executive arm of Government brings documents to us, we operate on the principle of trust; that they have done their homework and finished everything so that by the time those documents come here, our work is to receive and act on them.

This is not the first time that documents have been brought three times without even pointing out that they brought one before, which would be the correct procedure. If the document you brought earlier had some issues and you now want to replace it, the correct procedure would be that you withdraw the other one and put the correct one. There is no prohibition to that.

However, if the documents are the same and there are no variations in them then a repetition of laying them would not necessarily be correct. We will be looking at this again and giving the proper advice when we examine the documents. Thank you. 

There are some Members who had requested for the Floor. Can I start with Kitgum Municipality?

2.15
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance.

On 14 August 2019, there was a group of Ugandans who went to a radio station in Kitgum and announced that they have a project called Online Finance Limited. They held a talk show and the next day, held a workshop giving assurance to the people that this is a registered company in Uganda that is giving our people finances.

Mr Speaker, the terms were that those who registered and deposited some money would get 2 per cent profit daily on the money they deposited. Thereafter, every morning at 7 a.m., depositors would receive a message that their money had been credited. People were encouraged and kept on depositing. Later when they wanted to withdraw the accumulated interest and initial deposit from their mobile money accounts, they could not. 

This company called Online Finance Limited, with its offices at Church House, registered over 23 people in Kitgum Municipality and collected over Shs 100 million. On 14 October when these people failed to access their money, they raised concern. The managing directors are Reuben Niwagaba and Joshua Waiswa. These were the people in charge and they kept on giving people false promises that they would be able to withdraw the next week but they could not withdraw.

Mr Speaker, in August, one of the complainants named Denis Oluba went to police and opened up a case against Online Finance Limited and it is registered as 473/2019. Thereafter, the case was brought to CID Headquarters in Kampala and yet most of the 23 complainants are in Kitgum. Some tried to come to Kampala and follow up but ironically, one of them was arrested.

As I speak, these people are still asking for their money. The offices at Church House have been closed and the business owners have switched off their phones. Our appeal is that Government should intervene.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that a similar scenario is happening. There was a time when Front Page also defrauded people with promises of motorcycles before they disappeared.

My prayer is that the Government and more so the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and tell us about these registered companies because if you go online, this company is registered as Online Finance Limited. How can they operate and defraud Ugandans without anybody having a trace of them?

We would also like the Government to help these victims by tracing these suspects and recovering the funds that they have defrauded from our people. This is hard-earned money. Some of the victims want to commit suicide because that was all the money that they had.

Mr Speaker, if you go online, you will find that these people have registered some properties that can be attached so that money is recovered and our people are helped. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister -

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to give this information to Members but also to the entire country that if a deal appears to be too good, it is not a deal. If somebody comes to you and says that there is a business you can do and you would get two per cent profit - that is around 36 per cent per month - that is really not a deal. The internal rate of return in Africa now is 13 per cent. There is no business you can do to give you more than that.

While we know the situation that our people are in, we would like to appeal to the Resident District Commissioners (RDC) that let no company or organisation operate in a district without going through the RDCs, especially when they are connecting with the people directly because these are conmen.

Mr Speaker, I pledge that I will work with the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure that these people and this company are brought to book. 

In addition, someone can put up a website online and it appears good when it is actually non-existent. Therefore, I would like to request Ugandans to desist from quick money. Quick money is bad money. These deals, which appear to be good, are dangerous. Thank you.

2.22
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. There is a bridge in Kashongi called Obugyemeko that has finally collapsed. This bridge connects Kashongi sub-county and Kitura sub-county and its collapse has affected the movement of people as well as businesses in the constituency. It might subsequently cause damage to people in terms of death.

Mr Speaker, this matter was already reported to the Road Fund. I wrote to them and the bills of quantities were submitted to them from Kiruhura District. 

I pray that this Parliament compels the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with the Road Fund so that the bridge that collapsed can finally be reconstructed so that we can save the people of Kashongi County. 

MR KAHIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of order. Is hon. Kiyingi in order to come to this House in a manner that is not decent for this House according to rule 81. Is the honourable member in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The point of order has been overtaken by events. (Laughter)

2.25
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to speak about the emergencies that have been caused by heavy rains. My colleague presented a similar matter yesterday. However, I am here to speak about Sironko, which is heavily affected. 

We have registered four deaths in Zesui Sub County; two children and two adults were killed by the floods. The situation is an emergency across the constituency. Almost eight sub counties have been affected. 

I was on the ground yesterday and a major bridge on a UNRA road at a place called Kiguli, which links a market and several sub counties, has collapsed. Two other bridges have also collapsed. 

A number of households have had their crops destroyed and you know that agriculture is the livelihood of our people. The team from the district is on the ground, verifying the extent of the damage – I can tell you it is huge. Nearly everywhere, crops and a number of buildings have been destroyed. 

I reached Bugitimwa and I counted about seven houses which have been destroyed. A number of vehicles that had crossed to the other side are stuck with produce. I would have asked for the area to be declared under a state of disaster. 

I, therefore, call upon the Office of the Prime Minister to quickly constitute emergency teams on the ground from the various sectors, particularly the Ministry of Works and Transport so that they fix the bridges, especially the ones on Kiguli, on River Sironko, on Masagala and others so that life can get back to normal. 

The lasting solution would be that the Prime Minister comes up with a deliberate programme to quickly relocate people and the best would be to compensate people and they vacate from those areas. We are talking about relocating to a place in Bulambuli but it is not enough to host the large magnitude of families that have been affected. 

I also pray that this time round, Government purchases iron sheets and re-roofs houses for those whose houses have been affected. The people are actually staying outside without shelter. I pray that emergency shelter meanwhile be provided as we provide relief food. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope that something more urgent and more serious can be done by the Office of the Prime Minister and the sector ministries like works and health. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, this matter was raised yesterday on another part of Bugisu and now this is Sironko. It looks like the whole belt in Bugisu is now under attack by this disaster. 

There were some statements that were made here in commitment to action to try and help people. Would you like to restate them, honourable minister? 

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true that the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness made a comprehensive statement, by then, on how the situation was and we agreed and committed to this House that we are raising Shs 20 billion to attend to these urgent emergencies across the country. As I said, in a few days, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness will access this money and will start attending to these issues. 

I would also like to suggest that maybe the minister should come here to address us regularly because it is happening every day. The rains are coming and they are not about to stop in the near future. It is important to come and speak here but also, the doors of the Office of the Prime Minister are open so that every day, we attend to these issues as we get the resources. The minister should come regularly to update the House.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, my brother, for accepting to clarify on this. The clarification I am seeking from him – especially now that he is standing in the shoes of the Minister of Finance and also the Prime Minister – how do you run a Government with a ministry that has no continuing budget and that whenever a disaster occurs, we must keep waiting for the ministry to access funding? 

Would it not be better that the ministry is given money to attend to emerging situations as and when they arise? Or would you like to say that you gave them money and they have depleted their budget? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Sseggona. Currently, we are working under the Public Finance Management Act where we have a contingency fund. It is through this contingency fund that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness accesses resources to attend to these emergencies. This law was made by you. We cannot have a contingency fund under every ministry, as it stands now. That is something we can look at. We are running the Government very well. So, I do not know what you are talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the last time I read the law, it said something like there would be an automatic percentage from the budget automatically accredited to the Consolidated Fund. Has that law changed since? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, that has not changed and I think when you were in the Chair, you made a very strong statement about this matter. However, the circumstances in the appropriation process are different from the reality. We are supposed to have Shs 157 billion, according to the percentage of the Budget but Parliament was only able to appropriate Shs 67 billion.

Mr Speaker, I will communicate the details of why and how it happened in another Sitting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we do the Budget – since we work on reallocations, my recollection is that some money, which had been put for the Consolidated Fund, was moved for the other Budget. Why are you then bringing it now if it is not for this Budget? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I request that we correct this situation in the next financial year so that a contingency fund is put there automatically as a percentage of the total Budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying that for this financial year, the automatic percentage would have been Shs 147 billion?

MR BAHATI: For this year, the amount, which is available, is Shs 67 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am asking is: Would the automatic percentage have been Shs 147 billion? Did you propose it to this House?

MR BAHATI: Given the previous experience, we only proposed Shs 67 billion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we need to work on this because these are the results. When disaster strikes, we start running around, which is not a good way of doing business.   Thank you. Can we now go on the Order Paper?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES UNDER ARTICLE 179(1) (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND DECLARATION OF CITIES UNDER SECTION 7 (2A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT CAP.243

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was moved on Tuesday and spoken to. All that was left for me to do was to propose the question. However, there is a pending matter from Kashongi; the bridge that has been washed. We have not heard any commitment on what is going to happen to this directly. When bridges are washed away, we need to create a temporary situation to enable people move but it looks like the Minister for Works and Transport is not here today. 

Honourable members, we do not like statements; we like action. Statements do not help us much. If a bridge is washed away, how will the statement help us here? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Minister for Works and Transport will attend to this issue tomorrow morning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence under rule 50 to raise a supplementary question. The Minister of Internal Affairs answered a question on Tuesday about the need for sniffer dogs in Mayuge. However, the answer was too general.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Weren’t you here to ask the supplementary question?

MR WIARA: Yes, my apologies, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedure is that you lost the chance; the train left the station. 

Honourable members, the motion on creation of cities was moved and we had some interaction on procedural matters and some complicated debate that I was not following very well because I had not yet proposed the question. It looks like Members had anticipated what was going to come and they had issues to raise in the preliminary, before I proposed the question for debate.

The title of the motion talks of alteration of boundaries under Article 179(1) and declaration of cities under section 7(2A) of the Local Governments Act. I summarised that when they talk about alteration of boundaries of districts, it has two aspects. One is that the cities themselves would be the equivalent of districts and therefore, their boundaries need to be declared. That amounts to alteration or declaration of boundaries.

Two, some of the city boundaries will affect other districts. Those districts have submitted resolutions that they concede to the fact that parts of their districts be ceded to create the city. There will, therefore, be that aspect of alteration of the district boundaries. That is how the motion is structured; to take care of both those situations.

Honourable minister, when we left, I gave you an assignment. One was to prepare a summary of the boundaries of each of the cities proposed and lay them on the Table to be part of the records of Parliament. I do not know whether you are ready with them. You could lay them on the Table and then I see how to proceed. I recall that you read them but they were not in a state where they could be laid. You can now formally lay them before Parliament.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have very well stated, when we adjourned the other day, you instructed me to lay on the Table today, resolutions of districts.

Mr Speaker, with great pleasure, I beg to lay them on the Table, one by one:

    1. Arua District
    2. Gulu District

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just tell us the date of the resolution.  

COL (RTD) BUTIME: We have the following: 

    1. Arua District – 9 August 2017
    2. Gulu District – 18 February 2019
    3. Mbarara District – 27 March 2019
    4. Jinja District – 3 August 2015
    5. Mbale District – 28 February 2019
    6. Masaka District – 23 August 2018
    7. Lira district – 13 August 2015
    8. Soroti District - 2 July 2019. 

Mr Speaker, we did –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, when we had a discussion yesterday, the document that the Chairman of Soroti District presented in the afternoon was reading May but you are saying here that it was July; I beg to be corrected. I just picked up when hon. Nankabirwa said “yesterday.”

COL (RTD) BUTIME: 9. Entebbe Municipality - 15 April 2019
10. Wakiso District - 2 April 2019
11. Hoima District - 30 August -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which year was it? 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: It was 2015. Mr Speaker, for Fort Portal Municipality, it was 26 February 2019. Mr Speaker, there have been a series consultations because we had to agree on the boundaries, demarcations and so every other month, we have had consultations but all the documents are also available. The last and most agreed upon besides other resolutions are the ones I have brought here. 

Mr Speaker, you also asked me to lay on the Table the composition of each of the divisions in the 12 proposed cities and I have laid them.

The boundaries of Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, Hoima, Lira, Entebbe, Kabale and Soroti have been determined. The boundaries for Moroto, Nakasongola and Wakiso shall be determined as of April 2020 and I will bring them to this House for approval.
	
The reason I have here is that consultations, as I said on Tuesday, were not yet concluded. Yesterday, we were able to discuss and conclude very comfortably with the honourable members from Teso region and we agreed; that is why I have produced the composition and we had the opportunity of having the chairman of Soroti District.

I have no doubt that by 20th April next year I will bring the configuration of the parts that will constitute Wakiso, Nakasongola, Moroto, and Kabale cities. 

With Moroto, we had very fruitful discussions and I have no doubt that by April next year, we will be able to bring these divisions with the wards and cells to this House for discussion and finalisation.

Before I go to Cabinet, we received resolutions from districts; the teams from the Ministry of Local Government go to those areas being proposed and they authenticate which areas are going to constitute a division or a ward. When they come back to the headquarters, we authenticate and study and at the end of the day, we advise and go and study together with the districts many times - 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019.

Therefore, if a resolution is dated 2019, it does not mean that that was the first time of this matter; it could have been the 10th time as far as the discussion of these cities is concerned.

There were districts which applied as far as 2014/2015 and those resolutions are here; some are dated 2019 but might be as old as 2014 when discussions began and how many times the teams travelled to that town until conclusively the matter was handled and finalised. 

The best and most comfortable way of handling this matter is to make sure that we have a district resolution; without it, the basis is slippery because you do not have a district resolution and that is why you have to go on and on until.

It would be stark folly, unwise, difficult to bring here a district, a city like Wakiso when you have not completely finalised the demarcations but you can pass it in principle while you work on the nitty-gritty.
That is why I propose that in the case of Moroto, Nakasongola, Wakiso and Kabale as we agreed, by April 2020, we shall have concluded our consultations. I thank you.

Mr Speaker, let me continue reading out the composition of the divisions. I will start with Arua again. 

Arua City

Arua Central Division

    i. Arua Hill Division and
    ii. River Oli Division (The current Arua Municipality)

Ayivu Division

    i. Pajulu sub-county;
    ii. Adumi sub-county;
    iii. Oluko sub-county;
    iv. Dadamu sub-county;
    v. Aroi sub-county;
    vi. Manibe sub-county;
    vii. Ayivuni sub-county (Current Ayivu County)

Gulu City

Laroo-Pece Division

    i. Laroo Municipal Division;
    ii. Pece Municipal Division;
    iii. Laliya Parish of Bungatira sub-county;
    iv. Unyama Parish and Pakwelo Parish of Unyama sub-county
    v. Pageya, Kal and Ocaya Parishes of Koro sub-county in Omoro District

That constitutes Laroo-Pece Division. Those are the administrative units in Gulu District.

Bardege-Layibi Division

Administrative units in Gulu District

    i. Bardege Municipal Division;
    ii. Layibi Municipal Division;
    iii. Parishes of Laroo and Agonga of Bungatira sub-county.

Administrative units in Omoro District

    i. Parishes of Patuda, Alokolum and Kweyo in Ongako sub-county.

Hoima City

Hoima East Division

    i. Kyentale Ward; 
    ii. Nyakambugu Ward;
    iii. Kicwamba Ward;
    iv. Bwikya Ward;
    v. Southern Ward; 
    vi. Northern Ward; and 
    vii. Central Ward of Hoima Municipality.

Hoima West Division

    i. Kihombooza Ward;
    ii. Kyesiga Ward;
    iii. Karongo Ward;
    iv. Bujura Ward;
    v. Western Ward;
    vi. Kasingo Ward;
    vii. Kihuukya Ward;
    viii. Kibingo Ward and 
    ix. Kiduuma Ward of Hoima Municipality.

Mbale City

Industrial Division

    i. Industrial Municipal Division;
    ii. Wanabe Municipal Division; 
    iii. Bukasakya sub-county;
    iv. Nauyo Bugema Town Council;
    v. Bungokho Mutoto sub-county; and
    vi. Lwasso sub-county.

Northern Division

    i. Northern Municipal Division;
    ii. Nakaloke sub-county;
    iii. Nakaloke Town Council;
    iv. Namanyonyi sub-county;
    v. Namabasa sub-county and 
    vi. Bukonde sub-county.

Lira City

Lira West Division

    i. Adyel Municipal Division;
    ii. Ojwina Municipal Division and 
    iii. Lira sub-county

Lira East Division

    i. Central Municipal Division;
    ii. Railway Municipal Division;
    iii. Adekokwok sub-county;
    iv. Ngetta sub-county and
    v. Ilwal sub-county.

Jinja City

Jinja North Division

    i. Bugembe Town Council; 
    ii. Mafubira sub-county; and
    iii. Budondo sub-county.

Jinja South Division

    i. Mpumudde Municipal Division
    ii. Walukuba Municipal Division and 
    iii. Masese Municipal Division (The current Jinja Municipality)

Mbarara City

Mbarara North Division

    i. Kakiika Municipal Division;
    ii. Kamukuzi Municipal Division;
    iii. Biharwe Municipal Division; plus 
    iv. The villages of Rwenturagara, Kafunjo of Bubaare sub-county

Mbarara South Division

    i. Kakoba Municipal Division;
    ii. Nyamitanga Municipal Division; and
    iii. Nyakayojo Municipal Division

Fort Portal City

Fort Portal North Division

    i. Karambi sub-county;
    ii. Bukuku sub-county;
    iii. Kiguma sub-county; and
    iv. Karago Town Council. 

Fort Portal Central Division

    i. West Municipal Division;
    ii. East Municipal Division;
    iii. South Municipal Division; and
    iv. Ibaale Parish.

Entebbe City

Entebbe Central Division

    i. Entebbe A Municipal Division; 
    ii. Entebbe B Municipal Division (The current Entebbe Municipality);
    iii. Katabi Town Council; and 
    iv. Bussi Sub-County. 

Entebbe North Division

    i. Kajjansi Town Council; and
    ii. Kasanje Town Council.

Masaka City

Kimaanya-Kabonera Division

    i. Kimaanya-Kyabakuza Municipal Division and 
    ii. Kabonera sub-county;
    iii. Senya and Kiteredde Parishes of Kkingo sub-county in Lwengo District.  

Nyendo-Mukungwe Division of Masaka City

    i. Nyendo-Ssenyange Municipal Division;
    ii. Katwe-Butego Municipal Division;
    iii. Mukungwe sub-county; 
    iv. Parishes of Kitengesa, Bulando in Buwunga sub-county, all in Masaka District; and 
    v. Parishes of Kasange and Kibisi of Kalungu sub-county in Kalungu sub-county.

Soroti City

Soroti East Division

    i. Eastern Municipal Division;
    ii. Western Municipal Division;
    iii. Amen Town Council; and 
    iv. Opuyo Parish of Soroti sub-county

Soroti West Division

    i. Northern Municipal Division;
    ii. Arapai Town Council; and 
    iii. Madera Parish of Arapai sub-county.

Kabale City

Kabale North Division: Administrative units in Kabale District

    i. North Municipal Division;
    ii. South Municipal Division;
    iii. Central Municipal Division;
    iv. Nyabushabi Parish;
    v. Villages in Kyanamira Parish of Bunombe, Karubanda, Nyakahita 1 and Kanyinobuliba;

Administrative units in Rubanda District

    i. Kitojo Parish;
    ii. Kagarama Parish;
    iii. Muyanje Parish;
    iv. Bubare Parish;
    v. Nyamiyaga Patish;
    vi. Bushura Parish and Bigungiro Parish 

Kabale South Division

    i. Kitumba sub-county;
    ii. Kamuganguzi sub-county and 
    iii. Katuna Town Council.

As I have said, Mr Speaker, we had very intensive discussions for Moroto and agreed on a way forward; that by April 2020, together with Nakasongola and Wakiso, I will come here again and fix these boundaries so that we keep the momentum. 

There was an issue some time here that certain Members had not been present when the district councils were deliberating about the boundaries of the cities. I am a Member of Parliament and I do not attend every district council’s meeting as an ex-officio Member. That does not stop what the district has decided to proceed with. 

Therefore, there is every possibility that some Members may not have had the time - because they are busy here in Parliament and other duties in and outside the country - to attend the council meetings where that particular resolution was passed. That does not mean, however, that the resolution is invalid. Thank you. (Applause)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I thought ministers are better than this. Mr Speaker, with immense respect to hon. Tom Butime, I am the Member who mentioned on Tuesday that Wakiso District has not passed that resolution authorising the curving out of the three sub-counties being mentioned. 

As a Member of this House, I feel insulted when the minister insinuates that I was not present when the resolution was passed and yet it was I who said it. I am backed by documentary evidence that actually, the resolution he is talking about has never been passed by the district. What he has presented is actually not what is in the document. 

I am armed with the resolution of the district. I have served your office today with the same. What he says is contrary to what is in the resolution. The last resolution of the district meeting held on 27 March 2019 under Min.163/UWA/DLC52019 upheld the earlier resolution which he was talking about. In that earlier resolution together with the latter resolution, which is the latest on the subject, was to the effect that we recommend the upgrading of Wakiso to city status.

Is the minister in order to insinuate, therefore, that I missed the meeting, which never took place especially when he brought a forged document which is not the resolution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those things where we need to move together. I listened to the minister and anybody listening without a background and hearing what the minister said would have thought he was making a general statement to all district councils where we all belong. 

His statement was to the effect that probably because of our busy schedules, we might not have attended the particular meetings where these particular decisions were made in those councils. I thought it was a general statement without the background. 

Even if there was a background, I still think he made it generally enough to take care of another concern if it is raised by another Member. He was just trying to cover the whole place that the resolutions were made by the district councils, which members of Parliament most likely may not have attended. 

Therefore, I find it difficult to say he was out of order. He has been very courteous in what he was saying. (Applause)

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Now I know that he was not referring to me. (Laughter) For those he was referring to, who speak out of lack of knowledge, I agree with him. With respect to those of us who know the subject, I again will agree with him. I would like to thank the minister again –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you are going to begin to engage on the motion, can I propose the question formally?

MR SSEGGONA: Before that, Mr Speaker, because that presupposes that all the components of the motion are properly before the House. Whereas I am always persuaded and I am one of the authors of the proposal to grant city status to Wakiso District, I have a difficulty where I need to be guided by your good office. 

We have very serious reservations to the creation of two cities in Wakiso District; that is Entebbe Municipality and then the remaining Wakiso. Our troubles are two-legged. The first leg is that whereas we need cities, we need viable cities. Those cities must conform to the law and certain parameters as laid down in policies and laws.

First, as you guided, is that before you alter the boundaries of a district, you must have a resolution of that district. In the motion, there is a proposal to curve off Katabi Town Council, Bussi Sub-county and Kajansi Town Council, formerly Ssisa Town Sub-county. That one is not backed by a resolution of the district because the resolution is that you upgrade the entire district.

I am armed with the concept note that generated this debate as far as Wakiso District is concerned and I am happy to share it by laying it on Table. The most important component in there was the reference to regulation 32(a)(3) of part six of the third schedule of the Local Government Act, which stipulates the parameters as a requirement of law before you declare a city: population, the size and et cetera. We have not been able to share with the minister the consideration they had. We are always happy to share.

The second leg is that when you look at the population of the proposed Entebbe Municipality going by the last census, it is about 70,000 people – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He rose on a point of procedure.

MR SSEGGONA: 70,000 people. Even when you get the resolution of the district to add the three sub-counties or town councils, it would take you to a population of 170,000 people. Still, that would fall short of the required statutory minimum of 500,000 of 500,000 people because that takes you to about 300 and you are still far less.

Taking your guidance of Tuesday on this matter, and to demonstrate that we are committed to working together, I spent the whole of yesterday and almost last night, looking for information, including from UBOS and I have been able to access it.

We are not objecting to those areas where thorough studies have been made and that are already to go. We are happy and I am speaking as a national legislator. In respect of those particular areas where more needs to be done, I seek the indulgence of this House that the matter be referred to the relevant committee of this House with timelines. We can share the technical information available - (Interjection) - I am talking about Wakiso and Entebbe because technically, you cannot create Entebbe now. Technically, you cannot create Wakiso unless we engage and we want a city. 

We may refer this particular case of Wakiso to the relevant committee of this House. Mr Speaker, if you are pleased to give us timelines, we are now equipped with all the information. We would then come back and go to that second leg of the motion. Guide us procedurally, Mr Speaker, if that would be a better way forward because we are happy to move. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is a procedural point that I need to guide on, unless somebody is going to assist me with that. Would you like to? Okay.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to share the concept note on the proposed Wakiso City signed by the district chairperson, Mr Matia Lwanga Bwanika, with all the relevant information. I beg to lay on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that. Honourable members, the procedural matter that is raised by hon. Sseggona is to the effect that we could handle the substance of it. We could handle proposals that have no issues and finish with them. Those that have issues, we would then refer to the committee and give the committee a tight timeline, since the facts are already available, within which to come back to the House and then we deal with that. However, for those that are clear and have no issues, let us deal with them. That is the substance of his procedural matter.

This is my guidance. This matter came up yesterday and on Tuesday as well, where there was a proposal that came from the Leader of the Opposition that we handle this matter one by one. When we do that, each time we reach one that is complicated, we defer it and the matter goes to the committee. However, where there is consensus on the particular proposal, we finalise with it. Is that the agreement? If that is the agreement, that is also my ruling –(Laughter)– Can I now propose the question formally?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, before you propose the question -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am not putting the question. I am proposing for debate.

MR OKUPA: Yes, before you do that - Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report today. However, after presenting it, I waited to hear about the dates of commencement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The dates of commencement are in the motion and he already presented them.

MR OKUPA: That is where I have an issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable. They are already in the motion. If I propose the question and I open the debate, that might be the area where you want to intervene and make proposals for change because it is already in the motion.

MR OKUPA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter, specifically rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure. I appreciate the ruling that you have given but at the same time, I wish to seek your indulgence. I have a motion with which I would like to amend the minister’s motion. 

Mr Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence to allow me to move a motion so that when debate ensues, the issue of Kasese will be debated together with the other issues that the minister has moved. I wish to seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am actually fully with you. That can only come after I have proposed the question. When I propose the question for debate, that is when you rise to debate and make your proposal for amendment. Is that better? At this moment, I cannot say, okay, move your motion because there is no formal motion before the House, which I have proposed a question to.

MR NGOZHU: Mr Speaker, it will cause me no harm if you allow me to be the first person to debate so that I can present my motion. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules that govern that is also separate. It is called catching the Speaker’s eye. If you want to negotiate that you catch my eye, that might not be procedural.

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that Parliament, by resolution, alters the boundaries of districts under Article 179(1)(a) of the Constitution and creates cities under section 7(2A) of the Local Government Act Cap 243. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now with a point of procedure from Maracha. Are we debating by procedure today?

MR OGUZU: Mr Speaker, I am not coming to debate but I am raising a procedural matter. I know that every Government action must be preceded by a policy framework and an enabling regulatory framework within which we can be able to operate.

Before us is a proposal for many cities. Aware that Kampala City has a law that governs its operations and we now have all these cities, I do not know under what regulatory framework we are going to operate. That is the guidance I seek from you. Would we be proceeding well to go into creating cities when there is no enabling environment? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My recollection is that Kampala was created sometime in the early 1920s as a city but the law for its regulation was passed just a few years back when Kampala had been in existence for over 70 years.

Secondly, the framework we are using to deal with this is the Constitution, which grants permission for this to be done. There is also section 7(2a) of the Local Governments Act, which authorises creation of cities. Therefore, we are doing perfectly well in terms of how we are proceeding. (Applause) So, if you would like to deal with this and do the regulation later, that will also be in order. However, for now, let us debate this matter. We have had enough procedural matters.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: I am rising on a point of procedure. As I can sense the mood, everybody is interested in this particular subject. However, I would like to plead with the minister to also lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications. We would not like to give birth to still children. We would like to give birth to a child that will be fed and operate normally. 

Can the minister lay on the Table the statement of financial implications to assure us that this motion has money, which has been put aside to ensure that the cities will be operational? Although you have put them in phases, we would wish to know if there is money for this financial year.  Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, you will recall that the first cities will come into force in the year 2020/2021. That presupposes that the certificate for the other ones will come in the other financial year. The presumption is that it is not affected by this particular budget for this period because they are not coming into force this financial year or the subsequent one. However, for clarification, honourable minister, in case you have any documents to that effect, would you like to speak?

Mr Butime: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a certificate for the creation of the nine cities and a certificate for the creation of Mbale and Masaka cities. I lay them on the Table.

These certificates are signed by Mr Patrick Ocailap, the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury. This other one is signed by the same person for the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development/Secretary to the Treasury. This is for those starting next financial year, 2020/2021, and not the financial year 2019/2020. 

The rest of the certificates for the financial year 2021/2022 will be in the budget preparation of that financial year. Those for the financial year 2022/2023 will be in the budget for 2022/2023 and so forth. I lay them on the Table.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: My view is still valid because there are 12 cities but you are laying certificates for nine. We as an institution are going to pass this motion, which will affect 12 cities. 

We would like all this clarified so that you do not strangulate and start condemning us. Be straight forward and say that you have laid on the Table only nine certificates out of the 12 cities we are about to approve.

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, can we just do business? The nine certificates cover nine cities, which are coming into effect in the next financial year. The remaining ones will be accordingly done in the subsequent budgets to accommodate them. We did that with the districts and the municipalities. Therefore, I think we are proceeding well. Let us debate but if there is no debate, I will start putting the questions. Let us start with the Member of Parliament for Busongora North.

3.28
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will still seek for your indulgence. I pray that I am given some reasonable time because I am moving an amendment.

The deputy speaker: Just move the amendment and justify it. Honourable member, you start by proposing the amendment and then justify it.
  
Mr nzoghu: Mr Speaker, I wish to move an amendment to the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the alteration of boundaries under Article 179 (1)(a) of the Constitution, and declaration of cities under section 7 (2a) of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243. I would like to also move under rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This motion is seconded by hon. Winfred Kiiza, the Woman Member of Parliament for Kasese District, and others.

“Whereas the Minister of Local Government moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament on alteration of boundaries under Article 179(1) of the Constitution and declaration of cities under Section 7(2a) of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243.

And whereas –” 

The deputy speaker: Honourable member, you do not have to go that way. What you need to do for the House is to state, “I would like to propose an amendment as follows: …amend paragraph one of the motion to include a new subparagraph marked… Kasese City”, then you justify it.

Mr nzoghu: Mr Speaker, I was building the background to it and I wish to continue that way.

The deputy speaker: Propose and then justify.

Mr nzoghu: Now, therefore, I beg to move under rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure that the motion moved by the honourable minister on page 1 under paragraph 6 is amended by inserting the words, “Kasese Mineral City” immediately after the word “Moroto”.

Secondly, on page 2 of the minister’s motion, I wish to insert a new subparagraph (xvi) immediately after subparagraph (xv) to read as follows: “Kasese Mineral City will comprise Kasese Central and Busongora South divisions.”
 
Under paragraph three, part 2, I wish to propose the effective dates for operationalisation of the mineral city. Under (d), insert a new subparagraph (2) immediately after subparagraph (1) to read as follows: “Kasese Mineral City”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded?

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Members for Bukonjo West, Bukonjo East, Buliisa, Chua. That is enough justification for the motion. The motion is seconded. Can the Member speak to his motion. 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to be guided on the procedure. I imagine that there is a formal procedure that every area or local government entity goes through to qualify for a given status. An area goes through a certain procedure to qualify for a district, a municipality or a city. 

Mr Speaker, would it therefore be procedurally right that we propose creation of cities simply by amending a motion? To what extent shall we be sure that the area being proposed to be a city is ready to be a city? Otherwise, if that is the case, I would be happy to propose Kitagwenda City and back it up, if it is possible to create a city through amendment of a motion. Thank you, Chair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the justifications, motions or whatever are attendant to the proposal cannot be in the motion; they can only be in the justification. That is why I was saying, can the Member speak to his motion and probably in the course of speaking to his motion, he lays on the Table some documents to that effect. 

We are only hoping that that will happen. If it does not happen, then that matter would have been very properly placed. However, for now, he still has an opportunity to do that. Can he justify his motion?

DR BARYOMUNSI: My brother is from Kasese and Kasese neighbours Kanungu, so I would wish Kasese to be elevated. However, I am raising on a point of procedure in accordance with Article 93 of our Constitution – restriction on financial matters. 

Article 93 of the Constitution says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 

(a)	 proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following – 
(i)	 the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;
(ii)	 the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;
(iii) 	the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund… 

(b) 	proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article”

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally correct for this House to proceed on an amendment to this motion when it has an effect in terms of imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund because the cities have to be funded? Since the Minister of Local Government has heard the wishes of the people of Kasese, wouldn’t it be proper that we leave it to the minister now to consider it and then it is moved by Government, if it has to be moved, other than a private Member bringing this amendment to the House? That is the procedural guidance I seek from you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I have been here seated and I listened to you allow a motion to amend the minister’s list to include Kasese. My understanding is that by the time you allowed that, you actually appreciated the Constitution and you understood the law very well. Therefore, is Minister Baryomunsi, who is actually a doctor, who is now in charge of housing –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But who is a Member of this House.

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, he is a Member of this House, which gives him permission actually to contribute. However, is he in order to raise a matter of procedure which is in direct confrontation with your authority that actually allowed hon. Nzoghu to amend the motion? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I draw my authority as Speaker of the House from the Constitution. So, my ruling and guidance cannot be outside the framework of the Constitution. I am bound by what the Constitution says, and in this case it says what has been read. 

This matter was raised formally with me on Tuesday and my advice was, “Please, consult with the Minister of Local Government.”  You see, if the minister or anybody in Government consents to it, then that motion can be substantially moved without a problem. However, if they do not consent to it, then you have a challenge. I had this discussion with the Members. 

Now I need the Minister of Local Government to help me. The matter is that your consent is sought as Government to this proposed amendment.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You advised hon. Nzoghu and myself to consult. However, since Tuesday when you advised us late evening, this is the first time I am seeing him (Laughter) I looked for my brother and I could not find him; his phone was switched off, and that is a fact. So, we did not consult because he was not keen, I imagine, on this matter. 

However, I have the following to say on this motion: I do not have a district resolution from Kasese District expressing interest in elevating Kasese from a municipality to city status. I have not been to Cabinet on this matter. Since there was no resolution, there is no way I could have gone to Cabinet without this resolution. 

There is no technical report on the same issue. I do not know what the configuration of that city would be. There is no certificate of financial implications. I do not know the most recent estimate of the population. I do not know the local revenue which Kasese Municipality generates now. 

Lastly, the Ministry of Local Government has been busy building a huge Shs 24 billion market in Kasese. We have been more involved in developing the municipality with roads and the market. Let us concentrate on the development of Kasese Municipality; the city will come later. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, by implication – he did not say it directly – the minister has not granted consent to this motion. One of the points he raises, which is lack of a certificate of financial implications, is not sustainable because there are others that do not have and they are here. 

However, that is what the law says, unfortunately – “…proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes prescribed in paragraph (a) of this Article.” Paragraph (a)(i) includes imposition of taxes and (a)(ii) includes imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public funds of Uganda. That would be the relevant consideration, because the honourable minister lists several reasons why he is unable to give his consent to this motion; he needs technical reports and all those things before he can go to Cabinet to get clearance. 

In the absence of the motion being supported by the Government, I have difficulty to entertain it under Article 93. However, if the honourable member has things he would like to put on the record of Parliament, for example district resolutions and other technical reports – the things the minister has talked about – he could lay them on the Table and then we see how to proceed. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your ruling because it provides all of us with a chance to diagnose what the minister has said. However, it is not true that my phone was off because I have a record of other phone calls that I made in the morning. So, the honourable minister was simply lying. 

Mr Speaker, today I was simply seeking leave of this Parliament to allow me move an amendment. However, I wish to seek your indulgence so that you allow me bring a very detailed file next Tuesday. I have full details of what the minister is talking about and I would like to submit them on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the starter of this particular activity is a resolution from the district. Instead of saying you are going to bring a whole file, do you have a district resolution to that effect? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the district resolution is there and I would like to submit it on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, you do not have it here? 

MR NZOGHU: I did not actually bring it with me here but I will submit it on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am suggesting is that if you have any document - You have moved a motion and your motion should be accompanied by enabling documents. One such document is a district resolution. You could not have attempted to move a motion to amend and include Kasese when you are not holding that resolution in your hands. That is why I am saying, you could lay it on the Table now. However, in the absence of even a resolution from the district, there are some challenges. Do you have a resolution from the district? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I have put it very clearly that we have a resolution from the district. Today, I was only seeking your indulgence to allow me amend this motion. Once I am allowed to submit these documents, I will submit them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not seeking leave to present a private Member’s Bill. This is a motion and you proposed an amendment to it. If you have supporting documents to your amendment, this is the time to do it. You cannot do it any other day. This is “action” now; the camera is rolling. I think this issue is very clear. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The lack of clarity stems from the fact that when the minister was speaking about Wakiso, he did not have a specific district resolution or boundaries in respect of creating two cities. However, with your guidance on doing business, we understood that we would allow hon. Nzoghu time to also produce a resolution and we do business. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, a resolution for hon. Nzoghu will not solve the problem of Article 93. All I was saying was that let it be on the record of Parliament, not that it would enable us bypass Article 93 because it will not. It is as simple as that. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am seeking to persuade you and Members of this House that the proposal coming from Kasese can be allowed.  

In Constitutional Petition No. 3 of 2017, which was affirmed in the Supreme Court, the question of a certificate of financial implication was discussed extensively by the Justices of the Supreme Court. One of the cardinal interpretations was that the certificate of financial implication is only needed in the medium term, and it was submitted by the Government team that it takes effect within the next two and half years.

Mr Speaker, in the absence of his proposal for the city coming within the next three years, the certificate of financial implication, according to the interpretation of the Supreme Court, is not necessary. It is only necessary because Government has already planned in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. It is only within that framework that if you propose anything, it disorganises the programme of the Government.

It is therefore my submission that the objection based on the absence of the certificate of financial implication, as considered by both the Constitutional and Supreme courts, is that unless Kasese is seeking to become a city within the next three years, that is when they will be required to present the certificate of financial implication. I would like to persuade you. I do not have it here but I think the Speaker can guide on that matter. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us make this matter simple. When we try to complicate it, we get confused.

Honourable members, we are not talking about a certificate of financial implication. We are talking about Article 93, which does not talk about a certificate. In fact, the only time the word “certificate” was mentioned was initially in our Rules of Procedure and the Public Finance Management Act. It is not a matter of the certificate of financial implication. It is a matter of Article 93, which says, as long as that proposal has an effect of imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund, it can only be moved by Government or with the consent of the Government. Can we proceed with the debate?

3.54
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to second the motion for the creation of cities in our country.

I would like to thank the minister and the Government for considering particularly Acholi sub-region and all other regions. Like the minister clearly said, it is for development, and there is no part of the country which does not need development. Since development is evolved from the local level, I support this motion.
	
Mr Speaker, as you are aware, Gulu city serves eight districts in the Acholi sub-region, and it is only Gulu City and Kitgum Municipality that are the satellite towns of our region. I would like to put it on record that for a region like northern Uganda, which is basically agricultural, the creation of a city will create more administrative units, attract investors and better infrastructure. The same will apply in the other cities. 

Therefore, I will not be one of the people who will say, “no” to any proposal of Government to bring services nearer to our people. I would like to urge my colleagues that since other cities will come later, we should embrace this without much ado. 

Mr Speaker, without wasting much time, I support the motion for creation of the cities. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would not like us to go back on our words. On Tuesday, when I asked if we agree to the creation of cities, we were unanimous. We cannot therefore have the debate as to whether or not we should create cities since we agreed. We actually agreed that we should create cities.

We now need to go to the actual creation of those cities, which we agreed to create, which does not attract a debate. At this very moment, I am called upon to check whether we will be competent to do it. Honourable members, we will not be under the constitutional provision and guidance of the court on this matter where the Constitution makes a specific vote requirement, which is not by simple majority. We need the record of that vote. 

Since we are proceeding under Article 179, we require a majority of all voting Members of Parliament to vote in favour. Currently, we will require a vote of 223 Members in support of the alterations of the district boundaries. Looking at the numbers we have now, we would not be able to do that and the rules give me a way of handling that.

In the meantime, in public gallery this afternoon, we have district councillors from Wera Subcounty, Amuria District. They are represented by hon. Musa Ecweru and hon. Susan Amero. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have councillors from Mable District led by the District Council Speaker, hon. Muhammed Mafabi. They are represented by hon. Sizomu Gershom Wambede and hon. Connie Galiwango. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, the rules say that when I am about to take a vote and I do not see the numbers, I can suspend the House for 15 minutes and come back for a recount. If we are able to proceed, we will do so. House suspended for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 4.00p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.15 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have applied the provisions of our rules. The activity we were going to engage in was to take decisions, which are dictated upon by the Constitution that it should be a majority of all Members of Parliament. This means we should have a record of that majority and the number would be 223; 220 Members would be a half. I suspended the House for 15 minutes and on return, the number has even become less. I do not know why. (Laughter)

Honourable members, in the circumstances, we will not be able to take a decision on this matter; we will review as we progress. However, we have other matters on the Order Paper. Therefore, please stay because we can take this decision any time if the number is appropriate. Let us handle the next item. We defer this matter and any other matter which requires this kind of vote.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INSTITUTE AN INQUIRY INTO THE STATUS OF THE UGANDA ASSOCIATION OF EXTERNAL RECRUITMENT AGENCIES MONITORING FUND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we will defer Items 3, 4, 5 and 6. All the items that involve local governments will be deferred waiting for the appropriate number. If we have the number, then we will proceed with them. Is there any item that we can handle without the appropriate number? I do not think so. We need the number.

I think Item 7 was going to be withdrawn. Honourable minister, is that correct? Have you presented the motion? 

COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME: No, I have not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we take it that the motion will not come?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: We realised that if we passed Moroto as a city before passing the expansion of Moroto Municipality, it would be superfluous to come back later and pass its expansion. Therefore, we thought that we would come here and after receiving Moroto as a city, we would withdraw my motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not yet on the Floor, so there is nothing to withdraw so far. I am just saying it is an item that might not be handled. 

Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here? We had deferred this matter to today to allow the presence of the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be able to listen into the motion.

4.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Janat Mukwaya called me this morning to apologise that she would not be able to be in the House today and she requested that we consider this matter on Tuesday. Hon. Nakiwala is indisposed. Hon Peace Mutuuzo is handling yet another matter and there is no other minister of state that she could delegate. She also requested me to ask for Tuesday.

4.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, that is why yesterday I got up to say it hurts. There are certain things that we cannot continue deferring forever. There are up to four ministers in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have the senior minister, hon. Janat Mukwaya and then we have the Minister of State for Gender and Culture, the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs, and the Minister of State for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations. 

Even if there were three ministers under that docket, for all of them not to always be here is wrong. That is why the Prime Minister has to prioritise and make sure his ministers come here to help us move. Maybe he also does not care about the businesses of the House.

Uganda is one nation. There are people who are not doing their work and yet there are vulnerable people down there. That is corruption. Yesterday, you marched and you thought you were doing away with corruption but it is still persisting. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we receive this motion and debate it or we should wait for the minister? 

4.23
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move a motion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the view is that we wait for the minister. However, it is your motion and that is why I wanted your opinion. The minister asked for Tuesday.

MR MWINE MPAKA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter is deferred to Tuesday, 2 o’clock.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. JOHN BAPTIST LOKII ON MEDIA REPORTS THAT GIRLS FROM KARAMOJA SUB-REGION WERE BEING TRAFFICKED TO JOIN THE AL SHABAAB IN SOMALIA

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember this matter was raised on Tuesday and in my comments, I had made it clear that we would do some investigations this week and give an answer next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Therefore, I am surprised that it is on the agenda. However, we still maintain our undertaking. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we would just like to check that you are there, but you are always there. (Applause) 

MR OBIGA: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that we get a breath of fresh air.

RESPONSES BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO ISSUES RAISED BY MEMBERS 

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi raised a question regarding non-payment of honoraria for Local Council I (LCI) chairpersons. Our response is that the resource was not budgeted for during this financial year. We will be budgeting for those that were not paid next financial year.

Hon. Joshua Anywarach raised an issue regarding the precarious situation of newly created subcounties whose operationalisation had been deferred to next financial year. This matter is being discussed by Cabinet and we are planning to budget for the newly created subcounties in the next financial year.

The last question was raised by hon. Nganda Ssemujju of Kira Municipality on the alleged dubious importation and exportation of gold through Entebbe Airport that has cost Uganda colossal sums of tax revenue and the need for explanation on activities of Africa Gold Refinery Limited.

Mr Speaker, we are still investigating the issues of tax evasion and we are requesting that we report back to the House next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

4.28
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a supplementary question for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The minister has just said that they will be budgeting for the payment of all honoraria in the coming financial year. I would like to know whether they will be paying the accumulated arrears or they will just pay beginning from the coming financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are they arrears or from that date?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, they will be paid what is due to them, according to the law. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will be paid what is due to them according to the law. (Laughter) That means arrears. Do you have a supplementary question, honourable member?

4.29
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for responding. However, I think he trivialised the whole issue of honoraria to the elected leaders. We have new subcounties created out of old ones. Administratively, the old subcounties are now saying that they budgeted for everything and it is now up to you, but they are not operational. By the way, they have gone ahead and sworn in those leaders. How will these new subcounties operate yet when they go to the old ones, the old ones are saying, since they are now new subcounties, they are independent?

There is also the question of collecting revenue from those markets that exist in the new subcounties but are still being managed by the old subcounties because the new subcounty councils are not operational. That is where we got stuck and we expected them to give us a comprehensive answer. However, they have only gone ahead to answer us on payment to the subcounty –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The challenge is that you brought it under urgent matters and urgent matters are handled that way.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. SANTA OGWANG ALUM ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Santa Ogwang Alum, Woman Member of Parliament, Oyam District, raised concern about the continued incursion of elephants into communities of Oyam District, neighbouring wildlife conservation areas.

She informed Parliament that elephants had destroyed food crops and caused fatal injuries to the communities. She also requested Government to compensate the affected communities and support the capacity of the game rangers to appropriately handle wildlife incursions. 

Mr Speaker, you referred this to my ministry and here is the response: Honourable members, prior to Independence Day – I would like to give a background –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it is an urgent question, so answer accordingly - no background; simply deal with the matter. If you were there, you would have dealt with it but it is because you were absent.

MR KIWANDA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, we must agree that the number of animals have increased greatly as well as the population of Uganda. We have done the following to curb the problem: Specifically for Oyam, we have excavated a total of 38 kilometres of elephant trenches at the border with Oyam and Kiryandongo District to deter elephants from crossing into the communities.

We have also reinforced our teams of rangers in the area and increased our capacity as the honourable member requested.

We have planted Mauritius thorn hedges around Murchison Falls National Park and also continue to work together with the affected frontline communities through the volunteer wildlife scouts programme. So far, 310 wildlife scouts have been trained, equipped and are actively participating in the elephant control programme at the frontline villages. The number of trained scouts in Karuma-Chobe sector of Murchison Falls National Park currently is 110 scouts. We moved from 40 because of this problem.

As a result of crop raiding especially during the harvesting period, we have established a temporary elephant control ranger post for quick response in such hot posts. We have established Nora Outpost in Kamdini Subcounty, Oyam District. We have also established a post at Burudugu in Mutunda Subcounty and Mpumwe in Kigumba Subcounty in Kiryandongo District for such purposes.

In swampy rocky areas where trenches cannot be excavated, chain link and barbed wire fences have been installed as barriers against elephant problems. This has been done to prevent more human-wildlife conflicts.

In addition, Uganda Wildlife Authority has recruited more rangers to ensure quick response not only in Murchison Falls but also in some other areas. We have also finalised a countrywide feasibility study on issues to do with electric fencing. Murchison Falls is one of the other parks that we are now embarking on after Queen Elizabeth National Park.

I wish to conclude by saying that Government is fully committed to addressing the challenge of the human-wildlife conflict. We have changed it to a more positive human-wildlife relationship. We stand ready and fully resolved to deal with this problem.

On the issue of compensation, Parliament passed a law but we are still working on regulations regarding this. There are regulations that we must follow to put the law into practice.

We seek your support, especially in having more resources appropriation to this ministry, to make sure that we handle and resolve the human-wildlife conflict and improve on the relationship between wildlife and humanity.  Thank you.

The deputy speaker: These matters do not invite clarification but supplementary questions from the person who raised the matter. That is what the rules say. The Member of Parliament for Lira District was delegated to act on behalf of the Member of Parliament for Oyam District - Hon. Agaba, on whose behalf do you stand? Who delegated you?

4.37
Ms joy atim (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. The Member of Parliament for Oyam District delegated me to ask these few supplementary questions:

One, she would like to know what has become of the revenue that was supposed to be sent to the district. Of recent, such money is not there anymore.

Two, she also says that the trench has been dug only for about eight kilometres. You are talking of 38 kilometres but she says it is only about eight and it is already being covered so far by the elephants. What efforts are you trying to make sure that life is protected?

Three, on the issue of compensation, she said that ever since the law was passed in this House, there is still conflict. Many lives are being lost. What effort is the ministry making to compensate the families of those that were killed by the animals and those that are yet to die as a result because the work is not taking off very first?  Thank you.

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, the first one on revenue is not a supplementary question. Deal with the two.

4.39
The minister of state for tourism, wildlife and ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, on the issue of the trench, it is long but it might be covering only eight kilometres in Oyam District. However, it is 38 kilometres also covering other districts. When you are preventing elephants from crossing over, you do so even from the neighbouring districts because they can still enter using other districts. 

The deputy speaker: Have the trenches been already covered?

Mr kiwanda: It is not true that these trenches are covered. Honourable members, if you check our trench that is on your left from Kiryandongo up to River Nile and across, it is only in some areas where it is swampy that it is not there. However, from these areas, our trenches are very visible and operational.

I can agree with you that the problem still exists. On Tuesday, I will be in Oyam to address the same issue with my team on the ground. I can appreciate that the problem still exists but we are trying to do everything possible to reduce on this problem and where possible, do away with it.

You also raised the issue of compensation. I answered this. I said that much as the law was made in Parliament and the President has already assented to it, we are still working on the regulations, which could take us the next six months. The law talks about a compensation fund. We have already started mobilising it because that is two per cent. 

We could not have implemented this law this financial year because we had not planned for it before. Next financial year, the law will be in full operation because even the fund has been mobilised for compensation. We could not do this because we had not planned for it the other year. We have now budgeted for it. Of course, we are still working on the regulations but we are very sure that by that time, they will also be ready.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice, learned Attorney-General, Government Chief Whip; where is everybody? Hon. Betty Amongi, are you the whip for now or the Leader of Government Business?

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the two ministers are not in the House because of some engagements. We request that we handle other matters on the Order Paper and then next week, we handle The Administration of Judiciary Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR THE AWARD OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIP TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. On the matter relating to the Administration of Judiciary Bill, we need to get a commitment from Government. The committee to which I belong processed that Bill long time ago; almost eight months ago. 

Particularly, this is a Bill relating to another arm of Government and in a way, it has caused paralysis in this arm of Government. We need a commitment from Government on when we will have this Bill out of the way. As a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we may seem as though we are not doing our job and yet the report has been on the Order Paper for more than six months.

Mr Speaker, we need your guidance on this particular Bill. Other Bills could wait but to me, this particular Bill is very important and as Parliament, we do not need to look as though we are trying to stifle and frustrate another arm of Government from doing its job.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I said yesterday. I had asked them to come and make that commitment today and as you can see, they are not here. The shadow Attorney-General, who is here, lacks the competence to make a commitment on behalf of Government so we will deal with this another way. Thank you. 

Is hon. Majegere and the chairperson for the committee on Gender here? I can bring the Bill forward as, I am told, the report is ready and they are both ready. Can we proceed with that Bill?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO REVIEW THE TAX REGIME ON CCTV CAMERAS AND AUTOMOTIVE TRACKING DEVICES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have staff members from Gulu University led by Mr Asaph Ndabua, the University Secretary. They are represented by hon. Lyandro Komakech and hon. Betty Aol Ocan. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

4.48
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to review the tax regime on CCTV cameras and automotive tracking devices moved under rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the Constitution establishes different security organs of the State such as the Police, the Army and the National Security Council that are mandated to ensure security of Uganda as a nation;

AND WHEREAS the security situation in the country over the last years has been characterised by murders, such as the killing of the then Police Spokesperson Andrew Felix Kaweesi, the killing of Muslim clerics and murders of girls;

AWARE that on 20 June 2018, the President of Uganda addressed the nation about the security situation and explained 12 action points that the Government would take to address security situations including the installation of CCTV cameras and encouraging the installation of private CCTV cameras;

FURTHER AWARE that the President commissioned CCTV cameras on 8 October 2018 at the National Command and Control Centre at Nateete Police Station and thereafter, 122 live CCTV cameras were installed to monitor Lungujja, Old Kampala, Rubaga, Kawaala, Kabowa, Nateete and Mutundwe;

COGNISANT of the fact that in April 2019, Parliament authorised Government to borrow up to US$ 104 million from Standard Chartered Bank to finance the national CCTV network expansion project and the debate in Parliament indicated the tremendous importance of CCTV cameras;

FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that the Democratic Party, on 2 July 2019, asked the Government to remove taxes on CCTV cameras to enable many Ugandans to install them in their homes and businesses and on 5 September 2019, while reporting to Parliament, the Minister of Internal Affairs, in his statement to Parliament on the situation, noted that acquiring CCTV cameras for private individuals is still expensive and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was being engaged to review the tax regime on this so as to make CCTV cameras for private individuals more affordable;

NOTING that the advantages of CCTV cameras are numerous; the Police can identify criminals recorded with cameras, the police can prevent crimes from happening and can quickly solve criminal cases with material evidence from CCTV camera, and cameras protect against property theft and vandalism; if there are no witnesses to a crime, the surveillance footage will aid police in investigation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be resolved that:

    1. Parliament urges Government to revoke taxes on CCTV cameras and automotive tracking devices so as to make them more affordable.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Members from Kitagwenda, Bugaya, and Busheshe. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many Ugandans are willing to install CCTV cameras in their homes and businesses to beef up security but the only challenge we have, as Ugandans, is the affordability of the cameras. It is still a challenge for a common man to afford one camera that costs between Shs 500,000 – and that is one of poor quality - and Shs 2,000,000. 

When you inquire on the open market why they are very expensive, the retailers say that the taxes are very high on the cameras. 

We have had so many killings of boda boda cyclists. In most cases, I have heard the President urge Ugandans to install the tracking devices in their vehicles and motorcycles. The challenge we have is that those tracking devices that would have been of great importance to us are too expensive. 

I have a feeling that if Government can revoke the taxes imposed on CCTV cameras and tracking devices, it would make these devices affordable for Ugandans, including myself. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.57
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second this motion because it is one of the efforts being made to beef up our own security and especially those who can afford but are being prohibited by the exorbitant taxes. 

For the Ugandans who have been able to install these cameras in their homes, the cameras have helped not only for security purposes but also tracking what happens in their homes, especially when children are left alone with nannies at home. 

It is also right for us to support this motion because it is in line with Government planning because as has been stated severally by the Head of State, we are moving in the line of improving our security consciousness in order to curb crime that is very rampant. 

As Government tries to put cameras in different parts of the roads, I think it is wise for us as individuals to install cameras in our homes that can help improve our security. 

Installation of those cameras is very expensive because it requires a lot of technical expertise. If we remove taxes on the cameras and the attendant accessories, then it will help encourage more people and reduce even the cost of installation itself and that can help to improve our security. I beg to second. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that Parliament adopts a resolution urging Government to review the tax regime on CCTV cameras and automotive tracking devices. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. 

4.59
MR SSENGO KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

However, I request that the mover should have given us more statistics like how much tax Government is likely to lose by removing the tax. This is because you may find that the amount involved is so negligible that Government can get this money from elsewhere. 

As you will appreciate, the question of security is very important for this country that if we improve our security, we will also encourage more investors to come to this country but once you have insecurity, then investors will find it difficult to come and invest in this country. 

I appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to work out the figures of what we will lose by removing tax from CCTV cameras so that we get to know the costs that will be involved. 

I also request that when this tax is removed, steps should be taken to make sure that we do not get fake cameras because of recent, fake imports are very common in this country. 

This is what we are looking to; that we get cameras of good quality, that we establish the actual cost and that the minister of finance tells us what he is going to forego by removing the tax. Otherwise, I fully support the motion. Thank you. 

5.01
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the seconder. I believe that it is important, as we decide on what to tax and what not to tax, that it should be in tandem with our policy, with what we want to do and our plans for the country. 

Lately, there has been a lot of insecurity, not to say that all Ugandans can afford CCTV cameras but like it has been said, it is important to encourage whoever can afford. I know that Ugandans have an attitude towards low price so even if the difference is a few shillings, it will make a difference. They will feel that it has been done for their sake and that Government cares about their security. This will encourage them to do this and I think this is movement in the right direction.

I rise to support the motion, not because it is going to reduce the price a lot but to show that Government cares and is looking for ways to ensure that Members take care of their security. It will also help us do it for the public. Maybe Government itself will be encouraged to do it for the sake of the public. I have heard the President say that he wants to install cameras on the streets and everywhere where there are robbers. 

Mr Speaker, you cannot track who has committed a crime. Without thinking about losing tax - I pray that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will not think about how much money he is going to lose from the tax but about how it is going to help secure Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.03
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. This is a very welcome motion and it should touch all our hearts so that we support it unanimously. 

Our country is experiencing a wave of criminality, almost on preceded levels. This is very dangerous for the future of this country, the economy and even for our politics. It is, therefore, high time we started thinking outside the box. We may be thinking about the taxes – yes, the taxes are good because they enable Government to render the necessary services - but I think the lives of Ugandans are more important.

Mr Speaker, these services are meant for people and not for trees. This tax is affecting the lives of our people. I think it is high time that this Parliament puts its foot down and urges the Government to reduce some of these taxes. Why?

Recently, I went to China and I tried to buy these gadgets and they were cheap. When I reached the airport here, I was put aside in a corner and told, “You have got to help us open these packages so that we check them”. When they checked, they found the gadgets. I almost left them there because I had run short of cash and they wanted much more money in taxes than the amount I had paid to buy these gadgets.

What about the local person who cannot afford? Imagine this was a Member of Parliament failing to pay for these gadgets. How about the local people? I think it is high time that we thought wisely. The motion says we should encourage our institutions of higher learning like schools, health units, hospitals, local governments, urban centres, churches and even private individuals to acquire these gadgets so that Government comes up strongly to fight criminality that is impeding our development.

In addition to these CCTV cameras, I would like to say that lighting is very important. Mr Speaker, in some corners of this city, you even fear to step out of your house. The streets are extremely dark. We have visited cities – just next door here when you go to –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to second the motion and thank the movers of the motion for bringing it at this timely moment.

This motion is very timely because taxes are a factor of the national economy. It is a two-way approach. If there is criminality in the country like other Members have noted; criminality in security and all the challenges that our country is facing now, we cannot attract sufficient investment into our nation and attain the relevant GDP growth. 

Of course, the taxes might be marginal because the number of people who can afford these CCTV cameras and tracking devices are largely in the urban cities. A majority of the Ugandan population find themselves in abject poverty and may not afford. However, in the interest of national security and dealing with issues that ultimately impact on the people that pay the highest taxes, I think it is a logical solution and motion.
	
Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time, I will amend the motion to the effect that we urge Government to install cameras. Yesterday, we were walking to kick corruption out of our offices but Ugandans were saying that the corrupt were walking. That is a debate for another day.

The highest level of criminality happens in the offices of the public sector. That is where the largest sums of resources are exchanging hands. If we can take this to the fight against corruption, I think the sense in the motion would be realised.
	
Mr Speaker, if the motion does not have financial implications, I would like to move an amendment that Government installs these cameras in public places, especially public offices.
	
Secondly, we have an animal called sexual harassment in this country. If you go to public institutions and public work places, this is a problem that Ugandans would want to confront. The few women and men who are able to report this matter have increasingly come to the leaders in this national Parliament to require Parliament to do something about sexual harassment.

Mr Speaker, CCTV cameras will help us to fight, starting with this Parliament –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I can see the Minister of Internal Affairs smiling because we are helping him to address the issue of criminals.

Government alone cannot install cameras everywhere. Government can only install them on the highways and other strategic positions but not everywhere.

Mr Speaker, I am in the business of CCTV cameras and it is not a cheap business. To install a four channelled CCTV camera costs not less than Shs 5 million. This is due to the taxes. Uganda Revenue Authority’s tax policy treats CCTV as a luxury. I must say that CCTV cameras are no longer luxuries; they are a necessity since they secure the lives of people. Perfumes are very expensive; with 100 per cent tax because they are in the category of luxury goods. 

Mr Speaker, I support that we need to reduce or exempt CCTV cameras from taxation since not everyone can afford them. I will give you an example of my home in Ntinda. I can see it from anywhere in the world. I have installed cameras and I can see them from wherever I am.

At one point, I was able to help the neighbourhood. A male arsonist came and attacked his ex-girlfriend at 3.00 a.m. and burnt the whole place, including the chicken business that they had. The Police came and requested me to allow them view the camera footage since the cameras cover about 100 meters. That is how the Police was able to arrest the arsonist who came at 3.00 a.m. to set fire to his former wife’s place.

Mr Speaker, not everyone can afford but those who can afford can help others. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the minister of finance to soften his heart. There is not much because there have been a few people installing cameras so the tax collection from cameras has been very little. If we exempted it, we shall increase on those who will be able to install in their homes but also help the neighbourhood, Government and police to deal with these matters of insecurity. I fully support the motion. Thank you.

5.13
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. When it comes to areas like ours on the islands, clearly we need serious attention because we have only two people who can afford them on the island but they have been so helpful. With those two, we are able to curb a lot of criminality.

Therefore, I support that they are made affordable. He has talked of Shs 5 million but we are paying not less than Shs 28 million to install about 18 CCTV cameras around the school and the big screens to cover all the dormitories outside. You will find that very few schools can afford that.

When it comes to business, if the cost is affordable, we can go through the local Governments and urge them that before they approve a plan, they make sure the building can afford CCTV cameras. However, because they are not affordable, there is no way you can add another cost to someone who already has a heavy burden. Therefore, I highly support the motion and I hope this will not take too much of our budget. Thank you.

5.15
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. This motion should have no opposition because of its necessity. When you consider the cost, as Members have said - the tax, installation cost, maintenance and power especially now that we are on prepaid (Yaka); these gadgets use a lot of power.

When you add up all that, you will see that installation is very expensive. I sit on the Committee on Education and Sports and I recall when there was a wave of lightning in schools, we requested the minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean lightning arrestors?

MR ITUNGO: yes, the lightning arrestors.  We are looking at the cost of life and the cost of these lightning arrestors and I think when they made the adjustments, schools are now able to install them and some lives have been saved. I support –(Member timed out_)

5.16
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. First of all, I would like to thank the Government of Uganda for installing CCTV cameras in Kampala City.

However, the thieves are also not asleep; they have relocated to the rural areas like Hoima and that is why I support this motion because Government cannot afford to install cameras everywhere. It is important for Government to reduce on the taxes on those CCTV cameras.

In Hoima, we are losing at least one person every week due to robbers; even the woman Member of Parliament for Kikuube was attacked last year. Therefore, we need these cameras urgently.

I am happy that Parliament enabled me travel to China. I found that a system of four cameras for a home was around Shs 500,000 in China but in Uganda, hon. Okupa said it is Shs 5.6 million.

However, I know that around Kampala Road, a system of four cameras is Shs 1.4 million including installation. Hon. Okupa’s might be even more expensive but for the sake of the motion, if in China it is Shs 500,000 and in Uganda they are charging Shs 1.4 million due to taxes, then I think we need to reduce them so that our people can afford the CCTV cameras. Thank you very much.

5.18
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Reduction of taxes to allow many people to afford CCTV cameras is not an end in itself. We need to continue sensitising our people and the already existing ones to be manned properly.

I have seen on two occasions at the Fairway junction, at around 11.00 p.m. and midnight, people who come to attack road users because there are cameras but at times, the policemen who are supposed to be there are never there.
	
People are attacked their bags taken, their vehicles are broken into and no action is taken. Much as they reduce the taxes, if vigilance is not enhanced and Government – in most cases, the police do not take serious action to follow up the attackers and apprehend them. So, people do not get to know the use.

Otherwise if the taxes are reduce and the cameras are installed but there is no follow up mechanism, at the end of the day, they will mean nothing. I support that Government looks into the issue of taxes so that people can afford the cameras and be vigilant. Thank you, so much.

5.18
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion on the background that - if you recall very well, just this year when we lost one of the boda boda cyclists, it was a private camera which implicated the wrong doers.

This means that if we can empower Ugandans to have private cameras, we can easily fight insecurity. We need taxes as a necessity to provide services to the people but if the Government is getting taxes to provide services to people who are being killed by wrong doers due to insecurity - I know that by having these cameras, these wrong doers will be scared and we shall be protecting some of our people. Not only that, if you consider how much we inject in after having an incident, I think it is more expensive.

We have lost some people but again, we always call the police to come and look for those people. If we can urge the Government to reduce or even exempt taxes, then we shall have more cameras, and more cameras of good quality. Therefore, I would like to support the motion by saying that this move is good for Ugandans. I beg to move.

5.22
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. When you look at the taxes we collect, the money is distributed across many sectors. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is charged with the responsibility of security, takes more money.
-

Therefore, if we reduce or even exempt the taxes on cameras, we will have also helped to reduce the cost of managing the affairs of the Ministry of Internal Affairs because we shall partner across different sectors and with different people to help the ministry reduce and curb insecurity.

I would like to give an example. In China, a small kiosk is fitted with a camera and a small screen to help them monitor their activities. That would be good for us and for the MTN mobile money booth dealers, who are robbed, time and again.

I was once in China and a Nigerian had a conflict with someone who was selling airtime at a small kiosk. I stood and watched the argument on whether he had paid or not, as I was also waiting buy airtime. However, the lady was quick to go back to her CCTV and quickly identified that the Nigerian had actually given her a note of 100 Renminbi. It helped to diffuse that situation immediately.

Therefore, this will not only help us to reduce the cost of insecurity that this country is now going through, but also alleviate many problems and even scare away the criminals who are now everywhere. This should not only help us in that line but also our own personal homes.

You are aware of the challenges many families go through with house helps. You go back home and find that there is a problem at home. All those problems will be alleviated and the cost of managing those cases will also be reduced. Therefore, I rise to support the motion and encourage Government to look at how much we are going to lose. 

However, before we even lose that money, Government should encourage traders. Many traders should be encouraged to have CCTV cameras in their business premises to help monitor the movement of persons along their verandas, pickpockets and other idlers who have intentions of even short-changing people as they do their day-to-day businesses. 

In that case, I support the motion. How I wish it had even come yesterday. Maybe, we would have known who killed our own hon. Abiriga.

5.25
MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was initially hesitant to support the motion because I thought it was a connivance of the rich to deny the poor people interventions, which can get them out of poverty.

The Government priority is lift many people out of poverty. I was wondering how this will translate into getting my grandmother or people who are still stuck in the villages in grass thatched houses out of poverty. However, the arguments that have been advanced here have somehow convinced me. (Laughter)

Before I give my full endorsement, I would like to hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development if he thinks this intervention will indeed trickle down to the ordinary people and what savings we are going to make, if we reduce taxes on CCTV cameras and what the return on investment will be. This is so that we are able to rationalise what we are doing today.

Secondly, in some communities, cameras have also been used to invade privacy. We have seen some people who put cameras so they can monitor what is happening in your area. At the end of the day, it becomes a source of insecurity or infringement on one’s privacy. (Laughter) So, with this proliferation of cameras everywhere, how are we going to protect individual privacy? We need those assurances.

Finally, I would like to know how this tax will be administered. If there are going to be exemptions or reductions, how are we going to ensure it achieves what it is intended to be? We have seen cases where Parliament prays for exemptions or reductions or makes resolutions to the effect that Government is supposed to act. However, these resolutions are never implemented. 

How are we going to get assurance that Government will commit to this particular one and at the end of the day, we will get the kind of results we are praying for? Thank you.

5.28
MS AISHA SEKINDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion, based on my experience. When Government exempted taxes on solar systems, even the people in the rural areas managed to buy the systems.

Therefore, I am very convinced that if the Government allows, it should not even be reduction. It should be exemption so that even our people in the rural areas can be able to install cameras, in order to reduce criminality in this nation. Thank you very much.

5.29
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, in a context where Government has to cope with less revenue and yet there is increased expenditure; raising revenue is the most important function of taxation because it is the primary means of financing public goods.

The reasons advanced by the mover of the motion are valid but it needs a broad tax policy consideration by Government, in looking at how much we are going to forfeit and alternative sources to bridge the gap. This will require conducting a study on effect on the fiscal regime. 

I am glad that the motion seeks a review. Every financial year, this august House considers tax Bills. I would like to put Government on notice as we prepare to look at the tax Bills for next financial year. This is one matter that we shall be very keen on, to see if Government has considered it, probably arising from a resolution of this august House that will come after this debate.

However, let me also hasten to give caution. More often than not, interventions by Government towards reduction of taxes of this nature do not get a corresponding reduction on the prices. Many times, business people take advantage of the goodwill of Government.

So, Mr Speaker, once this is done, we need to monitor to ensure that this resolution of Parliament has had effect on the price of CCTV cameras. Otherwise, I am in total support of the motion that has been moved. Thank you very much.

5.31
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I thank the mover for the motion. However, I have noted that the mover, seconder and colleagues have tended to focus on the first part of the motion; the CCTV cameras but the motion has a second part, which is on the automatic tracking devices. This is where I would like to put my attention.

These are devices which are fitted on vehicles, motorcycles and so on. I do remember the President pointed this out in his speech on security measures. How would this help us? If these devices are fitted to your car and given the technology we have now, it can actually be linked to your phone such that wherever you are seated even here in Parliament, you are able to see and monitor the location of your vehicle. It increases safety of our vehicles. 

Secondly, we know that some of these cars, motorcycles and boats are used to commit crime. If these devices are fitted as part of the security measures on all these vehicles, motorcycles and boats, it will be easier to monitor who did what and where.

Thirdly, some countries now have gadgets whereby a car is linked to the GPS and wherever you are, you are able to see the traffic ahead of you. This would help us plan travels. It could help to reduce the traffic congestion too.

I totally support the motion. As the Member of Parliament for Kasilo said, this should have come yesterday. 

5.34
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just this morning, we were discussing the cities and this brings us to the safety of the cities. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 11 requires us to build safe, inclusive and sustainable cities and human settlements. This motion has come at the right time. As we consider building the cities, we need to make them safe and secure for the people who live in them. 

However, I would like to take the tax aspect with a grain of salt because it has a very big implication on our budget. I think it would be very important to know how much we get in taxes from the CCTV cameras. At the end of the day, we might reduce the tax and yet they would end up in the pockets of the importers who are already smiling as we discuss this motion. They might end up taking this money and at the end of the day, this will not benefit the people we intend it for. Thank you.

5.35
MR BOSCO IKOJO (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the mover of the motion and Members who have supported it. In the study that was sponsored by the European Union and was conducted by MUBS, it indicated that 50 per cent of our businesses collapse before they reach their first anniversaries. The reason, I believe, is that many of the businesspersons do not have the capacity to monitor their businesses. I believe that once they install the CCTV cameras at their business premises, they will be able to ascertain the areas of losses.

I would like to support the motion and beg that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accepts to adopt this as one way we can motivate and also prevent our businesspersons from incurring losses. Thank you.

5.37
MR ELIAS ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a direct relationship between economic growth and the level of security. Worldwide, the average tax on CCTV cameras is about 11.4 per cent and the highest is 40 per cent. There are instances where it attracts zero tax. What we do not know at the moment is how much tax is on the CCTV cameras in Uganda. I think in the wisdom of the mover, he urged us to review the tax. In my view, this review should be extensive. 

I am aware that in this country, we do not have enough data from which to make serious scientific decisions. What we need to do is to collect data and try to ascertain, for example, how much is insecurity associated with the usage of CCTV cameras and tracking devices. How much has insecurity cost this country? If we ask that question, we would only be guessing. That review is very important for us to make assessments. That is the only way we will be able to carry out evaluation. If we took the decision, how much will we be able to save?

Otherwise, reducing taxes – in most cases, people tend to look at what we normally get in form of taxes. They forget to carry out evaluation. If we reduce these taxes, what will be the ripple effect on our economic development?

My view is that low taxes will attract a lot of direct foreign investment and stimulate business activities. This should always be measured because the situation calls for cost-benefits analysis. Unless we know the cost and the benefits, sometimes, it is very difficult in these circumstances to make a decision.

Therefore, I would like to support the motion by saying we review the taxes. In my view, the review takes all these processes – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. After hon. Arinda, I will have the Members for Serere, Bubulo, Ruhinda and Agule. That is where we will stop.

5.40
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me thank the mover of the motion. CCTV cameras and the automotive tracking devices are no longer a privilege but a necessity. It is because the issue of criminality in the city has skyrocketed especially around this time when Christmas is getting closer. Criminals are everywhere. I do believe that having no tax on CCTV cameras will be very helpful to our communities. 

As we speak, even the cost of doing business is becoming expensive and as a result, one needs the CCTV cameras at the office. He needs them at home. He needs another one in the car. Maybe he needs another CCTV camera in his stores.

I do believe if we could adapt to this and if the Government could really take it up, it would be very good. We are urging the Government and I do believe the minister is listening since he is here. He needs to look positively at what the Members are presenting because it is getting very difficult to put away criminals.

As we speak, if you have private security guards, the company will always deploy two personnel. You can hardly get two personnel at less than Shs 1.2 million every month. That is another cost.

Therefore, I do believe that we really need to look at this motion and ensure that we move in the right direction so that the honourable minister can see that these taxes are removed completely so that we are able to protect our citizens and ourselves. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion, based on some experience. Two months ago, my neighbour directly opposite me was robbed but unfortunately, my cameras could not zoom far up to his place. With this discussion today, I have to improve because I would have saved him. Those who can afford, the Government should encourage them and remove taxes.

Also on 10 September 2019, I came to Parliament when I had a committee meeting. One of my girls went to buy lunch and on her way, she was abducted. Three women were in the car and according to her, she had seen one of them in church. By God’s grace, the girl survived.

Since I was here in Parliament, I went to the Parliamentary CID office, reported the matter and requested them to help me to urgently catch the fellows who were doing that. Unfortunately, to date, I have never got a report. I have gone there thrice but nothing has happened.

I, therefore, support the motion. Let individuals who can afford get cameras and let Government encourage schools, hotels - actually I have a hotel near my place. If that hotel had a good camera and I have a neighbour who is a professor at the corner; if he had a camera, I would now be having my own results than relying on the police.

Therefore, I encourage and support this motion and Government should take it up. Thank you.

5.44
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Basing on what hon. Moses Nagwomu raised in the case of a boda boda cyclist, it was with the help of a camera installed on the private premise that helped the police. I remember during that time, the President proposed that private cameras should also be connected to those of the police.

Mr Speaker, the proposal of the President is a directive and we cannot do that with high costs for these cameras. They are very expensive and to install one - hon. Okupa has already informed the House on the cost. It is very expensive that an ordinary Ugandan can hardly afford it.

However, we have some issues and these are on quality. There are people who have been advertising that with Shs 1.5 million, you can get a set of eight cameras. However, once these cameras are installed, you cannot even see what is taking place in a distance of 10 metres. We need also to regulate the quality.

We also have an issue on the usage of these cameras, as my honourable colleague put it. These cameras are sold by private individuals and business men – yes, we are going to do this but the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also need to help this country. We can exempt the taxes but I hope we are not exempting for the case of benefitting the business community.

I have a case scenario where the Indians sell a tracking device at Shs 500,000. If you are buying a car and you are paying in instalments, you pay Shs 500,000 but on the market, it is around Shs 300,000. Therefore, I hope we are not doing this to benefit the business community. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion of exempting taxes from CCTV cameras. However, even if the Government needs taxes - I have lived in countries which used cameras far back 25 years ago.

Therefore, I saw how China developed because of the cameras. I lived there and I learnt to behave myself, not to lie because some other people - even before the telephone - when you call somebody who has just acquired a mobile phone, he can tell you he is in Mbarara yet he is here and you can see him.

Those cameras have trained many people to respect themselves because you can do something and deny it. Go and check our prison and the Judiciary; people tell lies and many of them are in Luzira. At the police stations, police officers have sometimes become judges of many cases. A person commits a crime but because he has money, he pays off the police and the police will just stifle the person who is right.

If these cameras are brought here - many Ugandans do not want to hear of tax but if a small tax is paid indirectly - I was in China with hon. Angella Fred and they almost sold him a camera at $3000. When I came in and spoke Chinese, the same stuff came to $300.

Therefore, you are talking of the cameras being very expensive but they are not expensive; instead, the people who import them come here and masquerade that the taxes are too high. It is them who are taxing you. 

We could talk to a Chinese company or a Japanese company; they would be willing to come here and manufacture the cameras. They can have a factory here and then people can buy them at a cheaper price. Those cameras can be installed on sofa sets, clocks, chairs and everywhere. 

Apart from that, we have other chips – for example the chips that are installed in animals, when our Karimojong friends are disturbing us by taking away our cows. When they steal the cows, you are able to track them wherever they are. They will be comfortable and then one time you just come straight and surround them –(Member timed out_)

5.50
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First of all, I would like to support the motion. The motion was brought in good faith and it shows that there is a concern in the country. 

I even propose that taxes are totally scrapped especially in all urban centres. We should bear in mind that there is a disaster. I equate the thuggery and petty thieves to a disaster. 

Apparently, from seven o’clock onwards, you cannot drive in a relaxed manner. You have to keep all the windscreens shut at all times. It means that we have a problem; this is a disaster. That is why I disagree with some of my colleagues who say that we should look at the tax Bills and whether it affects the budget. It is a disaster.

Actually, Government should be happy that we are helping it fight the thugs. You can look at the huge amounts of money that is getting into payment of Local Defence Units (LDUs). Government decided to hire cameras called LDUs. They do not give any report but they are all over and getting a lot of money – (Interruption) 

Mr atiku: Mr Speaker, the Member who has just yielded the Floor has said LDUs are given huge amounts of money. However, I am also aware that since the LDUs were passed, many of them have not been paid. The minimum pay that was granted to them is only Shs 200,000 in spite of the fact that they are doing a lot of work in terms of curbing insecurity in the country. 

The deputy speaker: Thank you. That time is off your time for the information. I now put the question that this motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to reveal the tax regime on CCTV cameras and Automotive Tracking Devices be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The deputy speaker: The minister does not have to say anything on this matter. We do not want to put him on the spot.

Honourable members, this is to invite you to the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games Pre-tournament Conference on Sunday, 8 December 2019 at 9.00 a.m. in the South Wing Parking.

We are also encouraged to attend all the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games, which will take place from 8-18 December 2019. Being an active member in these games, I will participate in the Tug-of-War personally. (Applause)

I am now beginning to look at hon. Baryomunsi, Gen. Ali and all those who look like –(Laughter)- should prepare to come and participate in the Tug-of-War. Hon. Moses Kizige –(Laughter)– the programmes are going to be given daily. They cannot give a comprehensive one at once.

The National Debate Council is celebrating 10 years of the National Schools Debate Championship. This year, it is holding the championship on the theme: “Anti-Corruption.”

Since 2010, the National Debate Council has partnered with Parliament to organise a debate between members of Parliament and selected students. This year, the debate will be held on Monday, 9 December 2019 at 11.00 a.m. under the theme, “The Auditor-General’s report to Parliament has not been utilised enough to fight corruption.”

Please prepare to come and have this debate with the students. It helps us to be visible in these activities. You have been asked to oppose the motion.

The venue of the debate will be here in the Parliamentary Chamber ahead of the grand finale at 2.00 p.m. in the Conference Hall. All of you are invited and encouraged to attend this important debate especially after we recommitted to the fight against corruption yesterday.

Honourable members, there being no other item at the moment, House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
