
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Thursday, 9 December, 2021

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting. In my Communication yesterday, I informed the House that we shall have a High Mass this afternoon and that it will be celebrated by the Rt Rev. Dr Joseph Eciru Oliach, the Bishop of Soroti Catholic Diocese. So, he will be with us this afternoon. 

Honourable members, about 45 days ago, this House referred the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2021, to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for processing. I am informed by the chairman that they are not ready to comply with rule 141(2). I will give the chairman an opportunity to say something on the Floor to formally seek an extension. 

Honourable members, I will allow a slight adjustment in the Order Paper to have the motion by the Leader of Opposition on the shrinking civic space in the country come before the Bill. Then immediately after, we shall have hon. Alex Ruhunda bring his motion on the National Road Safety Day. Clerk should take note of that. 

I want to thank you once more for always being here and for working for the country.

2.18
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, thanks very much for the opportunity. I rise under rule 141(2) regarding what you have just communicated about; the processing of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2021. 

Madam Speaker, we have made significant progress on that Bill. However, there are some one or two sticky clauses, which we should agree on with the ministry before we finalise our report. And this is because some of the issues have bearing on other agreements, joint operating agreements in oil and gas. 

Now, because we have not been able to agree on them, the Ministry of Finance, the sponsors of the Bill have requested that we halt the processing of the Bill and that they are going to consult with their stakeholders and they get back to us. We tried to inquire as to how long that consultation process will take, unfortunately, they are not definite. They said some of the issues are beyond their control. 

Reasonably, Madam Speaker, in the circumstances, I am requesting that the House allow us one month, but it may be anything, maybe one week or two weeks. Hopefully it will be much sooner and it will not require the month but for purposes of the House and time allowed to us, I request that we are given one month. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, we like this Bill passed as much as possible. And on our side as Government, we are going to coordinate this weekend to ensure that we get a position so that this Bill, if the committee allows, is presented here on Tuesday for second reading. We wouldn't want much more than that, because we have commitments, which we must meet as a committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, by the time you bring a Bill, you should be ready for it. And you should be ready to cooperate with the committee. I am giving you up to 14th to bring the Bill in the House; 14th is Tuesday.

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am still reminding the chairpersons who have motions to bring them. They were given about 10 days or 15 days, and I don't know why they are not bringing those motions back to the House. And because of that we may be forced to take action because we don't want people who are not working. 

MR MAGOLO: Madam Speaker, on the 1st of December –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is the procedural matter about?

MR MAGOLO: Yes, on the 1st December this month, the Vice President made a statement on the national campaign against defilement, early marriages and failed parenthood. 

Madam Speaker, your office directed that Members should embrace this campaign and go and carry it out, and that they should register with the Office of the Government Chief Whip so that this campaign goes on before the schools reopen on 10th of January. 

However, when I went to the Office of the Government Chief Whip, I realised it didn’t seem to be in the know of this and nothing is going on. So, I am just wondering if we are procedurally moving right under that directive over that matter. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the Member has made a judgment on how my office is operating. But I want to assure him that it is operating properly. We have very many issues. You came when the whole team was focusing on the EACOP Bill. From there we are going to tackle other matters and that is one of them. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You even do not need to register for you to go and do the campaign. We facilitate you every weekend to go to your constituency to talk to your people; to do your oversight role. Therefore, if the Office of the Government Chief Whip is busy, please go ahead and do your work. That should not stop you. Thank you. 

STATEMENT ON THE SHRINKING CIVIC SPACE IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  This paper was presented. What we are meant to do is just to have a debate of about 10 minutes. It is basically to debate it.

Mr silwany: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition presented this paper some time back. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if he gave us a few highlights before we start the debate? It would remind the House and bring it to speed so that we debate informatively. 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, do you remember the paper that was presented?

2.25
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, whereas I do not have a problem with my colleague doing that, it is like an indictment on the House. (Interjection) Yes, it is as if we want to read from here. 

The purpose of statements being uploaded for us is that before we come to the House, we should prepare. Hon. Ssekikubo, you have been coming here several times when ready. I do not know why on this one, one would need to say: “First remind me of the highlights.” What if on the highlights, he picks out just a few areas he is interested in and leaves other areas?

Therefore, I would request that you give us an opportunity to first respond to a few issues, which he raised because the statement has been on our iPads for over two weeks.

The Deputy Speaker: Please, Government Chief Whip, respond to issues that were raised. 

Mr tayebwa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, for the statement and raising the concerns he felt touched their people. 

Number one, I would say that from the statement, the Leader of the Opposition was economical with the truth. In his definition of “civil society organisations”, I do not know whether, deliberately or not, he left out key non-state actors such as cooperative unions, international NGOs and others. I felt we can enrich his submission by including those.

Needless to say, Madam Speaker, each civil society, as per his statement, is well-governed and regulated by their respective Acts and regulations passed by this House. For example, political parties are under the Political Parties and Organisations Act while NGOs are under the NGO Act. 

Under political parties, what we are saying is that let the Leader of the Opposition highlight the sections of the law through which the Government has shrunk the operating space of political parties. 

Also, Uganda is under multi-party dispensation with the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition, with the latter enjoying privileges of a high-ranking officer, even above our ministers. Therefore, we believe we have given them space. They are doing well and are highly recognised. This has been demonstrated in many ways.

Political parties are also funded by the Government under the National Consultative Forum and the Government has always participated in fora like IPOD on equal grounds, like all other political parties although NUP refused to go and be part of it.

Even recently, here in Parliament, we passed a supplementary budget of Shs 35 billion - just the other day - to facilitate the operations of political parties. That is enabling you. Even NUP, which is not part of IPOD, is going to benefit. That is enabling you to go and do your civic activities using taxpayers’ money, with the support of the Government. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in reference to the Public Order Management Act (POMA), Parliament debated and passed the Act. The Leader of the Opposition states that section 8 of the Public Order Management Act was annulled by the Constitutional Court but this did not render other sections redundant. 

Our focus has not been on section 8 but we have a full law, which we must enforce minus those ones which were rendered redundant by the court. 

Also on our side, we feel it is unjustified to use an excuse of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic affected every sector of the economy and police had to act in order to avert the spread of the deadly virus. The police’s actions affected all political parties. In fact, in many areas such as Buganda and Kampala, the NRM Party never had a chance to go and meet the population and the Opposition held big rallies – although there was fighting and all that, that dominated media space – and they performed better. Next time, I promise my colleague that the moment we are given an opportunity to engage with the population in Kampala, we shall win it. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, whom they referred to many times in the statement, exercised his rights and filed a case to challenge presidential polls. Utilising the same rights, he withdrew the case – (Interruption) 

Mr nambeshe: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been scanning through our Rules of Procedure. Under normal procedure, this statement by the Leader of the Opposition was supposed to be debated. You had actually guided. When the Government Chief Whip rose, I thought he had come to debate. 

However, he is responding. This is not a dialogue between the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. You would only respond after debate.
 
Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well on this one? By the way, he is nearly reading, which is in absolute contravention of the rules.

The Deputy Speaker: Government Chief Whip, can you wind up.

Mr THOMAS Tayebwa: Madam Speaker, there were a lot of issues raised, including pre-election activities. Those activities formed part of the presidential elections petition, which the hon. Kyagulanyi filed in court but voluntarily withdrew after knowing that his evidence could not stand the test of time –

The Deputy Speaker: We are actually not going to discuss hon. Kyagulanyi in this House because he is not here. 

Mr tayebwa: No, Madam Speaker, I am responding to what was in the statement. There are 2,235 fully registered NGOs in Uganda. Any NGO that claims state interference should seek redress in the courts of law. Nevertheless, NGOs must comply with the NGO Act and stipulated policies. 

There is also an ongoing dialogue between the Government and the DGF and progress is being made to ensure co-ordination of Government policy and DGF activities. 

The media – the fourth estate – has a code of conduct that must be respected by other actors. Journalists in their course of duty have encountered occupational hazards. In situations where our officers have erred, the Government has compensated victims and prosecuted errant officers. Even yesterday, you saw an errant officer being sentenced to imprisonment for life and another to 35 years in prison for going against the laws of the land.

As I come to a conclusion, the NRM Government re-instated cultural institutions that were abolished in 1966. The Government has handed over some property to the cultural institutions.

Secondly, cultural leaders are facilitated by the state to carry out their noble cause in their respective communities. That is why the other day, Madam Speaker – when you were in the Chair – Parliament passed Shs 26 billion for Buganda Kingdom. That was a very good step in the right direction by the NRM Government.

Religious leaders, as citizens of Uganda, are free to join politics but must be cognisant of the consequences. The Government always consults religious institutions on transfers of teachers and headteachers of religious-founded schools that are now Government-aided.

Uganda is a religious country and our motto alludes to that. The Government and Opposition leaders, on various occasions, have supported religious institutions. The Leader of the Opposition calling such a noble cause “tokenism” is absurd. 

Finally, concerning the Uganda Communications Tribunal, I wish to inform the honourable Leader of the Opposition that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance is in the process of establishing the tribunal, I wish to inform the honourable Leader of the Opposition and the House that the Ministry of ICT is in the process of establishing the tribunal that includes gazetting the regulations and tabling them here in Parliament. I just felt we need to make those clarifications, which would guide the debate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will speak last. However, when you look at issues of shrinking space, “shrinking space” is subjective. The meaning and interpretation depends on the context in which it has been brought. Therefore, you should debate along that line. 

2.35
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the statement that he issued in this House. 

I first want to be on record. Before I became a Member of Parliament, I worked with several civil society organisations that included Plan International, Action Aid International and several other civil society organisations and community-based organisations. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda is the only country, actually one of the best that gives space to any community-based organisation, civil society organisation to operate freely. I remember when we were working in Action Aid, we started “Black Monday Campaign”. That campaign was seen in the whole country. That campaign was holding leaders accountable. There was no case at any given time when Government came and said,“stop doing this” I was the leader of the “Black Monday Campaign”. We did it in Eastern Uganda and we demonstrated. 

I even invited the now president of the National Unity Platform. At that time, he was not yet into politics.He came and sang about corruption in Pallisa; hon. Kyagulanyicame and sang about corruption and the whole thing was good. 

I think when we are looking at the space for civic activities and civil society we should not look at it in a narrow perspective. We should broaden our minds, look at things holistically and eclectically to enable us understand. When you talk about civil society organisations, what are we talking about? It is something big, it includes even Households; there are organisations that are at the level of a household. 

Therefore, I strongly disagree with the fact that the Leader of the Opposition brought a report and told this House that the civic space is being shrunk by Government. I think civil society organisations should just operate well and within the law that is established in the country and then, we move forward as a country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The issue is; is there space? Does space exist for these people to be able to interact with the Government and their own people for engagement? Actually, is there an obstruction that they cannot engage? How do we interrogate this further? I think the Leader of the Opposition- (Mr Geoffrey Okello rose_)yes, there is somebody.We should limit this debate.

2.38
MR GEOFREY OKELLO (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me space-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, I have given you space; there is no shrinking. (Laughter)

MR GEOFREY OKELLO: I will come to that, Madam Speaker. Thank you. Just as my colleague said, before I came here, I also worked with the civil society sector for quite some time.

The motion brought by the Leader of the Opposition is talking about shrinking space. That means it was better in the past than today.

Coming from the Leader of the Opposition, he is talking about what he feels. I think that feeling is important and this House should give it due attention.

When we are talking about civil society space, we are talking about all those other associations that are voluntary, that are formed by any group of people outside there.When we say civil society space, it includes all those spaces that we Members of Parliament also create for ourselves including in Parliament here. For example, we have several fora for Parliamentarians and that is a civil society organisation.

Therefore, it is not a narrow thing and it does not have to do with political party per say. In fact, this is non-partisan debate, because everybody is a member of a civil society. At least everybody here, I know, belongs to civil society. The best example I can give here is the Parliamentary SACCO; that is a civil society.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise?

MR GEOFREY OKELLO:  Can I bring just two or three points and sit down? Firstly-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We have a congested Order Paper.

 MR GEOFREY OKELLO: The law that the civil society is currently operating under is stringent. It infringes on the space, it does not give free space for civil society to grow.

The Government has also clamped on civil society organisations, closing at least 54 of them for  many other reasons, which is okay but they should be given space to defend themselves before closure. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. He is bringing in an aspect of perception; how you perceive the space, whether you have breathing space, space to do engagements and that kind of thing. That is the perception that he is talking about.

2.41
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way I perceived the matter for debate today is about the shrinkage where civil society organisations and the general public are having restrictions in the performance of their activities and work.

Madam Speaker, picking from where the honourable member has left off, we got concerned about failure by Government to set up the NGO tribunal. This tribunal, as we speak now, remains unconstituted; it is not in place. 

It, therefore, forms a basis of a major setback because they get deregistered, they get shutdown but they have no recourse to the tribunal.Currently, Government - and the honourable minister is here, he can tell this House; when is Government setting up the NGO tribunal because that would listen to the issues?  

However, now, Government is the prosecutor, the judge in its own cause and this leaves the NGO world in a very uncertain future.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, yes, we have cultural institutions but these need the moral and material support. I would like to thank Government for the restoration of the cultural institutions.

I was taken aback when we read statements attributed to the President, to the effect that these cultural institutions have never transformed any country. I wondered whether the President was aware of a country like Japan that has a traditional institution, Spain, and even the Great Britain, they have their monarchy. 

I think it is a question of understanding one another. Once you go cultural, leave it cultural. However, if we want to govern the cultural institutions politically, I think we end up misunderstanding one another. Otherwise, I thank Government for remembering to pay back the rent arrears to Buganda that the minister was talking about here. I think it was the right thing to do; not as a token or reward, but they deserved that. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo; it is about coexistence, tolerance - and that is what is happening. 
Honourable minister, you will speak last. 

2.45
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We are aware that there is space for civil society and we observed that it is just shrinking. We found that organisations that were drawing their funding from IDF were badly affected. 

In other words, it is very difficult for an organisation now, to venture into working on democratic aspects or taking democracy as one of their major goals, yet we see that there are gaps evident within our country, as far as democracy is concerned. Right now, many of the NGOs fear to venture into that and yet we are aware that the national treasury cannot provide enough resources to close these gaps. 

Madam Speaker, many of the civil society organisations are required to register at the headquarters as well as at the extension districts. It is a serious challenge to many of them; the requirements are not cognisant of the dwindling donations to these NGOs. In most cases, they just close and we find that it is very difficult to talk about the alternative youth employment. 

It is also very important that we come up with the provision of privileges and some benefits, especially to the religious institutions such that they do not lose objectivity in, for example, talking about the ongoing challenges within our country. Otherwise, if it is one party that provided a bishop with a car, it becomes very difficult for that bishop to sometimes objectively comment on what is pertaining to this country. 

That is the reason why even if we feel pupils should go back to school, the religious leaders sometimes fear to talk about it in response to what they were given as benefits. Therefore, we can come up with methods of providing the cultural leaders together with the religious leaders with goods and services to aid their civic space so that we maintain their objectivity. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaaya, I do not want to believe that these “handouts” are making bishops not to speak out because it is not just going to a bishop. Remember when you talk about the cars that are given to bishops, they are not given to them as individuals; it is given to a church. 
Now, we have a supplementary budget here that is supposed to pay a debt that the Church of Uganda got; we are going to give billions of shillings to Church of Uganda. It is not going to a specific person but the whole church. So, I do not want to believe that those handouts are only facilitating these people in their movements. The paper is good and if there is shrinking space, then you have made Government to know that there is shrinking space. We should wake up and see how we can give space to everybody to be able to participate.

2.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for availing space for Members to be able to participate in sharing their experiences on the subject I raised in my statement. Unfortunately, the debate has come a bit late, which is why some Members were requesting for a recap. 

When my good friend, the Government Chief Whip, came to debate, he got me thinking that in future, I will have to put an “interpretation” section on my statements so that I am not quoted out of context. 

That said, Madam Speaker, the statement is about us as a country and what we think is good for this country. Partisanship has gotten the better of us in our discharge of duties, to the extent that some Members believe that the position of the Leader of the Opposition is a privilege yet it is a matter of law. That whatever the Leader of the Opposition does, is a question of magnanimity and not law -that when political parties demand that we do operationalise the National Consultative Forum, we are not demanding what is legitimate. 

We declined as NUP to participate in the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD), because we know IPOD is just a talking platform; it does not have any legal space. The consultative forum is what is in the Constitution and that is what we are asking that it should be operationalised so that complaints of political parties are channeled through a constitutional framework. 

Madam Speaker, all we are inviting Government to do is to say, “We have made the laws, let all of us subordinate our activities and actions to the law.” 

If the National Resistance Movement is moving around the country, consulting with its members on how the last election was conducted and the challenges, why should the DP, NUP or any other party be dispersed when they are doing the same across the country? I would like to give an example, as I exit. Three weeks ago, our members in Kasese were doing the same consultation in a home. They were picked by the DPC, charged with treason and they are in Kigo. 

These are the kinds of things that get us thinking as to whether all of us are the same under the law. A particular group can freely consult and when others meet, they are said to be conspiring to overthrow Government. This is very unfortunate. This is the kind of thing that really makes us think about the future of this country differently. 

Civil society and the media – it is very good that Dr Baryomunsi is here. What happened to constituting the communication - under the Communication Act, the minister is charged with a duty to constitute a framework, which is the communication tribunal to hear out complaints. Like we know, we have a complainant, who is a judge in their own case and the provisions of the law are not being implemented. All we see are individuals who are a law to themselves. Do I have to mention the fact that (Inaudible) is legally suspended without a hearing? 

These are more issues and it is why we are calling for debate that Government may have to come out because truth should be told; power is gotten, power is lost and power will be lost. All we invite of this big party is to exercise what big people do. If you are that big then behave like a big person. You cannot be the father in the house saying you are the father while eating food from your children yet you claim to be the father. If the NRM is that big, let it compete on the same ground, on the same terms, under the same law. Do not use our military, our police, as an extension of your party. If you have run out of ideas, please cede the ground; we shall keep the same country; we are the same country. 

Madam Speaker, these and more issues are what is causing affliction in this country and it is not good for our democracy. They are the reasons we are raising this. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we are asking the Committee on Internal Affairs to interest itself in the activities of the NGO Board because it is acting ultra vires the law and is causing jitters in civil society. We need to invest ourselves in what they are doing; probably the Minister of Internal Affairs should be asked to appear either before the committee or before the plenary and explain whether the law was expanded to give the NGO Board extra powers outside the framework that we enacted as Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Do you have something to say, hon. Migadde and then we have the minister?

2.55
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition. I am fortunate that I have got the opportunity to say something as far as this shrinking civic space is concerned. 

If I was to take Parliament as the civic space, those who were in the Sixth Parliament - if there is any member here - There are those who used to debate for 10 minutes and some for 15 minutes. Now, you stand to debate and the Speaker, with all due respect, says two minutes or one minute. The space for debate is actually shrinking day by day. (Applause) 

That is what we should actually be looking at. If it is a speed governor, at what level should it be? If we agree on where we should be, then we know that every side is supposed to take this responsibility. The Government takes its responsibility, civil society takes its responsibility and at the end of the day, we shall have a peaceful country. At the end of the day, no one will accuse the Speaker of being denied the opportunity to debate.

Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that all the Members who have not got the opportunity to debate this specific subject are going to say the Speaker is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I am happy you can make such a joke. When you talk about shrinking space in Parliament, we had the “owners” of Parliament who could debate for 10 minutes, five or 15 minutes and the rest were left. 

However, if we can divide the space among the Members of Parliament who are available - remember we have 555 Members of Parliament. If we can divide and say we balanced the House, if the ruling government side is talking and the Opposition side is also speaking, the time should be limited to a particular time and equal for everybody. 

I would like to tell you there is no shrinking space in Parliament. This is an objective institution where everybody is free to do what he wants, speak whatever you want. Hon. Ssekikubo will get up and speak whatever he wants. There is freedom in this Parliament. Thank you so much. 

Honourable minister, I am told that you don't allow people to speak on information.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the discussion. Let me extend my voice to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the statement that he made. I sympathise with him. Sometimes he has to find business for the House even when what he is raising is not necessarily an accurate reflection of what happens in this country. 

Let me start with the Parliament. The space in the Parliament has not shrunk. Before I came to Parliament, Parliament would sit but the public would never adequately know what goes on but now as we speak, television is relaying these proceedings, people are tweeting, people are commenting, they know what we are saying. So, you cannot, at the same time, say this space has shrunk; it has not. 

Maybe the numbers in Parliament have increased and that requires us to take time to give space to each and every person to speak. However, progressively, Parliament is opening up to the public and therefore, it is not correct to argue that this space in Parliament has shrunk overtime. 

Madam Speaker, let me quickly give a few comments. When the honourable Leader of the Opposition says there is a shrinking operational space, where is his starting point? Are you saying that this space used to be abundant and when the NRM came, it shrunk the space or are you saying that during the leadership of NRM, at some point, the space was abundant and it has shrunk under the NRM? What are you saying? - (Interjection) - you are not the author, hon. Ssekikubo. 

Our firm stance as the Government is that the NRM government, which opened this space, continues to open this space, day by day. The beauty of this debate is that the public is watching us and they can weigh whether what the Leader of the Opposition is raising is true or not because the public out there knows whether the space exists or not. At no point shall we shrink this space. Our aim and determination is to continue expanding it so that every Ugandan citizen continues to participate in all these issues. 

Secondly, Members of Parliament travel a lot and we travel to different countries. We know what happens elsewhere. Uganda is one of the few countries admired when you go to the rest of the world about how liberal we are, how every Ugandan is free to air his or her views and we just go home and sleep. Even the Leader of the Opposition knows this but because he has to bring a statement, that is fine. 

One cardinal point that we have to make is that Uganda is not a lawless country because we are debating as if there should be no laws, there should be no regulation and therefore, we should allow anybody to do anything, anytime without regulation. We sit here as Members of Parliament and we make laws; so, we should also respect the institutions which we charge with the responsibility of implementing, enforcing and putting these laws in action. No, let me comment on the different institutions that the Leader of the Opposition raises; political parties. 

We have over 40 registered political parties in Uganda and the political parties are free to do their activities in accordance with the law. Your own president of NUP has been in Kigezi doing mobilisation, moving around and nobody touched him. He was free to move anywhere. When you bring an example that the DPC in Kasese arrested some individuals, the good thing is you say they are in the court system; they were not killed or taken somewhere – (Interjection) - you have said they were remanded. Maybe there are grounds and could be the reason they are appearing before court. Instead of castigating the police, try to find out why they were arrested. There must be grounds because political parties do not operate in a vacuum. There is a law, which governs them.

Therefore, much as we expand the space, we must also be conscious that whatever we do must be in accordance with the law. Once we breach the law, police and other enforcement agencies will always come in.

I am certain that even if it is NRM members who breach the law, the law will catch up with them. Therefore, it is not true that the Government or the State selectively applies the law on individuals – (Interjections) - do not echo, just sit down. You know the rules on how you proceed, if you want to give information. Just hold on and I will allow you after some time.

On the Non-Governmental Organisations, I want to say that this Parliament, in 2016, passed the NGO Act – provisions, which need to be reviewed. We are Members of Parliament and the Leader of Opposition knows how amendments come to Parliament. They can come from Government but even you, as an individual Member of Parliament, can propose amendments and we debate them. Otherwise, we must give space to the Bureau to implement the law, which we passed as Parliament. 

Let us also appreciate separation of powers. If we enact a law and say, “There shall be an NGO Bureau, which will implement and enforce this law,” then why do we come back to castigate the Bureau when it is doing its work? 

Hon. Christine Kaaya said that NGOs support Government activities with money because we do not have enough money. Are you saying that because we are a poor country, we should allow NGOs to do whatever they want and go beyond what they are registered to do and that that is when we shall have expanded space? 

We are saying, “No, we have a free door to the NGOs and civil society but they must act in accordance with the law.” When an NGO is registered, its objectives are clearly stated. They must stick to what they have been registered to do in the country. If you are saying your Government will allow every Tom, Dick and Harry to come and do anything, as NRM, we think we should have a door for civil society but they must act according to the law. 

You find an NGO, which registers to do charity work maybe in health and education, transforming into a political activist group. Are we saying that we should just say, “Oh, we’re liberal, do anything?” No, once we pass laws as Parliament, let us give them space to be – (Member timed out,)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chris, have you finished? Can you finish? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: No, I think the Speaker is saying I have little time – (Interjections) – yes but you allow with leave of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please,conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: No, you allow with leave of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, let me give a shrinking space. First finish; shrinking space on hon. Ssekikubo. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On NGOs, I want to say that we have very many Non-Governmental Organisations, many CBOs, CSOs and they operate freely in all parts of the country. However, we always remind them about doing their work in accordance and in respect of the law. 

Let me speak about the media and the journalists. Would you stand here and say, “We don't have a free media in Uganda” if you speak with honesty? Would you say that the Opposition, for instance, is gagged when it comes to  media space in this country? 

That is why I said the public is watching us as we debate. I have appeared, with hon. Mpuuga several times, on media talk shows - each one of us is free to give their views. 

As the minister responsible for information, Madam Speaker, I have been approached by many members of the public requesting me to close some media talk shows or even remove some panelists from some media talk shows because of the acidic and poisonous information they give. However, our view as Government is that we do not want to gag citizens. 
If you give information, which annoys some sections of the public, it is our view and duty as the Government to respond by clarifying. That is why we do not disallow people from airing their views. 

If you argue that Government does not allow people to speak - you compare us with other countries. Here, there is freedom of speech and freedom after speech. You can say anything, go home and sleep without any fear of anybody attacking you because of what you said.

Madam Speaker, it is this NRM Government, which restored the traditional and cultural institutions. There are laws, which guide these cultural institutions. There is a difference between the cultural institutions as they were before independence and immediately after, and the kind of constitutional framework that we have today. 
The cultural institutions are doing their work but definitely, if they breach the provisions of the law, they have to be brought to order. You saw the incident in Kasese in the Kingdom of ObusingaBwaRwenzururu where a cultural leader was starting to dare Government. I remember watching him on TV saying, “If the Government wants me, come, I will fight it. Let it come here.” Then, there was that confrontation. 

Therefore, even cultural leaders have to conform to the provisions of the law because they are guided by the laws of this land. We would want to encourage and invite Members to really – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chris, can you conclude?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, I am being advised to conclude. I would have loved to give way but there is no time as guided by the Speaker. Therefore, as I conclude, I want to say that while I appreciate the Leader of the Opposition for bringing the statement, our view, as Government, is that this space has been expanded under the leadership of NRM. We shall continue to expand this civic space. Should there be need to amend any provisions of the law, we are here, as Members of Parliament. We can amend any provisions of the law. Therefore, we disagree with that assertion and perception that the space – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedural matter.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a matter of procedure, the minister is aware that by virtue of his office, they should have constituted the communication and the NGO tribunals. Issues that are rising such as those of shrinking space, for instance, for media practitioners and the journalists, who are targeted; especially those who covered campaign trails of the Opposition, like Mr John Cliff Wamala who was assaulted - you know all this.

Is it right for the Minister to have latitude to take us through all manner of stories, when he has failed to comply with the law to constitute these tribunals? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Whip, the communication and the NGO tribunals are going to be in place. Can you conclude, honourable minister?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Yes, I know that the law requires those tribunals to be established but I have already spoken publicly on the issue of the UCC Tribunal, where I have said – and I can repeat for benefit of the Members – that we have been working out regulations to govern and guide the tribunal, which we have now completed and, soon, we shall lay them on the Table here. 

In addition, consultation is ongoing between our ministry and the Judicial Service Commission, which also has a responsibility, and we shall be appointing that tribunal. 

However, in the meantime, if you are dissatisfied with the decisions of UCC, there is a ministry which supervises UCC and there is also court. You cannot say that the channels are blocked once you are dissatisfied with the decisions of UCC. 

Similarly – on the NGO bureau – the courts are open. Therefore, you still have space where you can take your complaints. Therefore, the fact that the tribunals have not been established does not in any way limit the space for those who would want to raise their complaints. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The issue that was raised by the whip, on the communication tribunal, is pertinent. I remember that when we were in COSASE, that was one of our recommendations but to date, it has not been done. 

Maybe with your able leadership, we can have that tribunal in place to help - it is a legal requirement.

I want to thank you very much. In addition, some of the pertinent issues that have been raised under the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I would really interest the committee to look at those issues and see how we harmonise the situation. Thank you.  Next item

THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we considered the first 25 clauses of the Bill and stood over clause 4. Today, we shall begin from clause 26. The stood-over clause – clause 4 – will be handled at the end. Therefore, we are starting with clause 26.

Clause 26
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 26, agreed to.
Clause 27, agreed to.
Clause 28, agreed to.
Clause 29
3.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 29 is on insurance and reinsurance of the EACOP project. 

The committee is proposing to amend subclause (1) by inserting the words “The National Environment Act, 2019” immediately after the words “Insurance Act, No.18, 2017”.

The insurance regime applicable to the EACOP project shall be the Insurance Act, No.18, 2017, the National Environment Act, 2019, the Petroleum (Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Act, 2013, the Petroleum (Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Regulations, 2016 and Ugandan laws.

Madam Chairperson, the justification is that this is to aptly provide for application of the National Environment Act, 2019. I beg to submit the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is one of the amendments that I accepted because it was raised by the shadow minister for environment that we include the National Environment Act. Otherwise, we had included this in the words “Ugandan laws”, because the definition of “Ugandan laws” takes care of this provision. However, we conceded so that we come clear and harmonise with our colleagues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe just to remind the House, especially some people who were not here – because we realised this was more contentious – we set a subcommittee that looked at all the clauses and this is the outcome of the subcommittee but I would not mind if hon. Niwagaba -

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I were not on another committee work in respect to the Succession (Amendment) Bill, I should have been part of this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually, you would have chaired this one.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I have two observations. One, we are making an Act of Parliament. However, one thing that I have seen that goes through the entire Bill is that reference is also made to regulations made under other Acts of Parliament. To refer to regulations in an Act of Parliament – to me – is bad drafting and, really, a misnomer because we legislate and regulations are by a delegated authority. 

The other thing I wanted to raise is on subclause (2). If you look at this particular provision of clause 29, it refers to provisions under the host government agreement. Unfortunately, that host government agreement is not in our appendix and I wish it had been part of appendix, not necessarily all the provisions -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Niwagaba, actually, you have taken us back to the debate of the Bill. We have the host agreement - it was laid on the Table. If you want, I can give you another copy now. 

MR NIWAGABA: The good practice would have been to include those salient features in the host agreement under the appendix, not on the Table. This is because, if a legal researcher is carrying out a research and he looks at this, you will end up having litigation for disclosure agreements, which would not ordinarily have been looked for.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I think what my colleague has been articulating, we have conversed it. I would like to comfort him that, yes, this Bill makes reference to other laws because it is not also an ordinary Bill. As you can see the title, it is the “East African Crude Oil Pipeline”, (Special Provisions Bill), meaning that it is touching on many other provisions of other Bills. It is a special legislation for a project: it is not one of these we are legislating for a lifetime, it is purely for this project. In essence it goes to overriding many other Bills in many aspects but in relation to this particular Bill. That is why you will find crisscrossing of other laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 30, agreed to.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, we are at Committee Stage. 
Before a question is put, and a Member raises, it is for the benefit of the Bill being debated and for the whole House. 

Madam Chairperson, I stood and clearly caught your eye but the question was put on clause 30.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question because there was no amendment to it. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I had risen to propose an amendment to the same, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You can recommit it.

Clause 31, agreed to.
Clause 32, agreed to.
Clause 33, agreed to.
Clause 34, agreed to.
Clause 35, agreed to.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have an amendment on clause 36, which is on the Decommissioning Fund. Our harmonised position is that we amend clause 36 by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause 5 as follows:
“The minister shall submit a report annually to Parliament on the status of the Decommissioning Fund.”

The justification is to enhance Parliamentary oversight. I beg to submit the amendment.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the issue of Parliamentary oversight cannot be underestimated. I concede that for purposes of enhancing Parliamentary oversight, we include this provision. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am at odds and I rarely want to go the wrong way from my Speaker’s direction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Instead of quarrelling; go on, I have not put the final question. Raise your issue.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am moving that clause 36(3)(a) be amended from the current position, which provides that the project company shall be responsible for the costs related to the implementation of the decommissioning plan. Clause 36(a) provides from the date falling five years after the first date, etc. I propose that it should be the first year because the decommissioning is a composite burden to the state.

Once you wait for the five years, it has its issues. This is the money that has to cater after the crude oil pipeline usage is over. To prepare for that, you begin from the revenues as they begin flow but to give leeway of five years, it should be in tandem. Once you have the incomes set aside, the small amount at that stage to cater for the decommissioning at a later stage. Otherwise, the decommissioning could be abandoned for failure to have the full funds for the recommissioning. 

I propose to move – (Member timed out.)
MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to my colleague’s proposal –  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First of all, this Bill was in the committee and I expected Members to go and make their amendments in the committee and not on the Floor. You are not hearing this Bill for the first time; it has been in the committee.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to clarify that the committee considered this clause and looked at the provisions that were agreed upon in the host government agreement, in which it was clearly stated that we should start to have money in the decommissioning fund by the half-life of the project. That means we are looking at a project of about 20 years. Therefore, the half-life would be after 10 years. 

However, in this particular law, we are providing for starting to put money in the Decommissioning Fund after five years, which is very good. Additionally, we do not want to put money to redundantly stay in an account because the project has a lifespan and the lifespan according to what is being anticipated is 25 years. Therefore, we do not want to begin committing money there when it is not going to be used. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg that we go as is. Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: I just want to allay the fears of hon. Ssekikubo, who thought that probably, there will be a likelihood of abandoning the pipeline. The decommissioning itself is one of the proposed amendments so that we understand what the decommissioning is. There is also a definition of “decommissioning plan”. So, all that takes care of what hon. Ssekikubo was anticipating that probably, there could have been a likelihood of abandoning the pipeline. We are going to define “decommissioning” so that we know what it means.We are going to define a “decommissioning plan”. So, you relate that to the decommissioning fund. If you do that, you will realise that your fears are taken care of.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Christine Kaaya, you are part of this. Honourable Members, I would like to put  thequestion on the amendment of hon. Ssekikubo. I put  thequestion on the amendment of hon. Ssekikubo on section 36(3)(A)?

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the  question that the amendment of the committee do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

 Clause 37
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 37 – this is on completion of decommissioning - our harmonised position is to substitute subclause (2) to read as follows: Clause 37(2): ”The post-decommissioning finalisation report shall be reviewed by the Authority in consultation with the National Environment Management Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the National Environment Act, 2019 and the Petroleum Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Act of 2013 and the host government agreement.” 

The justification is that the clause as it were, excludes the mandate of NEMA and this could easily disregard the primary purpose of the decommissioning, which is associated with several environmental aspects including restoration. 
Save for resource reserve, all other aspects of the Eco project facility will be environmental in nature. Hence, the role of NEMA is very crucial.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede.

MR NIWAGABA: Before you concede, if you read or if you appreciate the amendment proposed by the committee, it keeps the sentence hanging. If the report is reviewed by the authorities, then who approves that report? You have not indicated exactly which authority of those two authorities – NEMA and the Authority – will approve this particular report. Remember this is being submitted by the project company and it must be approved one way or the other.
 
So, if your amendment is to be allowed, then it must go beyond this and mention the authority that will finally approve.

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, the authority is clearly defined in the interpretation clause and the authority is the Petroleum Authority of Uganda but because that authority is not technically competent, that is why we brought in NEMA as the technical authority that is competent in regard to environmental issues.

Madam Chairperson, if I may read the entire clause again, ,it should read; “the post decommissioning finalisation report shall be reviewed by the authority”, which means the relevant authority, NEMA – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You say that in the interpretation clause, the authority is the Petroleum Authority of Uganda.

DR OTAALA: Okay, let me first read the whole thing: “The post decommissioning finalisation report shall be reviewed by the authority in consultation with the National Environment Management Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the National Environment Act, 2019 and the Petroleum Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Act, 2013 and the host government agreement.” 

What that subclause means is that the authority referred to in the Bill is the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. It is the one that reviews the post-decommissioning report in consultation with NEMA, which is now acting as its technical arm. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MS NANKABIRWA: I reconfirm that I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Finance, do you have something to say?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I thought what was lacking was that to complete the statement by saying “…and shall be subject to the approval of the authority.” That was lacking and he seems to have deleted it with his amendment. 

MR NIWAGABA: I agree with the minister because you see, if these other authorities review, there remains that aspect of approval.So, if they can review with the NEMA but then the approval must now be vested in a specific authority, which should remain the authority. So, your amendment can be captured, but you continue with “…and shall be subject to the approval of the authority, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed,” so that it is complete.

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, the authority that is understood under the host government agreement is no other than the Petroleum Authority of Uganda and so, if we introduce NEMA –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I want to refer you to subclause (3). Now what we are talking about the approval is covered under subclause (3). So, there is no need for us to include approval in subclause (2).It is covered under subclause (3).

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, you are spot on; we should have read the two together because subclause (3) covers it and I request that we support the amendment as moved by the chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put  thequestion that clause 37 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 38, agreed to.

MR NAMBESHE: Clause 38 on early project activities; Madam Chairperson, we see – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chief Opposition Whip, we finished clause 38; we can come back to it. First go back and look at it again.

Clause 39
The deputy chairperson: I put a question that clause 39 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 39, agreed to.
Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42
Mr ssekikubo: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 42(a), “The project company shall have the right to receive and use electrical power generated from Kingfisher…” Then, it also leaves room for the company to construct and operate any other necessary infrastructure yet I thought that as a country - Fortunately, the host minister is the one in charge of power generation in this country. 

Wouldn't it do well if we remained with this section for the country to be able to supply power for heating? I know that since it is a waxy oil to be exported, it needs heating. We can make use of electricity without allowing the company to construct any facility. We leave it to be purchased from our power generated in the country so that we remove “the right to construct and operate any necessary infrastructure.” We leave the power supply to be our input and to be paid for.

I propose to delete that section that gives the EACOP the right to construct and operate any necessary infrastructure. We have excessive power from Karuma and from all these dams. We have it as the country to do the heating and electricity supply. 

The deputy chairperson: What is included in the host agreement?

Mr ssekikubo: Just a short while ago, I was comparing notes with the learned Attorney-General and said that most of these are in the host agreement. Probably now that he is here, if there is room and it was not tied, we can take the benefit, Madam Chairperson. 

The deputy chairperson: Can we hear from the Attorney-General.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, my senior colleague is being speculative. A thorough look at this clause shows there are key words in it. One, it says, “necessary infrastructure,” meaning that the infrastructure must be of necessity.

Two, “in accordance with arrangements,” meaning that there has to be a negotiated agreement. It goes ahead to say, “jointly agreed,” meaning that you have to negotiate and agree with the regulatory authority. In essence, they are saying that EACOP would have to liaise or to enter an understanding with the regulatory authority in order to construct the necessary infrastructure. There is no problem with this, Madam Chairperson. 

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what the honourable Attorney-General has guided on, this clause basically is to avoid any interference in the operations of the project company. We know that there is excess gas but to bring in another company to generate electricity out of that excess gas would bring in a lot of interference in the operation of this project. 

I just want to give an example to my honourable colleague, the hon. Ssekikubo. Imagine you are on your business in your bedroom and someone is also there to do other duties. How comfortable would you feel?

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, I put a question to hon. Ssekikubo’s amendment in Clause 42(a) that we delete the words, “including the right to construct and operate any necessary infrastructure.” 

(Question put and negatived.)

The deputy chairperson: I now put a question that clause 42 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 42, agreed to.
Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, our harmonised version of clause 46, which is on supremacy of this Act, is as follows:

“This Act takes precedence over all existing laws relating to any matter under this Act, and where there is a conflict between this Act and any other Ugandan law other than the Constitution in relation to any matter under this Act, this Act shall prevail.”

The justification is that this ensures that certainty is given to the investors that there will be no interference with their work. 

In addition, “This law shall be supreme to other laws on specific matters relating to EACOP.” 

It is worth noting that a similar provision is found in many other laws in Uganda including the National Environment Act, 2019 under Section 180 and the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act of 2013 under Section 186, among other laws. 

I beg to submit the amendment.

Ms nankabirwa: Madam Chairperson, this is one of those provisions where we had to harmonise when we interfaced with the committee. We agreed that there was need to make the people of Uganda settled regarding safeguarding the Constitution and other laws. We agreed that we become specific as the chairperson has proposed. Therefore, I concede and support the chairperson. 

The deputy chairperson: Thank you.

Mr ssekikubo: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In legislative drafting, there is always what we call cross-referencing. The way I am reading this clause, is it necessary? I am asking this because we are creating a super law that is given supremacy yet that supremacy can only be retained by the Constitution. Needless to mention, must we have this provision in this Bill? 

I propose that we delete it altogether, because where other changes shall be applied and even within this law mutatis mutandis, without necessarily having a provision that you are creating a super provision or a super law, and it is taking precedence over others - when need arises, they shall always be the cross-referencing. 

Yes, the Minister is talking about giving certainty to Ugandans and the chairperson is talking about giving comfort to the investor, but at the end of the day, we as the legislators, need to be fair to all the laws made under the Constitution. Therefore, I move that we delete clause 46 because it is creating a super normal aspect of the law as if there is something or the sky is falling; it is sacrosanct. The sacrosanctity can only be retained by the Constitution but not any other law made by this House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. Unfortunately, that is part of what is in the host agreement. Can I have the host agreement so I can show it to hon. Ssekikubo? 

I think there is a precedent that has been set. In the NEMA Act, 2019, there was a precedent set and in the Petroleum - I want to lend you my copy so that you have a look at it.  Honourable Minister -

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Again, I am sorry that we have to keep reminding ourselves that we are dealing with a “special provisions Bill” to enable the implementation of the agreements that we signed, after protracted negotiations. We found this as a limitation where we did not have any answer. 

I just want to plead that we bear with that because we want to enter into the real business where Uganda is represented. We are in business with other people. It is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you in agreement with the amendment?

MS NANKABIRWA: I am in agreement with the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 4 that was stood over.

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday we stood over this clause. Now, I would like to propose the following amendments:
    a. Amend the definition of the word “off-taker” by deleting the words “and delivered at the Marine export terminal at Chongolean, Tanga District in Tanzania.”

The justification is to be in line with the object and the purpose of the Bill and to avoid unnecessary repetition. I beg to submit the amendment.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you move all the amendments on the interpretation?

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for that guidance. The next amendment that I would like to move is to amend the definition of the word “oil processing areas” by deleting the words “located in Uganda, Tanzania or the territory of any State, which has acceded to the intergovernmental agreement.”

The justification is to be in line with the objects and the purpose of the Bill. I beg to submit.

The other amendment that I would like to submit is on metered volume. We are proposing that metered volume should be defined to mean, “the volume of petroleum that has been measured by a metering system at the point of entry of the EACOP system.”
The justification is for clarity, because the word has been used in clause 5 and other parts of the Bill. 

I also propose another interpretation on the payment in kind. We are proposing that payment in kind be defined as to mean, “The use of crude oil as payment for transportation tariff and related services, in accordance with the agreements for transportation of petroleum, and the host Government agreement.” 
The justification for that amendment is for clarity because payment in kind has been used in some of the provisions of the Bill, for example under clause 8 of the Bill. 

We further propose that we define decommissioning to mean, “The process of safely ceasing operations resulting in a complete or partial removal and/or making substantial changes in the use of EACOP system or permanently disposing or abandoning a facility or operation in a manner that is not deleterious to human health or the environment.”

The justification for that is just for clarity.

Accordingly, we also would like to propose a new definition of the phrase “decommissioning plan” to mean, “the latest version of the written plan, describing proposed actions associated with the decommissioning of the EACOP system across Uganda and Tanzania to be undertaken by the project company in the form prepared by the project company and approved by the relevant State authority and the relevant Tanzanian State authority.”
The justification for that proposed amendment is that the EACOP is a single integrated project that runs across Uganda and Tanzania. 

Therefore, the project requires a harmonised decommissioning plan to be approved by both States in reference to Article 15(1) (d) of the Intergovernmental Agreement that we are domesticating. The definition is, therefore, aligned with the agreement in the ratified treaty or the IGA. 

Madam Speaker, those are all the amendments that I wanted to submit on the interpretation clause. I now beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Chairperson. Anyone has more issues with the interpretation clause?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had initially intended to recommit clause 7 to give specific meaning to “legal and beneficial ownership” because of the issues we raised yesterday. 

We tried to agree with the team we were with today throughout the morning and afternoon and it remained a bit sticky. We seemed to be at cross-purposes, trying to understand the fair appreciation and intricate meaning and interpretation thereof. The challenge we had in agreeing, in finality to it, was that I did not establish a clear definition of the same in the host government agreement. That leaves some bit of ambiguity.
 I need to be satisfied that the amendments we moved under clause 7 provide adequate meaning so that at one stage, we shall not be blamed for lax legislation that leaves room for various interpretations. I have tried to come to terms with my colleagues on this. I want to be on record that the definition of “legal and beneficial ownership” is not a matter over which we have come to an appreciation.

The technical team had come up with a definition and, eventually, it fell through. Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether, in your wisdom, you would like to ask the minister or the chairperson to offer more clarity for my appreciation of this definition or, probably, for the chairperson to put it to the Members of this House. After all, it is not anybody’s business to get away with a victory but to generate consensus over matters for which all of us are going to be charged over time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Did you want to introduce this in the interpretation clause? If you want to introduce it in the interpretation clause, then do so. The minister wants to say something.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the Leader of the Opposition is right. He introduced this matter to us. 

However, when we looked back to what we passed yesterday under clause 7 – the time he introduced it, he was relating to the Bill as it was before yesterday’s amendment. When we looked at yesterday’s amendment, where we agreed to insert under clause 7, it was amended by inserting the words “arising from the 15 per cent state participating interest in our applicable petroleum agreements between the words ‘it’ and ‘at’.” The clause now read like this: “Notwithstanding the provisions of any Ugandan law, the Ugandan state participant shall hold legal and beneficial ownership of petroleum allocated to it, arising from the 15 per cent state participating interest in applicable petroleum agreements at the exit point from the upstream project at Kabaale, to enable it exercise its rights and perform its obligations under…”

We realised that this was taking care of what the Leader of the Opposition was raising. 

Secondly, yesterday, we had not considered the interpretation of the words “payment in kind”, which has been introduced today and ably defined. Therefore, I feel that we have taken care of what the Leader of the Opposition was raising. If I can read payment in the – but the chairperson has just introduced it and I think it is fresh in the minds of the Members. 
I beg that the Leader of the Opposition understands and concedes that we go by what we passed yesterday and today’s interpretation of “payment in kind”. It is specifically talking about the 15 per cent.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to go back to clause 7 and read it. It says: “Notwithstanding the provisions of any Ugandan law, the Ugandan state participant shall hold the legal and beneficial ownership of petroleum allocated to it…” We then made the amendment “arising out of 15 per cent shareholding or participatory, at the exit point from the upstream project at Kabaale to enable it…” – I want to emphasise it because we have the whole morning been grappling with this thing: how do we create a consensus?
 
However, we have not been emphasising this and I would like colleagues now to know – “to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under…” I can repeat: the ownership is to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under the relevant petroleum agreements, the agreements for the transport of petroleum, the host government agreement and any other agreement entered into for the implementation of the agreement referred to in (a) to (c). This legal and beneficial ownership is for a purpose, according to the Bill. That purpose is to enable it “to exercise its rights and perform its obligations”.

When you go to “payment in kind”, which certainly is related to clause 7, we defined what “payment in kind” means and we also restricted it. I do not know whether we are anticipating it but the minister has read it and we have the consensus about that definition. It ties in correctly that this particular beneficial and legal right is restricted, one, to 15 per cent and, two, to perform their obligations and rights under these agreements and nothing else. 

It does not go ahead and relate to revenue because the fear we are having is: are we giving the Uganda National Oil Company beneficial rights for purposes of benefiting from the revenue? I think that was the fear -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Since you have now taken up the role, may I get clarification from you? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which role has he taken over? 

MR NIWAGABA: He has taken over my role as the alternative attorney-general. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR NIWAGABA: I wanted to get clarification from my brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu. If the 15 per cent envisaged under clause 7 is restricted for the purposes of this particular Bill, why then do you make reference to relevant petroleum agreements, which are outside this Bill? Why don’t you restrict the title to the 
Petroleum and the payment in kind to only the purposes of this specific Bill? Which purpose is it? The provision is for the basic transportation of the petroleum in this particular project, the pipeline? Why do you make it appear to even include other agreements that are not envisaged under this Bill?

MR KATUNTU: Well, thank you very much, my younger brother. You know, I was the other Attorney-General for five years in this House before you and certainly went also to school before you. So, I am not taking up your role, but I am doing my senior role.

Number one, all these agreements are anchored from the petroleum agreements. They are not agreements on their own; they arise from the petroleum agreements. That is why when you look at (d), it even says any other agreement entered into for the implementation of the agreements referred to. So, they are not in isolation. 

If you and I do not know that the minister can read again, I do not know maybe the clerk- the amendment we have made for payment in kind in the definition- because this was demanded by the Leader of the Opposition; this thing about payment in kind we just wanted to know what payment in kind are we talking about if we can read the definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, can you read the definition of payment in kind? 

MR KATUNTU: The definition which we arrived at; it helps put it in context?

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, the definition we are proposing is: “’Payment in kind’ means the use of crude oil as payment for transportation tariff and related services in accordance with the agreements for transportation of petroleum, and the host government agreement”.

MR KATUNTU: Therefore, even this payment in kind is restricted. It is for purposes of transportation. So, you need to read clause 7, clause 8, and the interpretation clause together, and you will find that the fear or the mischief we are having is already covered by the Bill. 

However, Madam Chairperson, since yesterday, we have been trying to see how we can harmonize and we cure the problem which all of us could see, if we do not clarify, it could be subject to misinterpretation. So, in my well considered opinion, the amendment in clause 7, the amendment in clause 8 by defining “Payment in kind” in the interpretation, cures that problem. 

However, I would like the minister to be on record that maybe I am reading the law differently. But she should be on record to tell us colleagues that actually what we are fearing is not true because the law is not intended for that purpose. And I think that will make everybody comfortable; if I understood the Leader of the Opposition correctly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you make a clarification?

MS NANKABIRWA: I am holding the Bill. I am not holding the Bible. I would like to assure you – that is why I am holding the Bill; and I would like to begin from rereading what clause 2 means in this Bill on application. Where will it be applied? This Act applies to the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project and what the work of the pipeline is, to transport crude oil from the refinery. We have a refinery, which will be handling 60,000 barrels. And we have the rest going through this route, the pipeline. 

Therefore, hon. Abdu Katuntu, Senior Counsel, I would like to thank you for your further submission. 

Madam Chairperson, I really plead that we go by what we passed yesterday, in making sure that we are talking about the 15 per cent title and the definition of payment in kind which was missing in this Bill, where we agreed that for clarity, let us include this definition so that we do not go beyond the scope. This is what I can say.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, the beauty about the law and its interpretation is that when you conceive an idea or the concept and seek to offer meaning to it, it is your own meaning. And you share it across for interpretation, which is why I never saw mischief in supplying my considered definition, having failed to find it in any of the agreements and laws so referred to. 

I thought that the ambiguity could be subject to misinterpretation. I agree with the minister that clause 2 clearly speaks to the purpose of the Bill. But because, again, the purpose of the Bill is for transportation of the crude oil - when you read the Bill, you see; “and other services,” those other services, again, referred to relate to those other agreements. Okay. And they are not attached to this particular Bill. Therefore, the tendency to leave ambiguity is various.

However, that said, I would like to be on record - that leaves a void, Madam Chairperson. And let us formally close this by moving that it is the business of this House to take a decision on these matters that we introduce on clause 7.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are they introduced on clause 7 or clause 4?

MR MPUUGA:  Sorry, clause 4, part (i) to define legal and the beneficial ownership to mean, the oil allocated to UNOC in respect to the 15 per cent shareholding in the EACOP for purposes of meeting the tariff obligation and other services.

Justification is for clarity. I submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, can you give us your definition? Reframe it afresh.

MR MPUUGA: On record? The definition - to define legal and beneficial ownership to mean, “The oil allocated to UNOC in respect to the 15 per cent shareholding in the EACOP project for purposes of meeting the tariff obligation and other services.”

I am not a professional draftsperson but I have rendered the meaning I wanted to attach to this for purposes of the drafts people to supply the same meaning without creating any further ambiguities. Having done that, I hope my honourable friend and minister will, for the first time, concede like I have conceded.

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, I am putting the question to the insertion that the Leader of the Opposition is bringing up on the definition of “legal and beneficiary ownership” to refer to oil allocated to UNOC in respect to the 15 per cent shareholding in the EACOP project for purposes of meeting the tariffs and other related services that should be included in section (4) as an interpretation.

(Question put and negatived.)

The deputy chairperson: I, therefore, put the question that clause 4, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

Motion for the house to resume

4.25
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

The deputy chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding.)

Report from the committee of the whole house

4.26
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) [Special Provisions] Bill, 2021” and passed clauses 29, 36, 37, 46, and clause 4, which was stood over, with amendments. It passed clauses 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 and 45 without amendments.

We were able to pass the Schedules 1 and 2 without amendments. 
I beg to report that we also passed the title to this Bill without amendment.

I also want to add that the Minister of Energy and Minerals Development conceded to some of the proposals moved by the Leader of the Opposition. Therefore, it is not right that he was asking me to concede for the first time because you sanctioned us to sit and we consented. We took care of some of the provisions from the minority report and I am very grateful that we moved in harmony. (Applause)

Therefore, the clauses I have moved regard to the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021. I beg to report.

Motion for adoption of the report from the committee of the whole house

4.28
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

Bills
Third reading
The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) [Special Provisions] Bill, 2021

4.29
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) [Special Provisions] Bill, 2021” be read the third time and do pass.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, I propose the question that “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) [Special Provisions] Bill, 2021” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A bill for an act entitled, “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) [Special Provisions] Bill, 2021”

The Deputy Speaker: Title settled and the Bill is passed. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members and fellow countrymen and women, I congratulate you on this Bill, which has been outstanding for a very long period. Now, you can easily do business between Uganda and Tanzania. (Applause)

On a special note, I thank the Leader of the Opposition. You are a very special person. You have supported this country in whatever you have been doing. (Applause)

I also thank the acting to hon. Niwagaba, that is, hon. Katuntu. You did a very good job, senior. You have been a very important person in this Bill’s passing. Where people were not aware of what to do, you supported.

Shadow minister, you are a very brilliant lady. We thank you very much. We will do our best and protect the interest of all the Ugandans. 

Congratulations, honourable minister and the chairperson of the committee. Do you have something to say?

4.31
The chairperson of the committee on environment and natural resources (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to move a vote of thanks to you for the guidance that you gave us, particularly, in coming up with a select committee to harmonise –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was not a select committee; a select committee is provided for under the rules. 

DR OTAALA: The harmonisation committee, thank you for that correction. I just want to thank you for coming up with that harmonisation committee in which we deliberated and came up with various harmonised positions that made the passing of this Bill a harmonious task for all of us without saying so and so has won or so and so has lost. I thank you very much for your wisdom in guiding this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

DR OTAALA: Similarly, Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank everybody who worked with me in examining this Bill. Particularly, I want to thank members of my committee and the honourable minister and her team for the harmony that we exhibited as we examined this Bill. 

I want to assure members of my committee that your views were taken into consideration and the harmonisation committee was very cognisant of your tremendous input in dealing with this matter. 

Today, we have unlocked the potential for our country in moving it from a banana republic to an oil producing country. I want to thank all of you for this great opportunity. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, do you want to say something? 

4.34
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Yes, please. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Briefly. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am going to be very brief. I must begin by thanking you very much, Madam Speaker. As the presiding officer, your guidance is very key and you guided well. All of us interfaced with technical people who have been on the journey of the development of the petroleum sector in Uganda. They have been at it and they were fresh in reminding us of the provisions of the signed agreements where we were not party. Therefore, it was important that we go out and interface with these technical people. I must thank you. 

I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition with his entire team. They came up with the minority report from which we identified that there was need to clarify on some of those issues. I want to appreciate that. 

I want to appreciate the committee; we interfaced with them in a retreat together with the technical team. As you may all be aware, I was also in a lecture room with everyone because I have not been part and parcel of these agreements. 

Therefore, as I thank the committee, I want to end by urging colleagues to find time and read these agreements because we are the ones who are supposed to interpret them to the rest of the country; these are huge documents. We laid them on the Table and they are being referenced to in the Bill that we have just concluded. Therefore, it will be shameful for us to appear in the media explaining things, which probably are out of the agreed agreements. I just want to request everyone to really find time and read these very important documents. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I had actually expected you to thank your Government Chief Whip as well for the sleepless nights he has had.

MS NANKABIRWA: One thousand apologies. He chaired this special committee but also, he took time to read the Bill because he was able to even give clarifications where my team and I were not giving the clarification. This indicated to me that the Government Chief Whip took time to not only to whip people but also read the Bill, internalise it and sanction us to present the relevant provisions in the agreement. I know that he will continue whipping the rest of the Members in understanding the Bill that we have just passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. My special thanks goes to my personal Attorney-General, hon. Katuntu. Thank you to the staff of the ministry for your effort and the media. We are grateful. 

Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have His Lordship the Rt Rev. Joseph Eciru Oliach, the Bishop of Soroti Diocese. On your behalf, allow me to welcome him to Parliament of Uganda.You are most welcome Papa Bishop, feel at home while in Parliament of Uganda. Thank you for coming for the prayers. (Applause)

We also have Rev. Fr Thomas Omee, the Private Secretary to the Bishop; Rev. Fr Pontiano Kaweesa, the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplain. Still in the gallery, we have hon. Elly Karuhanga, former MP and currently, the Chairman of Uganda Chamber of Mines and Petroleum. Honourable, you are welcome. He is here to witness the passing of the EACOP Bill. Congratulations for your Bill. Members, I want to thank you very much, especially for welcoming my Bishop. Next item.

As I said at the start, we have a High Mass that is going to be celebrated by the Rt Rev. Bishop Joseph Eciru as well as lighting of the Christmas Tree. That is why Bishop Eciru is here. Bishop, you are welcome. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO STRENGTHEN EFFORTS FOR PROMOTING ROAD SAFETY IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter from Imat Cecilia Atim Ogwal Barbra. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. I have noted that you have appreciated the role played by the minister, the Government Chief Whip, the acting Attorney-General and the Leader of the Opposition. 

However, I have observed that there are quite a number of people who have contributed in shaping the Bill. Therefore, I am asking the minister and the Chief Whip, since the Bill is passed at the time of Christmas; it is a special Christmas gift for the people of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, one of the issues that you forgot to share with us who have been sharing and helping in shaping that debate - We want to know where the minister and the Government Chief Whip are going to have a scientific dinner. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia, you are aware that solicitation is criminal. Now, you are soliciting for Christmas benefit - Next item. 

Members, we have an item here on road safety and we are going to launch road safety on Monday. It would be prudent that we move a motion to that effect. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see two senior Members of Parliament standing and fighting for the microphone. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Not exactly, Madam Speaker. I was only standing in reference to the Order Paper because I noticed that the item that was next, as you guided, is Prime Minister’s Time. I thought the Prime Minister would be present in the House to answer the sticking issues.

Now that we have Gen. Moses Ali, I do not know whether he will be able to stand firm on the issues, particularly on the issues of Democratic Republic Congo because we want to ask these matters very specifically; it is also provided for under Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure. Rule 41 provides for the Prime Minister’s Time and since we have burning issues, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you ask the Prime Minister to be present because some of us are putting our eyes firmly on the Constitution and on our Congo expeditions?

We would want to take every opportunity available to raise this matter of Congo, and since this is the prime time for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we go as per the Order Paper and we have the Prime Minister to answer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. The beauty behind the Order Paper is that it is for the Speaker. Therefore, the Speaker will decide on what comes and what does not come. 

However, what he is raising is something that is pertinent on what you want to raise. As you are aware the item that you are raising is on the Order Paper and is going to be handled. You want the Leader of Government Business but he is here. He is the most senior Leader of Government Business. (Applause)

However, I am also mindful of General’s health. All of you know what happened to General and I do not want us to strain him so much on what does not – for now, let us first look at the motion.

Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for understanding that you are dealing with your father.

4.44
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. The motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. The motion reads:
“AWARE THAT Uganda has in the recent years institutionalized the annual commemoration of the national road safety week with that of 2021, scheduled for 13th to 17th December;

AND FURTHER aware that Uganda, as a member of the United Nations General Assembly, that adopted Resolution A/RES/74/299, Improving Global Road Safety, has signified its commitment under the second decade of action for road safety, to reduce road traffic deaths and injuries by at least 50 per cent by 2030;

AND FURTHER aware that the resolution indicated above calls upon the member states to continue action on all road safety targets: multimodal transport and land use planning, safe road infrastructure, safe vehicles, safe road use and post-crash response; 

COGNITION that the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 (Amendment) Act, 2020 recognises the need to promote road safety in Uganda through strengthening of road transport regulation and road safety management; and the Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, has instituted a series of reforms to address some of the gaps in the legal and institutional frameworks governing road safety;

COGNIZANT of the raft of statutory instruments aimed at operationalising the implementation of the Road Safety Act, notably-
    a) The traffic and road safety prescribed alcohol limit regulations 2004;
    b) Traffic and road safety speed limit regulation 2004;
    c)  Traffic and road safety motorcycle regulations 2004;
    d) Traffic and road safety wearing of seatbelt regulations 2004;
    e) Traffic and road safety restriction of use of mobile telephones regulations 2004;
    f) Traffic and road safety speed governors regulations 2004; and 
    g) Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. Statutory instrument 361 – 10;

NOTING THAT globally, road traffic injuries remain the leading cause of death with millions of lives lost to crashes almost every day. Hence, the world Remembrance Day for Road Traffic Victims, observed every 3rd Sunday in November each year, as the appropriate acknowledgement for victims of road traffic and their families; pay homage to those who have died on the world’s roads, advocate for better support for the victims and bereaved families, and promote action to save lives;

NOTING THAT in Uganda, the police crime report 2020 estimates death accruing to road traffic crashes at 3,000 people, while serious injuries average 13,500 people annually. The Uganda road crash severity index was 30 deaths per 100 crashes in 2019.The main risk behaviour factors contributing to road carnage and injuries, include high speed, drink driving, improper or non-use of helmets, seatbelts and child restraints;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT road crashes and injuries have a significant impact on any country’s GDP and the entire economy. The World Health Organisation Report 2017 on managing speed estimated that road traffic crashes cost countries approximately three per cent of their GDP, with the economic losses in low and middle-income countries, equivalent to five per cent of GDP, approximately Shs 6.4 trillion for Uganda’s case;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
    1. Government increases funding for the road safety programmes and activities, specifically the Department of Traffic and Road Safety of the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Directorate of Traffic Police for Human Resource and Equipment.
    2. The Ministry of Works and Transport considers reducing the speed limit for urban areas, high built up areas and schools zones from 50 kilometres per hour to 30 kilometres per hour.
    3. The ministry reduces the blood alcohol content from the current 0.08mg/100ml to 0.05mg/100ml for the general drivers, 0.02/100ml for young and novice and commercial drivers.
    4. The Ministry of Works and Transport liaises with other relevant agencies such as UNBS, considers setting acceptable standards for helmets, seatbelts and child restraints to be allowed on the market.
    5. The Uganda Police Force strengthens enforcement of road safety laws and regulations, especially during this month when we are nearing end of year holidays.
    6. The Ministry of Works and Transport, together with Ministry of Health and the Uganda Police Force, should work concertedly to improve the collection and management of road crash data.
    7. Government strengthens measures to curb corruption between traffic offenders and the law enforcers on the roads.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ruhunda. Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by hon. Mudimi, hon. Dorcus, hon. Keefa hon. Ekanya, hon. Obama – (Laughter) - hon. Migadde, hon. Obiga and most of the Members. Is hon. Josyline in?
Hon. Mudimi you can come and speak to the motion.

4.52
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I support the motion raised by hon. Alex Ruhunda for curbing accidents on the roads. He has mentioned many other aspects which contribute to road carnage but in the city here, apart from speeding, you will find a huge pothole in the middle of the city. They are here. 

Therefore, if you are not careful, even when you are driving at low speed, you will find you are off the road completely. I sympathise with the boda boda cyclists. Yesterday I was following one on the road and he entered a pothole and got stuck. Therefore, we are not necessarily saying that they are speeding. We urge the Government and leadership of Kampala Capital City Authority to improve the road network within the city as you look for money to do other things. 

Madam Speaker, we normally take the route to Jinja. In Mabira now, when you are driving, you have to be very careful because every moment where you pass, you will find a pothole. When you are driving at a reasonable speed, you will find you are off the road.

Therefore, I beg this House that when it comes to the budget process, we allot some money to KCCA to, at least, do some improvement in the city. 

Recently, a friend came from Norway and he asked what type of city this is, with huge potholes, uncontrolled boda boda cyclists: everything is in a mess. So, we have to look at the management of traffic and the people in a proper way. Otherwise, it is very expensive. They have ranked road carnage as the most expensive venture globally. 

Recently, I saw a bus which plunged into the water in Nairobi. All these are problems which can be resolved. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mudimi. This motion has been proposed and seconded. I am going to defer the debate to Tuesday. 

On a special note and on behalf of Parliament, I would like to congratulate the Most Reverend Paul Semwogerere upon his appointment as the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese. We wish him well and we will keep praying for him. We thank God for his appointment. 

I adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 December 2021 at 2.00p.m.)






