

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Thursday, 16 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.17p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy is inviting you for a thanksgiving Holy Communion and Christmas Carols Service today, Thursday, 16 December 2021 starting at 4.00p.m., at the Conference Hall.

The main celebrant is His Grace, the Most Rev. Dr Stephen Samuel Kazimba Mugalu, Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. I encourage you to attend. I will also try to make it possible for me to attend since I will still be sitting here. Members, you are invited to come and attend this. The Christmas Carols and Communion is important as we enter this festive season. 

Honourable members, there is no much communication from the Chair today, except that we have to go on with business. Let us start. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO RESCIND THE DIRECTIVE REQUIRING MEDICAL INTERNS TO VACATE GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL FACILITIES AND TO ADDRESS CONCERNS LEADING TO THE MEDICAL INTERNS’ STRIKE

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before that motion is presented, honourable members, we have had meetings today. We are continuing to have meetings tomorrow with the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasuryto find out how far they have gone with the release of the money that we passed, part of which was supposed to take care of the issue that is in this motion. 

Looking at the motion, one of the prayers is that “Government should unconditionally pay the medical interns’ arrears and allowances as per the presidential directive.” This was already handled by this House and there is delay inthe Ministry of Finance in committing the money. Since the Minister of Finance is here, I would like him to confirm what I have heard from the PS/ST that arrangements are being made to release that money so that this matter can be settled, especially this matter of payment to the medical workers. Would you like to deal with that now?




2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the House handled this issue when we passed the Supplementary Schedule No.1, which included Shs 35.2 billion to take care of allowances and salaries of medical interns together with the senior staff, among others. 

There is a process which we follow after passing a supplementary and we have been going through this process. Just today, we received a request from the Ministry of Health and by close of business today, we should have issued a cash limit to them, to facilitate them pay the money. I believe that by the time we close for Christmas, the medical interns should have been paid. 
Mr Speaker, this is the latest information I would like to give to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

Number one, “The Ministry of Health to rescind the directive requiring medical interns to vacate Government hospital premises”. The information I have is that the leaders are meeting with the Director-General of Health Services tomorrow, to handle this particular matter. 

Honourable, do you have anything to add on this? I received instrument making this man, for now, Minister of Health for these purposes. 

2.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, there have been engagements and the leadership of the forum of interns’ executive committee approached the Minister of Health and requested for a meeting, which was granted. Tomorrow, the leadership of the interns shall have a meeting with the Director-General of Health Services and most likely together with the leadership of Uganda Medical Association to discuss these very issues. Therefore, there is progress and there should be no cause for worry. They have also indicated that they are willing to resume work on Monday. So, there is progress. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now, that leaves us with (c) “Government to ensure that the medical interns smoothly complete their internship.” I think this is just rhetorical; it is one of those things that must be done. Otherwise, what is the purpose of sending them to those institutions? In light of this, I am going to defer this motion to Tuesday, to monitor what developments will take place tomorrow, our meeting with the PS/ST and the meeting with the leaders of the association.

We also need a clear guide on when these monies are likely to be paid such that when we come back on Tuesday, we are updated and we see what part of the motion would still be relevant and then we deal with it that way. 

We will handle this matter on Tuesday, next week. 
Next item – (Hon. Atkins Katusabe rose_) – On this same matter? It is very clear. Next item. This same thing I have communicated on? No, please. If it is on the same matter, honourable – 

MR KATUSABE: No, Mr Speaker, you have ruled and as you know, you have the last word and I would not –

THE SPEAKER: I am glad to hear that. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, you have got the last word. About a fortnight ago, the presiding officer then, directed the Committee on Human Rights to look into the issue of the royal guards and the king that are still or remainincarcerated yet they are in need of urgent medical attention. I have been monitoring closely and it has occurred to me that the committee has not bothered at all to sit or even to call some of us who are the representatives. 

Mr Speaker, this is a matter that concerns life or lives of our fellow citizens. I do not know how long this is going to continue. Even to a committee of Parliament, your directives are ignored and disregarded. Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally – 

THE SPEAKER: They are not ignored;they are implemented slowly.

MR KATUSABE: Slowly, I am happy to hear that.

THE SPEAKER: It is risky business to ignore the Speaker’s directive.

MR KATUSABE: I thought it was dangerous. It is a recipe of disaster. Mr Speaker, this particular matter concerns life. Everything else we handle on the Order Paper can wait but not human life. 

I continue to get distress calls from the hospital, including the prison authorities that say, “We communicated that your people in jail need urgent medical attention.” I said, how much can I – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, is this the same matter of the people in detention where some of them have sicknesses, which matter has never been responded to?

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, they have not responded to it. Even when the presiding officer directed the committee of Parliament to handle, nothing has been done. I felt this is very dehumanising.

Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right for us to look on as the Speaker’s directives are not effected or implemented?

THE SPEAKER: No, but as Parliament, we are really proceeding well but those who choose to ignore or implement - rather too slowly - guidance that has been given by the presiding officer, are not correct. 

Dr Chris Baryomunsi, you spoke on this matter last time, didn't you? Was it you or was it the Minister of Internal Affairs? (Interjection) Was it Gen. Muhoozi? (Interjections) 

No, it was a commitment to this House but I also referred the matter because that was the third time it was coming and this is the fourth time it is coming. 

Can I have a direct commitment that this matter will not come back to the House? If it comes back to the House, it will only be to say that it has been handled. This has been here for four times; it is frustrating.


2.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: I will personally follow up this matter now. Honourable, please come to my office tomorrow at about 10 o'clock and we will do this jointly.

MR KATUSABE: Much appreciated. This country can give the people in prison a Christmas gift by releasing the prisoners unconditionally. We will be happy as a country. I think this is for the good – 

THE SPEAKER: That is a new one. (Laughter) Thank you very much. (Interjection) Clarification from whom? 

I told you your motion is very well received and part of it is already being discussed. I am deferring the presentation to Tuesday to allow us time to check all these things that people say they are doing; the payments, the issue of leaving hospitals, the vacation thing; all those will be handled tomorrow; I am monitoring it. 

Therefore, I have deferred your motion to Tuesday to give us time to examine all these other things. If we see that we are on course, then we may not need this motion but if we are not then we have a full debate on the motion on Tuesday.

What is not clear, honourable? I thought I have been very clear. You know, you end up demobilising people who are doing their best to help solve the situation. Can we proceed to the next item?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO STRENGTHEN EFFORTS FOR PROMOTING ROAD SAFETY IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Alex here? Is it you presenting it, David? Please. 

I am being advised that this motion was presented and what was left is debate. I am sure the question was also proposed for debate. 

Just to remind you, I will propose the question again. The question is that Parliament, by resolution, should urge Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now.

2.33
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also known as the people's guardian. 

I would like to thank the mover of this motion for the very fact that in my constituency, ever since the new tarmac road was put that begins from Tirinyi through Pallisa up to Kumi, we have so far lost about 22 people.

We are now talking about life and development and how to balance the two. I would like to inquire whether Government would be able to put in place safety measures, even after putting such a very expensive road. They should put safety measures, especially towards the trading centres and the junctions.

The reason I really support this motion is to emphasise the fact that whereas we put in place good roads, we should also be mindful of the users of this road. How safe are they? This is especially on those highways that are passing through rural areas where it is the first time for people to see such a marvellous development coming into place. 

We should do a lot of sensitisation and awareness. There should be strengthening of the department within the Ministry of Works and Transport that is concerned with public awareness to educate people on road safety. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Karubanga, you are the seconder of the motion, you cannot speak to it again. 

2.35
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

When we talk about road safety, the Government is very inclined to emphasising the penalties given to the road users. It is inclined to emphasising how to fine the law breakers. However, the Government has not put in place mechanisms to find the aetiology of the traffic misuse. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the word again?

MR KAYONDO: Aetiology is the cause - (Laughter) - what causes people to break traffic rules. It has now become a cascade of issues that when we come to Parliament here, we are talking about traffic misuse and what have you. 

Yesterday, I was talking about Jinja Road. It takes you five hours from Kampala to Jinja. It takes somebody one hour from Soroti to Mukono. It takes four hours from Mukono to Kampala. That prompts our drivers to break traffic rules. How I wish the Government can also be inclined to reducing what is tempting these people to break the traffic rules. 

Look at the roads that are being constructed; they are of low quality. For example, they have just constructed a road in Mukono South that connects to Jinja. It is not even a year but it is developing potholes. 

The trading centres do not have humps and at the end of the day, people are losing their lives. But what the Government is doing, it is strengthening the penalties it is giving to the end user, but it is not putting an end to what is stopping these people from breaking the traffic rules. I beg to submit,Mr Speaker.

2.38
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A fortnight ago, we lost eight people in one night and this was caused by the recklessness by the boda-boda cyclists. Also, as we look at the road safety in Uganda, we also need to come up with a law to regulate the road users, especially the boda-boda cyclists. 

Today in Uganda, anyone can go and buy a motorcycle in the afternoon at 3.00pm. It is about a boda-boda cyclist. And I think it is only in Uganda here that we don’t have a government driving school or a government riding school here. The Government should come up with a law to regulate the road users, especially the boda-boda cyclists. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.39
MR YOWERI SEBIKAALI (NRM, Ntwetwe County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about how these roads are constructed because they would be with hand washing facilities from a distance to a distance. And this one can even prevent diseases and infections. But you find a road from Nansana up to Hoima without a convenient place and people are eating in those vehicles. They are no good places to ease themselves. So I think when they are being constructed, these convenient places should be inclusive. 

Secondly, I have gone to Rwanda and those reserves are protected for environment protection. They plant trees, put good grasses so that people can at least rest when there is sunshine and everything. However, our roads are very expensive without those components where we can get good services. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.40
MR FRANCIS TWINOMUJUNI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for the motion. However, I would like to thank the Government for the roads in Bunyoro subregion, especially in Kikuube.

However, there is an important road that the Government compensated the people with the view of working on it, and that is Kabwoya-Kituti Road. This road is important in nature because it is the only road that you can use to access the oil wells in Kingfisher and also to transport food to the refugees. 

As I speak, the road is impassable even if you go there now. You find so many trucks parking without access. A day before yesterday, we were in our roads committee in Kikuube District. I tried to request the station engineer of UNRA to at least do the spot grading.  However, the station engineer said that he has no capacity. 

Honourable minister and the chairperson of the committee, you are here; may I request that you update us and also give us a solution for that road? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you still debating the motion?

MR TWINOMUJUNI: I am not but I want to give the information to the minister so that we can be helped. Thank you, Sir.

2.42
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I wish to support this motion as well with a small adjustment, especially on the prayers. One of the prayers is majorly emphasizing on the construction of humps along the roads. However, though that one is one way of deterring these accidents, over time the issue has been the class of our drivers. I request that the issue of the Highway Code must really be instilled amongst all road users. The level of discipline along our roads is really questionable. 

Then you ask the question “Are people who are using these roads qualified enough to use them?” So in addition to the prayers that the mover raised, I would like to add that the issue of the Highway Code must be brought back. I remember when we were at school, we used to sing these in the back of our hands, but I don’t think this is anymore. And you can easily see it as you drive along the road. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with my colleague from Mukono South; the issue of our roads, again, rightly as he put it, it takes exactly two and a half hours using Tirinyi Road and the new Pallisa Road for you to drive from Soroti to Mukono and another three hours or four, if you are lucky, to get from Mukono to Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, I think really as leaders and particularly the ministry, if you look at the exit alone - let me use Mukono as an example; if you used it as an exit there are other auxiliary roads that could be worked on such that the traffic is decongested out of Kampala. 

Thirdly, I don’t know if colleagues have witnessed it recently along the roads. I don’t know why the police are making these roadblocks with very heavy spikes. Sometimes just driving I find that a roadblock has been instituted here and you can easily get yourself on to the spikes. 

In Mabira, for example, you question, other cars come through but the very important truck drivers who drive this economy are the ones who suffer in this world causing unnecessary congestion. I witnessed a number of accidents caused by unnecessary and non-gazetted police roadblocks that end up causing accidents. Among other measures, this is highly questionable. 

Lastly, and I am happy the honourable minister is here, we have a very beautiful road that we have which has been developed. I think maybe it will be launched soon. You find very nice traffic flowing on the northern bypass but exit out of the northern bypass you end up into potholes and panya roads. What are we doing? 

(Text expunged)
With that small contribution, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the contributor of this motion, and really pray that we take our time, especially as leaders because it is quite important that we follow up. And I would like again to thank the mover of this motion for this opportunity. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable,(Text expunged), we like to not be part of this communication that you have just made (Text expunged). And if I had the powers, I would have asked you to amend to be specific about who you are referring to(Text expunged).

Would you like to adjust your statement to reflect your true intentions or what you really want to say? Or just take out the old statement altogether? 

MR ELOTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I was not clear enough. And probably for that reason let me take away that particular statement out of my submission.

The Speaker: Thank you very much. Those remarks do not occupy part of the record. 

2.47
Mr anthony Esenu (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make three comments. One has to do with the whole question of road standards. Where I come from - I stay in Rubaga, Kampala - we got a motorist being killed by boda boda riders. The roads are very narrow and you find pedestrians, cyclists and motorists sharing the same narrow road. On the sidewalks, you find people have put all kinds of market produce and ware and there is nowhere anyone can pass. 

Therefore, I request that we have a standard of road construction, both in the rural and urban areas. Go to the rural areas – in Kapelebyong, three quarters of the district become inaccessible when the rains come. Now, I do not know how they build those roads. Once the rains come, they wash away all the local roads and we have to, basically, use one-third of the road system. 

I request that the ministry – and Government – creates a uniform standard of road construction across the country, whether it is in the rural areas or in the city so that we can be able to have accessibility and good use of our roads. Thank you.

2.48
Mr Richard Sebamala (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Road safety is meant for the vehicle operator – who is the driver – the passengers and the pedestrians. Road safety starts with the driver’s behaviour. 

The drinking and driving causes most accidents. Not wearing seatbelts, speeding, not keeping a safe distance when driving, distraction - people are driving while they are on phone, they are discussing, they are looking behind and discussing with the passengers. Some people are sick – you do not feel well – but continue to drive. This is where everything starts.

When we go to the design or the engineers, there are a lot of designs that do not take care of other road users: the people we call the non-motorised transport – cyclists and pedestrians. Pedestrians do not know that since the traffic rule is that vehicles keep left, they are supposed to walk on the right such that they do not walk as they look back to see whether they are going to be knocked. These are not catered for. 

Then, you look at the road designs. The roads have a lot of black spots. There are places on a road where most accidents are. Look at Masaka Road. They will always tell you “Lwera”. They will always tell you about Mabira. There are those places that have black spots and have been named over time. 

There are some portholes that are in Mabira, somewhere towards the police station. They never go away and people keep dying in the same spot and these places are not repaired. Therefore, the road designs are also supposed to be looked into.

Then we go down and look at the roads in the villages; these roads are not maintained in time. You find the bushes closing in and you have to hoot at every single corner you are turning such that the person who is on the other side of the corner can hear you come. There are very many people dying. We are losing up to almost 2,000 people in road accidents per year. 

Therefore, it is important that as we look at road safety, we look at it holistically and take care of the different aspects, one by one. We should cater for the driver, the passengers and the pedestrians. I beg to submit.

2.52
Mr frank Kabuye (NUP,Kassanda County South, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to debate the motion urging the Government to take up the responsibility to strengthen the safety on the roads. 

I will speak, first, about the village and the district roads, for example, in Kassanda District. Kassanda is one of the districts that were newly created in 2017 but up to now, we lack a road unit. We have been hiring from Mubende, Mityana and other neighbouring districts. Now, it has taken like a full year without the neighbours collaborating to assist us with at least a road unit to do the simple maintenance on these roads.

We are losing a lot of lives due to the accidents that occur because some of the roads are impassable. For example, if you are going to the district headquarters, you have to use the longest route that is available – that is about 13 kilometres – yet there was a shorter route of seven to five kilometres to the district headquarters. 

We are finding people from some of the islands because we have areas that are close to the lake. We have a lake - Lake Wamala – but they have been filled with water. We have written to the Ministry of Works and Transport to come and help. Ladies are giving birth on the small boats – because the roads are no longer passable by the motorcycles or the vehicles - that are being rowed by sticks, not even the sailing sticks. This is the challenge we are facing. 

Another thing is that, when we talk about the roads in Uganda, we have to look at the quality and the size of these roads. When you look at the Mityana-Mubende Highway, it was worked on but it stopped in Mityana Town. They have started working on it to see that at least it can be put to a better quality. However, if you look at its size, it can only accommodate two small vehicles to pass through if they are moving at the recommended speed of a highway. 

Therefore, we urge the Government to look at widening it to see that they can maximise the road reserve so that we can try to reduce on the number of accidents, and the number of lives that are being lost. 

In Naluttutu Subcounty, where I come from, in two weeks, we have lost five people due to road accidents. Even one of the people I competed against in the elections nearly lost his life due to an accident that claimed five people. He survived alone. 

I beg that the Government wakes up to see that at least the quality of the roads we build in these areas are good and the roads are wide enough. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable minister, is it true that you have roads that can only accommodate two small cars to pass at the same time? Are you using bicycles to do measurements? (Laughter)

2.55
The minister of state for works and transport(WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, first of all, the NRM Government is awake all the time. That is why we have been around and will continue to be around for some time. What makes us to be around is our commitment to service delivery. We are judged –

The Speaker: You are dealing with my question only for now: the one of two small cars.

Mr ecweru: The Mityana-Mubende Road had deteriorated but we have put a contractor there. He is going to work to very international standards that we have specified to him. We will be supervising to ensure that what happens – (Interjection) - I am not going to tell you that this is the width but there are international standards that are acceptable for all the roads, including Mityana-Mubende Road and that is what is happening.

The Speaker: So, you are confirming that it can accommodate two small cars only. (Laughter)

Mr ecweru: Not at all –

The Speaker: Two Lorries cannot meet?

Mr ecweru: It is a critical road, Mr Speaker, and can never be for just two cars. 

The Speaker: It is on the record and that is why I want you to correct it. 

Mr ecweru: Mr Speaker, the road is not meant for just two cars. It is a good road. We are doing everything possible –

The Speaker: Two small cars?

Mr ecweru: That is not correct, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The roads in Uganda have always got a very good standard. However, due to corruption, the people who construct the roads make them become narrower and this is the truth. 

Recently, the President said that the corrupt people in Uganda are good people because they steal and put it back into the country. I would like to say that the poverty in Uganda, today, comes because of the bad roads. When I was campaigning, I went to one of the villages using a boat because there was no bridge to cross to that area. The gentleman we found across had 62 sacks of beans to be sold but he could not pass because you cannot carry even five sacks in the boat. 

I have a proposal, especially in Pader District that if we want to reduce poverty in these districts and villages – soon, we are going to open up schools; we better concentrate on building bridges so that these local people can walk on foot and at least, manage to cross the bridge to another area. My proposal is that the money that you sent to the districts for the subcounty roads should be mostly concentrated on putting the bridges to allow the people to pass. 

Even if they walk in the bushes, as long as they can cross the bridges, that would be very important. You can roll your bicycle or cross the bridge with your boda boda and then follow the other path. We fear that when schools open, many children will fail to cross the bridge and go to school beyond their boundaries. Many of them will lose their lives in the rivers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.59
MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support this motion specifically looking at life on the road. I just want to interest the Government on two things: 

First, is the quality of implementation; we have the Traffic and Road Safety Act in place and we have the Road Safety Policy in place. What has gone wrong, Mr Minister, in the implementation of these things? Isn’t there an opportunity where you would enforce or design a mechanism of having minimum enforcement standards? Minimum enforcement standards would help us implement all these good policies and laws that help us in our transportation system. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we have a very big challenge. Honourable members have commented on rural roads. There is a very big challenge at the districts, specifically with the road fund: the quality of our roads, especially those that are supposed to be managed by the districts. The money is too little and the kilometres are increasing every year because there are new roads that are being created in these districts. Therefore, the roads are not all that good and accidents are supposed to be there almost every day. As Government, is there a provision where we would see how to support these districts and have better roads and transport system? 

Lastly, is on the quality. I just want to emphasise the quality of roadworks and the designs. I have a road from Kyenjojo-Kagadi-Hoima-Masindi Road. That road is causing a lot of accidents. It was on design-and-build basis. There are many designs that were created and we have very many spots, where we are experiencing a lot of accidents. Just last month, we lost about 10 people on the same spot. We have reported this matter and it is not being worked on. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.02
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the mover of this motion; the road safety in the country. Indeed, road safety is a great concern for all of us. According to the Police report, it is estimated that about 3,500 people lose their lives on these roads of Uganda. 

Therefore, it is very important for Government to strengthen the effort to save the lives of Ugandans. Mr Speaker, continuous public awareness should be done for the people of Uganda. There was a time when we had the same crisis and they installed seatbelts in our cars, but within a short time, people relaxed and never used these seatbelts. It is important to have continuous sensitisation on the use of these seatbelts to our communities. 

The other is that Uganda has got good policies and regulations in our region. The challenge is that there is no enforcement of these regulations. For example, the boda bodas are meant to have helmets together with their passengers. However, you find a boda boda with four other people on his motorcycle. There is need for these boda bodas to be regulated. If you went to Jinja Road, you will only see a swarm of boda bodas and they are the ones who caused these accidents. Even if we went to Mulago National Referral Hospital, many of the casualties are caused by boda bodas. Therefore, there is need for the Government to regulate the “boda boda industry” such that they can have helmets together with only one passenger. 

What is that that Rwanda can do different from Uganda? I have travelled to Rwanda and you find a boda boda and a passenger both wearing helmets. When they reach the traffic lights, they wait. In Uganda, when you are at the traffic lights, the boda bodas have the right of way; they do not wait. So, there is need to regulate the boda bodas. 

The other point is about the use of the humps. I come from Kotido Municipality and there is a road, which is a black spot, and about 10 people have been killed because of the speeding cars. We have given this information to UNRA but to our dismay, they have refused to put humps. I think the Government should make sure that where there is a black spot, there should be a hump so that the drivers are able to reduce the speed when they get to these areas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.05
MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion strongly, honourable members. However, we need to look at the cause of these problems on the roads. 

On my own observation, one of it should be a procurement system of the Government up to the districts. For example, when you look at some roads like the one the honourable said, they do not last even for two years. A lot of money is spent and in less than two years, potholes are all over. In Pallisa District, the only tarmac road we have is what we have called the main street. It was put before I was born and I am now 40 years old. It was constructed when we were in Bukedi District before we went to Tororo District. 

However, as we talk, the tarmac at the sides is what has tried to go off but the middle of the road is still intact. Now, what causes all these kinds of arrangement is that the procurement of Government still selects the same poor contractors that have done a poor job in a certain place - awarding them more contracts? This is one of the problems that we have. 

Number two, I do not know whether in the road system we have the department that observes roads. If I can give you one of the examples, they advertise very nicely – I stay in Bweyogerere. They say something like, “Kira roads are going to be renovated. They are going to fill all the potholes at such and such a time. Please be aware, if you are inconvenienced, we are sorry.” We listen. But to our surprise, from Bweyogerere up to Namugongo, after one week of the announcements, it was murram being put. Now, the murram, as soon as it rains, it is washed off. 

One of the passengers that was carried by a bodaboda rider - those who know Bweyogerere, between Tarzan and the junction of UNBS – lost both legs. This is because a vehicle was trying to dodge the pothole, there was a truck on the other side, and the bodaboda also wanted to go. So they squeezed the man’s legs when he tried to jump off the boda boda.

When you look at the potholes on Jinja Road, around Mabira Forest, we have potholes everywhere; sharp potholes. If you are driving at night, you may not manage to realise that there is a pothole there. You hit the pothole and get a flat tyre. That is why most of the accidents happen in Mabira Forest.

Mr Speaker, we need proper maintenance of the roads;even if they are narrow, let them be maintained. 

We need quality roads to be put so that we take at least 40 years – like the example I have given you of Pallisa Town. 

Another problem that we face is of driving schools. To be honest, these driving schools only teach one how to direct the vehicle. They do not teach one how to read road safety signposts. At the end of the day, one gets a driving permit and yet they cannot read the safety signposts. 

Some of the people practice in their own vehicles and then pay Shs 300,000 or Shs 400,000 to get the driving permit. What has this person learnt? Only how to direct the vehicle.  

I concur with one of the honourable members that mentioned that we need Government to come in and regulate the driving schools. The same for the boda boda riders; one rides the motorbike with no permit. If he has a permit, it is not a permit that he got genuinely. If you look at it critically, and crosscheck with Naguru where they test the drivers and compare with the number of people issued with permits, the numbers do not correspond. Few people go for tests. Many people get driving permits this way. 

I therefore request that Government comes in and looks into it. We shall be grateful. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.11
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. As we urge Government, I think we need to also advocate for a mindset and attitude change of the road users. 

Yes, Government has a role to sensitise people, but as citizens, we must accept that we have a responsibility to know that when you enter your vehicle, you must put on a safety belt and we stop baptising it “a seatbelt” - it is not supposed to tie the seat; it is supposed to be a “safety belt” to protect you. But because we are running away from the responsibility, we continue to call it a seatbelt and put it on when we get closer to the police and get it off when we get away from them. 

I think it is our responsibility as citizens to appreciate the things that we need to change. Yes, Government has issues that it has to address, like the regulation of the boda boda industry. 

When I was working in Mulago, there used to be a ward called the “boda boda ward”. And this would admit casualties who are boda boda victims. 

I can tell you, if someone gets spine damage, the shortest time they will spend on admission is a minimum of one year. And these are in the age of 17-35 years, the most productive age in this country. 

I think it is very important that we put measures in place to regulate bodaboda, without fear or favour or without fear of any contradiction. This is because they have caused a lot of mayhem on the road. Understanding that it is an industry that is employing many young people but it is also an industry that has maimed and caused harm to many young people.

The other is the issue of corruption. As a country, we need to see how we minimise the human contact during enforcement. Colleagues, you will bear me witness that at every point on this road, there are police officers. But every five hours, you hear about an accident caused by a vehicle in poor mechanical condition. And you wonder, where did they pass when at every point of the road, there is police? 

This goes a long way to even affect our health care. Like now we are going for Christmas. You will hear of a lot of accidents. And of course people get to facilities and overstretch them, because these facilities, when they are planning, they do not plan to the extent of 20 accidents on the road. But when it happens, all these people are put in our health care system. And the stretch affects the facility. The medicines get exhausted instantly, and there is total stock-out. 

It is a long challenge that we need to address comprehensively as a country. What is wrong with enforcing and making sure that all vehicles that carry passengers have insurance? That when your vehicle causes an accident, then the people affected can be paid for. The facility, whether government or private will treat the people therein and they will invoice you as a company or as the owner of the vehicle. 

Why must we leave the whole burden – one buys a vehicle, does not service it, puts it on the road, it kills people and the burden is passed on to Government. 

I think there are issues we need to address – of course for us who come from the upcountry constituencies, it is becoming even more risky because our roads are becoming completely impassable. 

They gave us districts, but they did not give us equipment. Now the roads are real – how do I call them because they are beyond potholes?

I can assure you, the same number of boda bodas you see are the same in the villages. So we have a lot of accidents. 

I would like to appeal through you, Mr Speaker, that the concerned parties consider giving road equipment to new districts so that we are able to rehabilitate these roads and save the lives of the people that send us to represent them. Thank you.

3.16
MR SIRAJ EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe):Mr Speaker, my concern is about the dangerous mechanical condition of vehicles on these roads. You will find that a driver drives a vehicle which is not in good condition. And in this vehicle, passengers are also overloaded. A vehicle which is supposed to carry about 14 people, you will find a driver carrying more than 18 people in the same vehicle. 

This causes accidents in the sense that you will find that because of the overload – The drivers squeeze themselves with the passengers on the seats; I have ever witnessed this. 

Regarding those motorcycles, you will find a motorcycle rider carrying more than four people on a motorcycle. How can we control this? I am appealing to traffic officers on those roads to check such vices. 

I come from where a person may study from primary one up to primary seven without leaving his or her district. Such a person will not know what the tarmac is. There is no tarmac in my district and the roads are so bad. During the rainy season, you will find that passing through those roads is really unbearable. Vehicles continue to cause accidents because of those bad roads. 

Some honourable members were saying that in their districts, roads have been tarmacked and drivers are over speeding.That does not happen to my district. 

They are also taking a long time to complete some bridges. In my district,for example, there is a bridge called Jure that has taken over three years to be completed. You will find that the only option to pass through by that bridge is narrow and vehicles have been falling there because they are overloaded and some cannot manage to pass the option that was created. 

People want to proceed with their businesses but the only option that they have is that bridge. I am appealing to UNRA to have some time limits whenever they are trying to construct a bridge. At least there should be a time limit on when a bridge is supposed to be completed. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

3.19
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and also to bring it to the attention of this House -More so when the Minister of State for Works is in the House. The Minister for Works is a regular user of Soroti Road that is from Kampala to Soroti via Ngora, where I come from. 

Between Kumi and Soroti, there is a town council called Mukura which most people callMukula. Immediately after that town council, there is another trading centre called Koloi. The two centres; the town council and Koloi, are busy centres. The business communities actually do business there on a daily basis. 

Mr Speaker, from 2000 to date, over 20 people have actually been injured on that road. Some of them have died and others have gotten permanently deformed. In the Mukura Town Council and Koloi trading centre, there are no humps at all. It is very difficult for anyone who is using the road to reduce speed and yet those two centres are busy.

THE SPEAKER: What about the railway crossing signs? Don’t they respect them? 

DR ISAMAT: There are no signposts to indicate that, that is a trading centre or a town. Because of that, accidents have become very common in those two places. I want to urge the Government, for the sake of those towns and trading centres, which are busy, that it be a policy of the Government that humps be erected in those centres. I have observed in some centres that they exist but I wonder why it is done selectively. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not moving another motion.We already have a motion. (Laughter) You are debating a motion already so please stop making your own motion because we already have the motion. You are just supporting the motion. Thank you.

DR ISAMAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.23
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the mover of the motion. I have two issues to raise as I support this motion. As we ask the Government to protect the roads or put measures on roads, one of the causes of road accidents is noise pollution along the roads, especially in upcoming trading centres.You may realise that there are some machines which are erected along the roads, especially grinding machines. While operational, the competition between movable objects and these machines cannot be assessed by pedestrians. 

In my area, I have two or three trading centres where the rate of accidents is very high because there are so many machines along the routes. When these machines are working, pedestrians are unable to listen to the moving objects which causes accidents. Therefore, if the ministry can have a measure to regulate the operation of machines along the roads, we will be very happy.

Secondly, we have issues to do with the nature of murram. I am not an engineer by profession but when you go to some of our roads, you find what we call murram is a muddy object and when it rains, a vehicle cannot pass by.When we ask the engineers about the nature of murram to be put on the roads, they say this is a good murram. 

In my observation, I think good murram is red in colour and has an absorbable quality when it rains but the engineers say that is not murram, this is tested murram from the laboratory. The conflict then occurs between me who is not an engineer and an engineer and to determine who is right in between me and the engineer becomes a problem. 

Therefore, if possible, as leaders of our people, we need to understand which murram is to be put on the roads so that when we go to our areas, we can tell our communities that this is right murram much as it sometimes has issues. 

Thirdly, we also have issues to do with the installation of culverts along the roads. There are many categories of culverts on the roads; there are some culverts which are raised and for us who are not engineers, we prefer them to be in good shape. 

However, when one reaches a station where the culvert is raised and that person is speeding, you may find yourself off the road. Therefore, as we urge the Government to safely protect our roads, we also request for a standard measure of culverts which need to be installed along the road. 

Thirdly, it is a request – there is a river in my constituency, Adjumani East called Esia River along the road from Adjumani to Amuru. We have lost very many lives of people crossing the river to the market and many other places because of its steepness. When there is mechanised work going on, we always request UNRA to reduce the steepness of the area; we have never got any good answer. 

My request is that the honourable minister looks into that; I will be very grateful. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. I was wondering whether the other Member for Adjumani County might agree with you or not. Honourable member from Adjumani County, do you agree? (Laughter)
Well, now he is the Deputy Premier. I think that takes precedence and so, he will not talk about Adjumani issues for now.

3.28
The second deputy prime minister and deputy leader of government business (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I, first of all, want to thank my colleague, who for the first time – it is a miracle actually - the first time to meet him talking without arrangement. (Laughter)

When I came in the House I found a paper on roads being discussed. Indeed, this road issue was talked about so many years ago and we are still talking about it. We will continue talking about it - even the future Members of Parliament will continue talking about it because the road will always be there. 

Therefore, it is important that this type of road, I think should be clearly done. The Minister of Works, I am sure he is here -

THE Speaker: Microphone.

Gen. ali: The Minister of Works, with whom I worked for many years, is a very capable man and I am sure he will handle this issue properly. I, therefore, have nothing really to add to this topic, which I enjoy very much, anyway. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

3.30
Mr atkins katusabe (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the mover and the seconders of the motion. 

Mr Speaker, all lives matter. It is painful for a country to lose even one life. I have been struggling to figure out how our nation can sit quietly when our fellow citizens continue to perish on the road. I really want to thank you for giving this very important motion space on the Order Paper.

I struggle with this that every time a motorist runs over a citizen, all we get to hear is, “How much does a casket cost? How much are we going to need to do a funeral?” For the bereaved family, especially for the accident victim, all they get is two million and a casket. When you aggregate two million and a casket, it comes to around three million. I wonder whether that is the price that as a nation, we have attached to human life.

It grieves my spirit that every time, unfortunately, when I drive to my community, I keep praying that I hope I will not find somebody’s daughter whose only cry maybe is to have a father that does not have a car to take him or drop her to school. I find dead bodies of school children run over and sometimes, the motorists just continue. This must stop. 

I will encourage the mover that it is time we started attaching value and real value to human life; that if you are a reckless driver, we will put a high price to check your recklessness. We cannot allow citizens to continue losing their lives just because we have put some tragic culture in it; that all you will be charged is a cost of a casket and the Shs 2,000,000 and you carry on; you have your permit; it happens nowhere.  

Mr Speaker, and a lot of us here know that every time you run even a traffic light - the red light, as they call it in all the countries depending on the state where you are driving and where that will occur - you have your permit withdrawn for a minimum of six months; just running the red light. 

By the way, as a country, I do not know whether we have ever sat down to ask ourselves why in some of these countries, especially in Europe and the United States, you can have your 10, 20 or 30 years without ever hearing of a road accident or victim. Why? It is because of the price that they attach - the moment you run over a citizen - an American citizen - the minimum you can spend in an American jail is 40 years; 40 years. That is why every American driver has to be very careful because you choose whether you knock somebody recklessly and then have your 40 years in prison - you literally spend decades in that country without ever hearing of a car accident.

Mr Speaker, one day – I will ask my brother-in-law, hon. Ochero - just go to the post office. There is a large zebra-crossing. If you are fed up with the African continent, I dare you go try cross the zebra-crossing. We are the only city and the only country that does not pay attention to even zebra-crossings. 

Now, if I cannot feel safe at a zebra-crossing, where else can I feel safe? Even just right here, as you are driving to work, Members of Parliament that work the other side, Mr Speaker, literally live or cross at the mercy of God.There is a zebra crossing but nobody observes it. I think it is time for us to say “enough of this”.

Lastly, the people that cause accidents are seated right in front here–(Interjection)-No, first get my point, my sister. Please. Our Constitution is very clear – (Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to my brother-in-law, we are seated here –

THE SPEAKER:Who is your brother-in-law? (Laughter) 

MS NAMUYANGU:Hon. Katusabe is my brother-in-law.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, the Hansard people do not know that. Therefore, we need the records to capture that. 

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, with due respect, we are seated here on the Front Bench; very obedient Ugandans and we have never caused accidents or killed people. Is he in order to make wild allegations that the people who cause accidents are seated just here? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the standard practice and obligations of Members of Parliament is to keep the integrity of the House and respect all Members. Therefore, any statement that suggests anything to the contrary would be against our rules. Would you like to withdraw that statement, Sir?

MR KATUSABE: Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, she just got it without a qualification. The Constitution is very clear on who is supposed to have a right of way. Mr Speaker, you have seen people driving on the opposite direction all over the place.

THE SPEAKER: Must all of them drive in one direction?

MR KATUSABE: They are supposed to take their direction. Mr Speaker, because she or he is aminister, she or he drives in the opposite direction. Who is the victim? An innocent boda boda rider! I am not saying that my honourable sisters and brothersknock people on purpose. No, I am talking about misuse or abuse of roads. 

However, putting my thing very clear – 

THE SPEAKER: So, in that context, I cannot rule him out of order. (Applause)

MR KATUSABE:Much appreciated, Mr Speaker. You know how careful I am. Every time I say a word, it is a word of wisdom because I treat everybody with honour, dignity and respect that they deserve.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My last submission is crystal clear –

THE SPEAKER:Thank you, honourable. We need to share the time. 

MR KATUSABE:Yes. My last submission, Mr Speaker, is that I am saying the Constitution is very clear on who is supposed to have a right of way. My honourable brothers and sisters, can you wait for your time? If you are not the Prime Minister, the Speaker of Parliament or Deputy Speaker of Parliament or the President, please, wait for your time until you have a right of way according to our Constitution. Please, observe the traffic rules because nobody is above the law, including you. 

Mr Speaker, I really appreciate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.41
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. For every major infrastructural work to be taken, they are normally components: component of environmental protection and component of community sensitisation. All these components are costed and they form part of the total contract sum. You find that in most cases during implementation, those who are charged with the responsibility of supervising such works pay little attention in ensuring that those other components are also treated seriously. 

When a road is being commissioned for construction, they only look at the construction side. They pay little attention in ensuring that the environmental component is also worked on and the community through which the road is going to pass is sensitized. In the end, when the road is constructed, the usage is normally abused.

Mr Speaker, colleagues have talked about training schools – be it for driving or engineering. We are lucky that in Mbale, we have Elgon Technical School where most of our engineers train from. Surprisingly, these very engineers – having obtained training from Elgon Technical School – when they get back, especially at the district levels, the roads which they build – very much aware that when they are designing, they take into consideration things like culverts – there are standards at which these culverts need to be made. 

However, if you follow those roads, you find that some culverts are made like graves. Such makes it dangerous for the road users. We know very well that most of our people move on motorcycles and when they are riding on these roads, and they meet such bottlenecks such asculverts which are not done properly, what do you expect?The result is an accident. 

Therefore, I urge some of us who are charged with the responsibility of supervising such major works to adhere to the standard, as put down and costed, to make sure that all the components are dealt with to make us avoid these unnecessary accidents that are caused as a result of poor workmanship and people not being properly sensitised on the major infrastructural works being done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of you are leaders of the road committees in your districts. Therefore, you are one of the people responsible for making sure that this thing is done properly. Each one of us should find time and make sure that works that are being done save lives. We have seen all these things and we have caused some changes but, really, something has got to be done. Members of Parliament,being members of these road committees – some of you even chair these road committees. 

As Members of Parliament,we need to do something about this because if we leave it to other people, we take the blame and they take something else. We donot want to take the blame for things that could have been done well. 

3.45
MAJ. JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on road safety in our country. A lot has been said – good contributions – about how to curb road carnages.

I would like to say that whereas Government is working very hard to curb road carnage, some indisciplined Ugandans exist in the community. What am I referring to? Government has put a lot of road signs. For example, you are driving on the road, you see, “humps ahead”, you see, “bridges ahead”. But some indisciplined Ugandans go ahead and cut off the road signs and sell them in form of scrap. 

Assuming you are driving on a road for the first time, and you are not well aware of all this, imagine what happens to you. Now, if Government keeps doing this, and we have these ill-mannered Ugandans in the community, Government still has to think more by probably putting concrete road signs or poles in order to curb this kind of ill-mannered people in the community. 

It is really difficult, but not impossible. When you look at road signs, there are zebra crossings. I think Uganda is one country that I know where there is no sign of zebra crossing for people with disability. 

If you are to cross from a zebra crossing point – first of all, what does zebra crossing mean? It means pedestrian crossing or somebody waiting to cross the road. But in our country, you must be fast enough; be able to run in order to cross the road. 

Those motorists do not really respect road crossers. When you are crossing a road, you need to run. Nobody cares about you. And it is worse with the people who have disabilities or people who have special inabilities. 

It is important that my minister takes note so that people with disability are taken care of while crossing the road. 

Mr Speaker, you may realise that a number of accidents have been caused due to phone usage while driving, in many countries – we have read in papers and in media, China is one of them. And in Uganda, we are no exception. Many people drive while texting messages; while they are communicating and they abuse other road users. 

If you follow closely on media, phone usage while driving has overtaken drunken driving. I pray that Government takes this seriously and continues creating awareness and sensitisation on phone usage while driving. 

Finally, I request the Government to probably reactivate the use of speed governors. We have them in vehicles, in buses. What happened to them? What happened to the seatbelts? Thank you.(Applause)

3.50
MR  ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. The subject matter we are discussing this afternoon is a very serious matter, which requires a lot of emphasis. 

As we sit here right now to deliberate on this motion, many Ugandans are perishing out there. You realise that there are fatalities in towns and even in villages. It is across the country that accidents are happening. 

But why is this happening? That would be the question. I happen to be a professional in this industry. I run a garage. My experience and the time I have spent in that industry is what I base on to assure you. 

When we assess what happens, how the accident happened; we realise that Uganda has a very big problem that most of the people you see on the road – be it with a bodaboda, or with a vehicle - do not know driving. Driving is a profession, which requires a lot of attention and experience. Much as we see people driving, there is a big problem that our people do not know how to drive.

If we gave a test to a few of our drivers, including ourselves, we would realise that very few understand the Highway Code. That this is what is required at this particular place.

Even the machines that we drive in form of vehicles, we do not understand them. That is the biggest problem in this country. You see somebody driving, but do not be surprised if out of the blue, the person knocks you down and you lose your life. 

Uganda is the third in the world in road carnage. What does this mean? Many Ugandans perish on the roads. This is a very big number; more than the COVID-19, which we waged war against; and it is disappearing. 

This is an area which requires a lot of effort, honourable minister. Much as you are castigating the Minister of Works and Transport, for me, as the leader of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, I realise the problem is not with ministry of works. The problem is with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The department charged with the responsibility is given only Shs 2 billion to run the activities of awareness and so forth. That money is also subjected to a budget cut, because it is categorised as a conceptive item. A conceptive item, subject to a budget cut, when Ugandans are dying. The department is just handicapped; it cannot do much. 

Therefore, my request, to the minister of finance and all honourable members, is that we should put our foot down and ensure that we fund this department for them to be able to go down and give awareness to the people of Uganda, not to die of road carnages. 

What is happening in the country is too much. If we continue at this rate, and we are losing valuable resources – people who matter are the people who die, business people die on the road. There must be awareness. There must be inspection. It demands a lot to reduce the rate of accidents on our roads;it demands a lot. 

As we deliberate this afternoon about road safety, it is a key area – very critical, that we must all join hands and fight together to see that we reduce the rate at which Ugandans are perishing on our roads. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you said at the beginning that you are a professional in this area. You did not state the profession for the record. Somebody might be reading and – 

MR KASOLO: I think I am one of the Ugandans who have studied a vehicle to advanced stages as a professional. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We are talking about the profession. The profession you referred to-he is a professional driver? (Laughter)

3.55
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on road safety. As you all know, Kapchorwa is a highland district.

I would like to talk about two places where accidents are very common in Kapchorwa. Tewei, which is in Sipi and also Chekwet, which is in the lower side of Sipi. 

These two places have registered very many accidents and very serious accidents. In Tewei, we lost very many students of Makerere University one time when a lorry overturned. The students were coming back from Kapchorwa after a Christian mission. Recently, we also lost students from Kiryandongo - a bus overturned from Towei Hill.

Therefore, most of these accidents - I have quoted a few, but there are many others. Most of these accidents occur when the vehicles are coming down the hill - they are rolling down the hill; we have never experienced an accident when the vehicles are climbing the hill. Usually accidents occur when the vehicles are coming down the hill. In both of these points, Towei and Chekwatit are steep areas. 

One time in Chekwatit, we lost very many UPDF soldiers; a lorry crashed, because it lost control. All these vehicles lose control as they come down the hill. My prayers, therefore, are that on top of the hills, there should be signposts to indicate to the drivers that they are now going down a steep area; they should engage on low gears all the time when they are coming down the hill. 

However, most of these people who get involved in accidents are new to the road. Many of them are new and they come in the same speed from Kapchorwa and then they want to roll down the hill with the same speed. So most of the time, they roll over the hill; either they overturn, or they fly over the cliffs. Therefore, we have had these experiences. 

My other prayer is that - maybe to the ministry - that area of Towei where the vehicles fly over the cliff, we need a protector, maybe a strong concrete wall; a sort of barrier. That is me, I am not a technician on the roads but the Minister of Works should look for a better solution for those areas. Thank you for listening to me. Be blessed.

3.58
MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I rise to support the motion. The issue of road quality is big. I was born in Teso and I still see bridges that were built in the 1960s. The mark is there, “Teso Development Administration”; they exist up to today. It tells me that those people were keen on what they put on the road. 

When I took my district engineer on, in terms of critically analysing the classroom blocks that Government built and there were cracks, he blamed the cement. Yesterday on the news, we were seeing UNBS seizing metallic bars that are manufactured right here, and they access the market. 

Government has done a lot to improve the roads in the last couple of years but I would like, through you, Mr Speaker, to ask the minister that as you do procurement, please be mindful of the quality of the materials going into the roads because the roads have taken a lot of our money in the last couple of years. And it would be good if the materials being used can last for a while. 

In my district, my point number two is the issue of road maintenance. Right now, we have done quite a number of good roads but the budget for maintaining those roads seems to be low. Like one honourable member mentioned here, the Road Fund that uses our funds to maintain for instance the district roads has very little money to keep our roads up to date. So, the roads are not resilient, not because they were not done well but because of weather changes. Once they are not maintained, we lose them. 

As I speak, in my district, the main road that accesses Kaberamaido has been washed away by floods in the last three years and it has killed people. As we speak, when the schools reopen, I actually worry about children crossing from Kaberamaido to Kalaki, where they have a school nearby. The water has just submerged that Omagoro place for the last three years. 

The same has happened to a peninsula called Murem in Okile Subcounty, where, because of lack of maintenance, the water just submerged the bridge and the road. Right now, we only access it using boats and the children are not safe. That peninsula has a primary school and a health centre, and the only access to the peninsula is supposed to be this road but this road has been like this for the last three years. Therefore, it is not safe. And for me, it is the issue of maintenance. If those bridges were well maintained, probably the floods would not have washed them away. 

If you see some of our roads that are well done, like, again, where I come from, the road from Soroti to Lira, when it was done, it was done very well but as soon as the road was launched, villagers stole the road signs and because there is no maintenance just on the road signs, people who drive at night cause accidents. Again, when we talk about maintenance, not just the potholes, but every package that goes with a good road, would require a budget to maintain it. 

Mr Speaker, we had an issue of inspecting vehicles in this country - and I will end with this, Sir. 
I do not know whether it was the company that was secured to do it, or what but we have left it up to now and I think that if you go - for all of us who have travelled, we see that the countries that are inspecting their vehicles and keeping them in order are reducing accidents caused by those vehicles. It would be nice if this House revisited that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.03
DR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the Floor. I thank the mover of this motion for coming up with it, especially at this time when we are approaching the festive season - when our people tend to get very excited. 

And in that regard, I concur with him that the major causes of road traffic accidents in Uganda include over speeding, drunk driving and lack of concentration, especially now with the advent of mobile phones. 

Mr Speaker, so, whereas we are urging Government to strengthen her efforts in reducing road traffic accidents, I also observe that we, the individual road users, must take responsibility ourselves, especially in terms of observing the speed limits in built up areas, around school areas but also in construction zones. It is only in Uganda, where I see construction going on in various roads, but the speed limit is not indicated as it should be lower than what should be ordinarily the case. 

The other thing that I would like to observe is that for as long as we continue with the design of our roads - most of which are dual carriage - without providing for islands in the middle to separate traffic lanes going one way from the other ones, we shall continue to get high cases of road traffic accidents. If you look at our major highway all the way from Malaba to Katuna border, the volume of traffic on that road is enormous. 

And recently, I want to appreciate the efforts of the government in coming up with alternative routes that could help to decongest this major highway, for example, Njeru-Katosi-Mukono and Njeru-Kayunga-Gayaza. Those are very good alternative roads that could help to decongest the highway. 

However, what is happening? Mr Speaker, I want to observe that the way those roads were constructed discourages road users. If you just look at the rumble strips or the humps on those roads, they just discourage road users. Sometimes, they throw drivers off the road. That is why you find that drivers are shunning the Mukono-Katosi-Njeru road yet it would be a very good alternative for decongesting the main Jinja-Kampala Road. The rumble strips on those roads are so dangerous.

There was another very bad ramp in Idudi. That ramp kept on throwing drivers off the road until I was told that one day it hit a high profile person in this country who ordered for the ramp to be removed because it was so dangerous; it was so huge. I wonder what kind of designs our engineers are making. 

Mr Speaker, the other thing that I would like to talk about is the lack of road signs. Sometimes when they are there, people come and take them. I would suggest that Government comes up with road signs that cannot be easily removed like those made out of concrete, which cannot easily be pulled out. In this way, we shall be able to save most of the lives that we lose. 

Finally, I want to talk about the importance of Government putting in place deterrent measures against drunk driving. In the US and other advanced countries, you cannot handle a vehicle after taking alcohol. Uganda is renown as number two in the consumption of alcohol yet after consuming alcohol we just go behind the wheel. This is how we end up killing so many of our people. 

Therefore, I want Government to strengthen measures that can actually deter drunk-driving. In the US and other jurisdictions, when they suspect you have taken some bit of alcohol and you are driving, they make you stand on one foot to see how you are able to balance; to see the brain's capacity to balance with your muscles. In that way, they detect very many errant road users. We have the laws but Government is not enforcing them. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Finally. Honourable members, it is four o'clock. Usually, it is Prime Minister's Question Time but I wanted us to conclude this motion so I am going to request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to give me some time to complete this motion then we go to Prime Minister’s Question Time. We are winding up now. 

4.10
Mr mapenduzi ojara (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of the colleagues in –

The Speaker: Two minutes. 

Mr OJARA: Thank you, Sir. I would like to thank the mover of this motion. Part of the problem we have in this country is that the people charged with the responsibility of designing these roads seem not to be doing a good job. 

The other big problem is when citizens raise concerns and complaints, people who should take responsibility and attend to them do not do the needful. I want to give an example in Gulu where a road was built in 2015. This is Gulu-Atiak Road. There is a section from custom corner to Bank of Uganda. That three kilometre stretch alone, from 2015 to this day, has claimed 11 lives. We have had over 300 cases of terrible accidents in that section. 

When I was the chairperson of Gulu, I wrote several letters to UNRA raising concerns. Unfortunately, no step has been taken to this day. There is another stretch on Kampala Road from Layibi junction to the city centre; about 2.1 kilometres. The way the drainage has been built, several lives have been lost. 

I think it is important that the Ministry of Works and UNRA take responsibility when citizens raise concerns. For how long are we going to continue losing lives? I want to appeal to the honourable minister - Honourable minister, for some of us who know how much commitment you have, I want to appeal to you because you are a very productive man. The section from custom corner to Bank of Uganda has claimed 11 lives. It will continue claiming so many lives and this is something that can be corrected so our people can have safety.

This country will begin to have some level of safety the moment people charged with that – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we need to draw to a close. 

Ms atim: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I heard “Amolatar.”

The Speaker: I said, “Nyabushozi then Amolatar.”

Ms atim: But we can start the other way around as well.

The Speaker: Using which prerogative?

Ms atim: Apologies.

4.13
MS jovanice Twinobusingye (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion and I rise to support the motion. The challenge that we have is the poor roads. We cannot talk of safety when we still have very poor roads and this is attributed to low budgets. 

Mr Speaker, if we want our roads to improve, we must improve on the budget of works. I will take the example of CAIIP roads where we have a challenge. The project was implemented in 2015/2016 and submitted to the district. Unfortunately since then, those roads have not been worked on. In my area, CAIIP roads cover 225 kilometres but they are not allocated resources. Therefore, you cannot talk of safety when those roads are still causing a lot of accidents. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Mr akugizibwe: Thank you, Mr Speaker - 

The Speaker: Amolatar. I think we have a problem in this zone.

4.15
Ms agnes atim (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. There is one critical issue that I would like to raise. In my experience of consulting in the infrastructure development works, there is an aspect of social safeguards, which is always a critical component in every road construction. Unfortunately, social safeguards are only considered in major tarmac roads. 

Social safeguards are mainly issues that must be considered in any road construction; how the construction is being done. We have seen in rural communities, where murram is dumped and stays there like for six months or more. That is where the major issues of accidents come from. 

We have also seen issues in major road constructions, where there are no signs to show, maybe, whether there is work going on or not. 

My humble appeal to the Ministry of Works and Transport is for it to always consider these social safeguards, not only for major roads but also on rural roads. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of safeguards also involves supervision. When we were growing up and up to now, whenever you drove on the major roads, there were people we used to call the “road gangs” whose responsibility was to move around these roads, to supervise and report some of these issues that Members are raising. 

Can the minister be able to abreast us with the information on what mechanisms are now in place to ensure regular supervision of these roads?
Honourable members have talked about signs and I know signs are being removed but for me, in Amolatar, where 99 per cent of the roads are rural, is there provision for those small corners and rural roads that are being constructed without any sign to show the road users where to move?

Finally, honourable members, have talked about the standards and width of the roads. The access roads in our rural communities are too narrow to be used by both pedestrians and motorists. Do these rural roads constructions – 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.17
MR ALED AKUGIZIBWE (Independent, Buruli County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to appreciate the mover of the motion. I want to urge the Minister of Works and Transport to make sure we have proper maintenance of these roads and regular checks. A case in point is, for those of us who use the northern connection, on Bomba Road, from Kampala to Mijeera. The road is marked and labelled very well. However, from Mijeera, around Shell up to Kigumba, there are many corners and potholes. Actually, when you are moving, there is always some hitch as if the road is not yet completed up to now yet it was already commissioned. If you happen to drive along it in the night, it is bad news. With such roads, there is no way we can say, “We shall not have road accidents.”

The other thing is that most of the roads are built with very many corners. Talk of Kigumba-Kyenjojo Road –let me just pick out this stretch from Bulema to Hoima. That road has very many corners in that even when you are driving at a speed of 60 kilometres per hour, you can easily get an accident. Most of these contractors avoid compensating the people. The way the murram road was moving, is the same way the tarmac moves. At the end of the day, where are we going? So, when we are constructing some of these roads, we need to make sure the corners are – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think we should pause it here. We have had a good discussion on this matter because it is important. All of us know that road safety is critical and the carnage that we suffer on these roads and the reports that we see – sometimes, a very graphic image, coupled with the fact that the morality of Ugandans has gone down; each time there is an accident, people are feeling the victims’ pockets. And those who are not doing so are taking pictures and posting on social media instead of saving lives. This is part of the problem. So, we need a lot of mind change discussions to make our citizens more responsible even when they respond to accidents situations. 

Honourable members, as I communicated earlier, I have a guest. He has come to be the main celebrant in the thanksgiving Holy Communion and Christmas carols, which has been organised by the Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy. It started at 4 o’clock but I am still here. I am going to release those who are still here to go - I will finish this business, which is about to end. 

In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Church of Uganda. They include His Grace the Most Rev. Dr Stephen Samuel Kaziimba, Archbishop of the Church of Uganda; Bishop Samuel Egesa, the Bishop of Bukedi; Rev. Jackson Kasiime, the Chaplain to the Archbishop, and Rev. Canon Christine Shimanya, the Anglican Chaplain in Parliament, our own here. (Applause)They have come to observe the proceedings but I think also to let us know that they are already here so that whatever we do, we try to accommodate. You are welcome, Archbishop and the delegation. (Applause) We are still doing this part of the business but we will see how to come over and make that a success as well. 

I am now going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to speak in about a minute.I would like to remind the minister that this is not a ministerial statement but a motion. Both of your answers should come in the resolution of the motion rather than a speech in Parliament. So, you will just make some very short comments to allow me deal with another urgent matter. Yes, Leader of the Opposition.

4.22
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The roads sector in Uganda actually, is now the most important mode of transportation. A study has already shown that it accommodates about 97 per cent of the freight cargo and 99 per centof the passenger traffic, and this is very heavy.

Mine is to provide alternatives to the minister because as a matter of fact, you remember in 2005,the World Health Global Status Report adversely mentioned Uganda on issues of road safety. In fact, we were placed to be among the worst performing 20 countries, in terms of road carnage. 

By the way, with the increased mobility, there are also increased levels of fatalities because the roads connect goods and persons to markets, jobs and opportunities. 

However, Uganda has a comparative advantage, especially if you look at the capital city we have. We have a water body, which if it were exploited or put to best use, most of the freight cargo, which comes from the seaport, would be ferried through Lake Victoria. If you were to read the Metropolitan KCCA Strategic Plan, you would learn that it is mentioned as an alternative to relieve our roads of the stress over these freight cargo vehicles. 

It is true to appreciate that we have only one international airport but even then, with the revival of the Uganda Airways, I expected your ministry to seriously come up with initiatives on domestic flights. The neighbouring countries have domestic flights, which are affordable. Equally, we have Eagle Air, among other companies that would have helped to relieve the stress on the roads. 

Mr Speaker, if the focus is on reducing road carnage – or it is about road injury prevention – it should start with us as Parliament. I have been a keen observer on Parliament Avenue – now that we have offices on buildings such as Queen’s Chambers and Development House, particularly Development House. Members who cross from there – actually, one time I offered to help one of the lady honourable members. I will not mention her by name. The way our people drive - the boda bodas and other motorists have no respect for zebra crossings. 

I highly doubt whether there is even one. There used to be one but it eventually faded and the responsible authority has not put it back. 

I am of the view, through you, Mr Speaker, that the minister considers installing some barriers on that road to regulate the traffic for the sake of the people’s representatives. 

In the report of World Health Organisation, Uganda was adversely mentioned but praised for having the best regulatory framework on road safety. For instance, we came up with brilliant ideas of safety belts and speed governors. Can you imagine those who were procuring speed governors abused it, including procuring for tractors? It happened. However, enforcement of some of those good laws has always remained a problem for the ministry and the country. 

Honourable minister, you will appreciate that the road from Mbale to Soroti consumed Shs 109 billion. The other section from Tororo to Mbale consumed Shs 63.7 billion – and that was in 2015, before it was commissioned. However, hardly a year down the road, the quality of that road was compromised - 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have amended the time sufficiently. Now, wind up.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you. In the interest of time, I will conclude by calling upon you to ensure that your ministry, which you have just inherited anyway and is riddled with all manner of corruption – because most of these roads get huge allocations through those contracts but the quality is compromised under your superintendence, honourable minister.

This should be nipped in the bud. I know you as a very serious arrow boy and I know you can fight this like you fought in that war. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): I want to, first of all, join the voices of my honourable colleagues in indicating the timeliness of the motion. It has come at a time when we, as a country, have joined the rest of the world in marking World Traffic Safety Week. 

I have noted, with a keen interest, all the issues that the Members have raised. I want to commit that by the time we come here, as a ministry, we will come with the measures that we will have put in place to attempt to address as many, if not all, the critical issues that the honourable colleagues have raised. 

However, let me say just one thing. My technical people in the ministry have told me that there are four critical elements responsible for accidents. The first one is, of course, the road itself – the surface of the road. The second one is the vessel that is used – the vehicle. The third one is the user – the driver. The fourth is the people around where we are passing. 

I want to say, before I sit down, that last week, I drew the attention of these honourable Cabinet colleagues of mine to a serious development that we may have been taking for granted.

The technical people have guided me that the design of all our roads, including this new Express Highway, is such that we are not supposed to exceed 100 kilometres per hour. However, Mr Speaker, right from all of us here, including you, Sir, I am not sure we have been observing this –

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to speak for yourself? (Laughter)

MR ECWERU: Yes, Sir, especially myself – and honourable colleagues. In the next few weeks, I will be coming with my technical people who are responsible for sensitisation to hammer these points home for the citizens, right from us, the leaders, down to the person who uses the boda boda. 

Thankfully, as we talk, there is a meeting going on between my technical people and critical stakeholders across the country to see how best we can eliminate – if we can and if we cannot eliminate, then minimise – the road carnage that is afflicting the country. 

That is also going to address the question of what people have described in Kampala as “organised chaos”: the question of the boda bodas. 

Finally, I will personally take the question of Gulu, particularly Custom Corner, to Bank of Uganda to see what can be done. There is also this question of Kapir-Mukura. As I pass there, I will direct some interventions. 

This is so that by the time I come back here to give this House a comprehensive strategy that the ministry has put in place to address all these concerns – and to mobilise you to support us – my hope is that some of those issues will have already been addressed. 

I want to thank you for very objectively opening us up to, really, remember what we are supposed to do and do them very well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Good discussion. Good debate. Very well informed, I must say. Thank you, honourable members and congratulations for a very successful debate. I now put the question to this motion, that by this resolution, Parliament urges the Government to strengthen efforts for promoting road safety in Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRIME MINISTER'S TIME

4.35
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand here to respond to questions asked by Members of Parliament during Prime Minister’s Time, starting with hon. Isaac Etuka Joakino Member of Parliament for Upper Madi County Madi-Okollo District; the background for colleagues to get the question proper runs like this.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the agricultural cluster development project ACDP, which is a six-year World Bank funded project operating in more than 20 districts in Uganda expires in March 2022, to date most of the multibillion shillings projects under this loan facilities have never started, particularly the road chokes. 

THE SPEAKER: Your microphone.

GEN. MOSES ALI: In Upper Madi County road chokes estimated at a cost of Shs 4.4 billion, included in the report, have never been worked on; the side road is in a very bad shape. Now, this is the background and my response to the question which is that “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you update the country, particularly the people of Upper Madi County, as to when implementation of this project will start?” 

The response is, Mr Speaker, the Agricultural Cluster Development Project (ACDP) is ongoing. The Government undertook the rehabilitation of road chokes under this project in a phased manner. Rehabilitation of road chokes in the pilot districts has been completed. Rehabilitation of road chokes in the first roll out covering 21 districts is at contract signing stage, and work is expected to start in late December 2021. The last roll out covering 29 districts is at a bidding stage and work is expected to commence in February 2022. 

For Madi-Okollo District, the call for service providers was run in December 2020. But unfortunately, all the bidders quoted way above the available resources. The rescoping of the rehabilitation works to fit within the available resources is being done and the contract signing is expected by end of December 2021.

Question number two: “What happens to all the other components of the agricultural cluster development project, which have either been sold or are in progress before completion?” In response, Mr Speaker, other components will be completed within the closing date of March 2022. 

The Government has requested for low-cost extension of 18 months, to enable the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - for the agriculture cluster development project to finalise all the pending activities and rehabilitation works. This ends the question of Madi-Okollo. 

The next question, Mr Speaker, Sir, hon. Jennifer Mbabazi Kyomuhendo, Member of Parliament for Kagadi District asked the following questions. Again, for the Members to understand the question easily, the small background information which I want to go through quickly, which reads: “The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited entered into contract with ILF Consulting Engineers Austrian ILF for the Muzizi Hydropower Project in 2018? 

With the financial support from the project in 2016; the Government of Uganda, KFW German Development Bank and Agency for French Development that is AFD, the Project Affected Persons were to be compensated as per agreed and approved compensation report by the Chief Government Valuer.  To date, no compensation has been made and yet they said persons stopped using their land for economic activities such as farming, which is a means of individual survival. 

The Project Affected Persons have also never been provided alternatives to their economic activities that can generate income for their survival. These are related to food insecurity as well as poverty. 

On the annual budget estimate, Financial Year 2021/2022 established that there was a significant low release and absorption of funds, especially donor funds to some of the core projects, one of which was Muzizi Hydropower Project which did not receive any donor funds as it had been budgeted. 

The report of the Auditor-General 2020 indicated that the construction of Muzizi Hydropower project had not commenced after close to four years from the date of signing the credit facility. As of 30 June 2020, Government had so far paid the commitment fees amounting to euros 798,750.” 

This is the background. The question here is, “Why is there a delay in the commencement of the Muzizi Hydropower Project?” The response is; the commencement of the project has majorly been affected by-
    1. Persistent delays by KFW Development Bank of Germany - the main financier - to issue approvals at various stages of the project;
    2. change in the feasibility study design;
    3. Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL) did not receive a competitive bid for the works contract.
    4. Government is committed to ensuring that the project is successful. 

Question 4
“When will the project-affected persons under Muzizi Hydropower Project be compensated?”

The response is that; compensation payments for the project-affected persons, which commenced in 2019, are currently ongoing with 418 project-affected persons having been fully paid; 25 project-affected persons having been partially paid. 75 Project-affected persons submitted for payment and 133 project-affected persons are being assessed for payment.

Question 5
“What alternatives has the Government got for the project-affected persons who put aside their economic activities owing to the project?”

The response is that; Government will be implementing the livelihood restoration plan and a community development plan. Interventions will include initiatives to enable communities cope with effects of the project. 

It should be noted that project-affected persons who have received their full compensation amount have been given notices to vacate the affected land. Those who are yet to be fully compensated continue to utilise their land, especially for growing seasonal crops.

Question 6
Whether the Government will carry out fresh evaluation exercise owing to the time lag of six years in execution of the project?

Response
Mr Speaker, it is not true that there has been a six-year lag in compensation payments since the main valuation report was approved by the Chief Government Valuer in 2019. All those who would have been affected by the delay were revalued and the valuation report was approved. Government will continue to fast-track compensation payments to project-affected persons. Thank you. (Applause)

The Speaker: Thank you very much, Rt Honourable, for the responses to questions. 

4.51
Mr john-Baptist Nambeshe (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the Deputy Prime Minister for the response - detailed. However, what remains of concern, Rt Hon Prime Minister on this first question of hon. Isaac Joakino is about the Agricultural Cluster Development Project. It is expiring in March 2022. That is of grave concern because it has been - in a developmental project, it has done a lot. It seems your response was shy at Government efforts in ensuring that that project is renewed just like your office helped to renew NUSAF. We have NUSAF 1, 2 and now 3. 

Equally, what efforts are your ministry doing to continue using the good connections with the development partners to ensure that this Agricultural Cluster Development Project is renewed so that we have a CDP 1 and CDP 2? 

About the failure on the unfortunate bit by Government to get bidders because most of them had quoted way above the available resources; what will you do if it continues to be like that? I thought the alternative has always been force on account to redeem the funds that are - because these are funds which are mobilised through a credit facility and they are accumulating lots of commitment fees to a tune of almost 800,000 euros. That is too much and those are commitment fees alone. How about interest, because it is not also mentioned?

Therefore, that plus other loans - this House, Mr Speaker, ought to be furnished with the way these loans are performing because most of the challenges are the delays to execute the projects. That attracts lots of commitment fees and interest and it is the case here, which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has attempted to respond to.

About the project-affected persons, I see four categories of them. Very few you have paid, there are those who have been partially paid, those who are yet to be paid and then there are those who are being assessed. It has taken a whooping four years. Honestly, that is a duration by which you should have helped to know the genuine project-affected persons. 

By the way, Government, from the look of things, you are overwhelmed by those who need the compensation - the project-affected persons and this is one of them. Moreover, the money is there but lying idle.

Mr Speaker, lack of absorption is a serious challenge and something must be done to urge the Government to ensure that funds that are mobilised through loans are used at the right time or in good time so that we do not pay those costs or even end up losing on the donors because it is financial indiscipline to fail to consume when you have the money.

Finally is the question of the valuer. If you are in dispute with the honourable’s question about Muzizi Hydro Power Station - because she mentioned a six years’ lag and you almost concurred although yours is a two-year lag. Still that is a delay. You ought to harmonise and ensure that the project is executed in good time. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Good questions, good responses and good comments by the Leader of the Opposition. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE CHARTER OF FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND THE ECONOMIC AND FISCAL UPDATE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2025/2026

THE SPEAKER: Chair, please come. Honourable members, given the importance of this particular report on Charter fiscal responsibility, which is a statutory document that we need to look at, the committee has done its work, I have looked through what they have done and it is good, I was proposing that we receive the document so that it is put on all our systems and Members can update themselves on what the committee has recommended. When we come back, the chairman will give a very brief introduction and summary of what they have recommended and then we can have a debate and take a decision.

For now, chairperson, if it is okay, you would lay the document. If you want to give a short comment of about three minutes, I will allow that.

4.57
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Wamakuyu Mudimi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Budget Committee on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for Financial Year 2021/2022 to Financial Year 2025/2026. 

This document was laid on 9 September. We have done a lot of work together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The minister is here and he can confirm. We have consulted and I have a report here. We agreed on most of the issues and amendments, which we propose to the charter. 

I beg to lay the report on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility with the proposed amendments and I hope the House will adopt these recommendations. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, let the records capture that. It is now formally before Parliament and if it was already on the iPads, this is the time to have it properly because the document has been laid before us and to have a good debate, we need to look at it. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, it was uploaded. Members have it and they have internalised it. I beg to lay the following documents to accompany this: 

    1. Minutes of the committee meetings;
    2. The brief by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for Financial Year 2021/2022 to Financial Year 2025/2026;
    3. The charter itself;
    4. The economic and fiscal update; 
    5. Bank of Uganda views on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility;
    6. The Economic Policy Research Centre memorandum on the charter;
    7. The National Planning Authority response to the charter;
    8. The Opposition response to the charter; and
    9. Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group key issues considered on the charter. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents to inform further engagements on debate on this matter. Thank you very much.

MR WAMAKUYU: Finally, Mr Speaker, we processed this with our colleagues on the opposite side. We have agreed on the issues and so, we do not have a minority report on this.

THE SPEAKER: Thank You. Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this will be requiring a proper debate and I have looked at the Order Paper and there are some other issues that might require a debate. 

The reason I am not sending Parliament on recess today is because we have not received the Budget Framework Paper. I am being advised that the document will be discussed by Cabinet on Monday and on Tuesday, it should come to Parliament. My estimation therefore, is, we cannot go beyond Tuesday because we would have gone too far. 

Honourable members, what I would like to propose - and if you agree – is that in order that we have sufficient time - The challenge that this proposal will come with is that we will not have a single minister or we could request the Leader of Government Business and the whip to consult and see if we can have some ministers here. 

I was going to propose that we have a discussion on Monday afternoon to reduce on the burden of what we need to do on Tuesday so that on Tuesday, we receive the Budget Framework Paper and maybe have one or two discussions and then I send the House on recess. If that is acceptable then we can do Monday afternoon. The circumstances are as I have explained. If I have concurrence that I will have some ministers here, then it would be a good thing to do.

5.03
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ((Rtd) GEN. MOSES ALI): Mr Speaker, I think we shall arrange as requested. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. With that concurrence from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that I will have a House of both backbenchers and frontbenchers, this House, for the purposes aforementioned, is now adjourned to Monday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.03 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 20 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)







