Friday, 14 December 2012

Parliament met at 11.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome to this sitting. Thank you for making the time on a Friday morning. I know it is difficult but I am glad you are here and we can be able to do some business. 

In the public gallery this morning we have the family of Mr and Mrs Katongole from Atlanta, Georgia, USA. They have been away from Uganda for the last 16 years. They have hosted lots of Members of Parliament who have visited Atlanta. They hosted me, the Deputy Speaker, with my family when I went to Atlanta on a visit. In Uganda, they come from Kayunga District, represented by honourable Members of Parliament Nantaba Idah and engineer Kafeero Sekitoleko Robert. They are here to witness the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming this family. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, the business of today is clear on the Order Paper. We will proceed with it as such. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE LEADERS OF THE DISTRICTS OF MUKONO AND WAKISO SEEKING INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVIEW THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY (CITY BUS SERVICES) REGULATIONS, 2011 AND INQUIRE INTO THE VALIDITY/LEGALITY OF THE AGREEMENT APPOINTING PIONEER EASY BUS AS AGENT TO OPERATE BUS SERVICES IN THE KAMPALA METROPOLITAN AREA BY KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a petition to this House. Actually, there were two petitions and I am glad the committee has been able to finalise both. The copies of the report are going to be circulated soon. Can we receive the report from the chair while the copies come in? This petition, I think, affects all of you who are in the Kampala Metropolitan Area. Can we proceed with receiving the report. Mr Chairman, would you like to approach the dispatch box. We do not want you to speak from far.

11.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is my humble request that you give us some little time so that we get the copies to the members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already waived that. Please proceed. The copies will come and you will be making your summary. You know, Friday morning is difficult so we have to move quickly. You have 15 minutes. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, on 13 October last year, a petition was presented to the House by hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament of Mukono Municipality. It was presented on behalf of the leaders of the districts of Mukono and Wakiso. The petition was seeking the intervention of Parliament to review or cause the review of the Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations, 2011 and to inquire into the validity/legality of the concession agreement between Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and Pioneer Easy Bus Ltd and to deal with any matter in connection therewith.

The subject matter of the petition is that the said Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations 2011 were drawn without consulting the local governments which were to be affected by the regulations. Also, it was said that its implementation was being done clandestinely without involving the local governments in those areas. The petitioners also challenge KCCA’s authority to make an agreement with Pioneer Easy Bus Ltd for transport services in the areas of Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso to solely benefit KCCA as a monopoly, without the involvement of the concerned local authorities of Mukono and Wakiso. 

In their petition, the leaders of these districts accuse the Executive Director of KCCA of denying them access to information on the agreement which she signed with KCCA. They suspect fraud, nepotism, abuse of office and corruption in these transactions. They contend that implementation of this agreement would result in unemployment for many people especially those involved in commuter taxi business. 

The committee sat, therefore, to review this petition and we had meetings with the following: 
a) 	The petitioners; 
b) 	The Executive Director, KCCA; 
c) 	His Worship the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City; 
d) 	The Minister of State for Transport; 
e) 	The Minister in charge of Kampala; 
f) 	Ministry of Local Government officials; 
g) 	The directors of Pioneer Easy Bus Co. Ltd; and
h) 	Representatives of the various associations which provide public transport services in Kampala, including: 
•		Uganda Taxi Operators and Drivers Association(UTODA); 
•		National Union of Taxi Operators (NUTO); 
•		Drivers and Conductors Central Association (DACCA); and 
•		Commercial Taxi Owners and Transport Development Association (COTODA).

We looked at the said Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations, 2011. We studied the bid documents and made reference to the documents tabled by the witnesses. We were guided by the various relevant laws, regulations and so on.

Background

In large cities the world over, governments, through municipal and city authorities, operate and manage public transport. This ranges from city buses to trains and trams. This service is complemented by city cabs or taxis, mainly used for special hire, which are privately operated but under the guidelines and regulations of the urban authorities. 

Recently, there has been a growth of the application of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) to manage public transport. The PPP is preferred because of economic reasons and for efficiency in the service. 

Efficient public transport is necessary, and the government’s objective in improving this service is to ensure that there is:

•	Reduced traffic congestion through the use of high capacity transport facilities.

•	Improved road safety through the use of reliable, secure, well-organised and highly professional transport operators and drivers.

•	Reduced costs of transport to the urban public through subsidised facilities that take advantage of large scale operations to benefit the transport users.

•	An improved urban environment through the use of transport means with reduced carbon emissions.

•	Increased economic productivity and vitality of the city in terms of faster and cheaper business activity.

•	Strengthening of the public image of the city as modern, organised and attractive to the city dwellers, visitors and tourists, thereby facilitating all other services offered to the general public by the government.

In Uganda, the urban public transport sector has, over the last 20 years, operated in an irregular and unusual manner. Since the winding up of the state-owned Uganda Transport Company (UTC) and the People’s Transport Company in the late 1980s, urban public transport in Kampala and other big towns evolved around a non-integrated, largely unregulated laissez faire model. The railway was left to goods transport and even then, it did not serve inter-city purposes. The 14-seater commuter taxis took centre stage. They formed associations that rivalled each other for stage control, often leading to quarrels which sometimes ended up in bloody fights. Some of these associations, which I mentioned earlier, are UTODA, NUTO, DACCA, COTODA and others. 

In the mid 1990s, the motorcycles commonly known as boda bodas became a common phenomenon on the city roads. They increased very fast, established their own stages, formed associations and put up garages. They became the most commonly used transport means, especially for the poor and middle-income earners. Transport in Kampala City and other big towns deteriorated. Traffic congestion grew to unmanageable levels. The cost of transport rose and became unpredictable. Strikes were used by the operators to hold the travelling public at ransom and to negotiate lower taxes from the city, municipal and town authorities. Pollution of the city by vehicles and motorcycles became a problem. The cost of doing business increased and the city became less attractive to tour and to work in.

Having realised this problem, the government took steps to improve public transport in Kampala. Although narrowly covered, improving traffic flow within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area was made part and parcel of government commitment in the National Development Plan. 

On 21 July 2008, the then Minister of Local Government, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, granted an operation licence to a private company called City Bus Services Ltd to run city passenger transporting services by bus and to establish passenger terminals at Mukono, Entebbe, Nsangi, Wakiso, Gayaza, Maganjo, Temangalo, Kigo, Ggaba, Makindye, Salaama and Naalya. By December 2008, there were attempts by the Ministry of Works and Transport to create dedicated corridors in the central business district of Kampala so as to streamline urban transport in the city and harmonise public transport generally in the greater Kampala metropolitan area. 

In the national Budget Speech of 2009, His Excellency the President directed the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Finance and Planning, the Minister of Local Government and KCC to work out modalities for speedy implementation of decongesting Kampala City through the PPP approach. Accordingly, KCC started the process of contracting private bus companies to provide passenger transport in the city and the surrounding areas. The city was divided into four zones: western, eastern, southern and northern. In the appendices, we have shown the details of these zones. This was done to avoid a monopoly, with one company taking over all routes in the city. 

Bids were opened and Pioneer Easy Bus Ltd emerged the winner. They were allocated two zones, the western and eastern zones. An agreement was signed to take effect on 16 December 2010. In January 2012, Pioneer Easy Bus brought into the country the first batch of 100 buses of Chinese make.

Findings  

In our investigations and interactions with the witnesses, the committee established the following:

1. 	Regarding the statutory instrument in contention - the Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations, 2011 - we found that it is true the Ministry of Works and Transport issued a statutory instrument to regulate the proposed city bus services. The Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulation, 2011 was published in the Gazette on 21 February 2011. Later, we shall point out our recommendations on review of this regulation.

2. 	Regarding the bidding process, on 23 July 2009 and 24 July 2009 KCC run adverts in both the New Vision and Daily Monitor newspapers in which they called for expressions of interest by competent firms to enter into partnership with KCC to provide public transport services in Kampala City. The advert emphasised the following:
•	The operator would compete for the market not for the road.
•	The successful operator would be awarded exclusive rights to operate a pre-defined network of bus routes which was defined in the area concession. 
•	KCC would attach conditions such as minimum bus standards, maximum fares, minimum service requirements, etc, for this company.
•	In all other respects, the concessionaire would be acting on their own behalf and not as an agent of KCC.
•	The operator would be expected to provide their own bus terminals.
•	Successful firms would enter into contract with KCC for a period of five years.

Five bids were received, from the following companies: 
i) 	Alliaz Pharmacy/City Bus Service Co. Ltd. 
ii) 	BenconollyPejj Ltd. 
iii) 	Kiskim Transporters (UK) Ltd/City Metro Bus Ltd. 
iv)	Pioneer Easy Bus Ltd. 
v) 	Sice/Trans-Africa Traffic Solutions Ltd. 

The bids were evaluated by the procurement and disposal unit of KCC, which then issued the Best Evaluated Bidder Notice. On 18 August 2010, in accordance with the PPDA Act, the contracts committee of KCC approved the evaluation report and awarded Pioneer Easy Bus the contract to operate bus transport services in Kampala City in the western and eastern zones. Kampala City Council then entered detailed negotiations with the company to concretise the terms of the contract. On 12 November 2010, the Solicitor-General cleared the contract on the negotiated terms. 

We have provided a short background on Pioneer Easy Bus Limited. This is a locally owned company. It was established to provide integrated, affordable and reliable urban public transport services for the benefit of the growing number of commuters in and around the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. It was incorporated on the 1st of March 2005 and has been offering public transport services since 2007. Its operations were initially run with a fleet of 16 buses. The company expanded in order to prepare for implementation of the concession. We have indicated the shareholding and capital funding of this company. The shareholders include: 

•	Matthew Rukikaire, a businessman, who owns 4,171 shares; 
•	Atlantis Holdings, a private limited liability company, which has 1,800 shares; 
•	Investpro Holdings Ltd, another private limited company, which has 1,170 shares; 
•	Urban Transport Company, a private limited liability company, with 333 shares; 
•	Kenlloyd Logistics (Uganda) Ltd, a limited liability company, with 1,526 shares; and  
•	Deluxe Solutions Ltd, another limited liability company, with 1,000 shares. 
The total number of shares is 10,000.

The company’s capital funding structure for the purchase of the 525 buses is as indicated on that table on page 8: Shareholder funding, Shs 11.5 billion and bank funding, Shs 50 billion. The total is Shs 61.5 billion which they needed to import the 525 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, is that a billion shillings? I see USD there.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker, it is in US dollars. Shareholder funding is US$ 11.5 million and bank funding is US$ 50 million, and the total is US$ 61.5 million. I thank you for the correction, Mr Speaker. 

We looked at the agreement made between KCCA and Pioneer Easy Bus Co. Ltd. The contract was signed on 16 December 2010. It was awarded on the following terms: 

First of all, it was a concession. The concession was structured as a Public Private Partnership (PPP). The PPPs are long-term contractual arrangements between the public and private sector in which the two parties agree to manage certain public services or projects jointly, with the responsibilities of each party clearly spelt out. 

In PPPs, a risk should be borne by the party best placed to manage it, and that is the party that can best understand, control and minimise the cost of risk. Normally under PPPs, assets are owned by the public sector but temporarily controlled by the private party. 

In case of a public service concession, the private company enters into agreement with the government or local authority to have exclusive rights to operate, carry out and maintain investments in a public utility for a given number of years. The concessionaire does what the controlling authority is supposed to do but does not have capacity to manage. So, the private company does what the government side is supposed to do but does not have capacity to operate and maintain. In this particular case, KCCA/Government of Uganda’s intention was to work in partnership with the private sector (Pioneer Easy Bus) in the provision of public transport services in Kampala metropolitan area. So, it is a concession under PPP and specifically it is to provide public transport services in the Kampala metropolitan area. 

The main objectives of the contract were: 
•	To provide efficient, environment-friendly public transport; 
•	reduce traffic congestion in the city; 
•	increase road safety; 
•	reduce the cost of transport to the city commuting passengers; 
•	increase productivity and economic vitality of the city; and 
•	make Kampala more attractive to the city dwellers and visitors.

Under the contract, the company was to operate in two zones. The first was the western zone which covers Masaka Road, Mityana Road and Hoima Road with a minimum of 217 buses each with a capacity of at least 60 seats. The second zone was the eastern zone which covers Jinja Road, Portbell Road and Kiira Road with a minimum of 305 buses each with a capacity of at least 60 seats. So in total, the company was required to bring in 525 buses excluding standby buses in case one breaks down. 

The operator was expected to introduce 100 buses within four months of signing the contract and be at full capacity of 525 buses within nine months of contract signing.

The operator would pay to KCCA Shs 300,000 per month for every bus operating in each of the two zones and the fee shall be reviewed annually.

The concession was for one year, extendable to a full term of five years following satisfactory performance in the first year.

Obligations of KCCA/Government 

•	Government committed itself to give exclusive rights to the bus company on the eastern and western zones for buses above 25-seater capacity.

•	Government also undertook to construct/provide the necessary infrastructure, including bus lanes, gazette routes, bus stages/bus stops. 

•	To issue a performance bond as comfort to the lender.

•	To determine the fares and review them annually.

•	To provide the operator, that is Pioneer Bus, with liaison services with government departments and other agencies as required by the firm in execution of the contract.

•	To facilitate entry and exit and issuance of statutory permits that the firm may require to execute the assignment.

•	To set service delivery standards and performance indicators against which to evaluate the performance of this company.

•	To monitor the implementation of the project and ensure that the firm adheres to the agreed satisfactory service delivery standards.

•	KCCA was to evaluate the service after one year and accordingly extend the contract to the full term of five years, if the performance was satisfactory.

•	Obligations of Pioneer Easy Bus Company 

•	Pioneer Easy Bus undertook to ensure that the bus transport service shall be commercially viable, sustainable and affordable to commuters.

•	Construct up to 600 bus shelters across the entire area of operation. The remaining 834 drop-off points and bus stops to be erected but without shelter for commuters.

•	Develop modern bus terminals at Mbalala on Mukono-Jinja Road, at Kakiri on Hoima Road, at Bulenga on Mityana Road, and at Namagoma on Masaka Road.

•	Put in place a modern fare collection system that is efficient and convenient to passengers. Pioneer Easy Bus undertook to use an off-board ticket sale model to be done through a dealer network at gazetted terminals and bus stops where kiosks would be constructed for that purpose.

•	Introduce state-of-the-art buses of 60-passenger capacity, with minimal emissions and environment friendly systems.

•	Use computerized information management systems for its human resource management, fleet management, ticketing/finance management, and they were required to avail information promptly as and when required by KCCA and Government.

•	Recruit at least 3,000 permanent workers; set up a training centre for bus drivers and maintain high standards of discipline and professionalism among its employees.

•	Maintain up-to-date insurance coverage for third party motor vehicle, third party liability, employer’s liability/workers’ compensation, professional liability and loss or damage to equipment and property.

•	Bear and pay all taxes, duties and levies imposed on the service provider by all municipal, state or national government authorities both within and outside Uganda in connection with the provision of the services.

•	Provide a 24-hour service on the routes.

Commencement of Operations by Pioneer Easy Bus

Mr Speaker, on 12 March 2012, the buses started operating on the orders of KCCA. The Executive Director KCCA explained that this was done following an executive order by H.E the President to safeguard the city residents and commuters against an impending strike by the taxi operators. 

The provisional permission granted to Pioneer Easy Bus to operate bus services in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area under a temporary ownership by the government was signed by the Minister of State for Works and Transport, hon. John Byabagambi, on 9 March 2012. Pioneer Easy Bus was requested to avail its buses to the Executive Director KCCA, who was charged with deploying them according to terms that were to be set by the Authority. 

In the letter of the minister, the buses became the responsibility of Government “until further notice”. Even after the strike was averted, the buses continued to operate but with no defined legal framework. Up to date, the buses are still on the road on that arrangement. 

Observations and Recommendations 

1. 	First of all, regarding the statutory instrument, we observe that the statutory instrument was published in the Gazette on 21 February 2011, two months after the signing of the agreement between KCC and Pioneer Easy Bus. 

2. 	We observe that in this statutory instrument, the emphasis on “city bus services” was meant to provide an instrument that would apply only to buses operating in the city and its suburbs. Previously, it was the Traffic and Road Safety Regulations but now it was called the Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations. 

3. 	The statutory instrument was drafted with the input of KCC but not other local authorities affected by the regulation.

4. 	This regulation defines “council” as the city council of Kampala. The committee observes that regulation 3 provides thus: “The regulations shall apply to Kampala and the surrounding districts of Wakiso and Mukono.” However, the committee observes that Wakiso and Mukono are by law different legal entities with their own councils distinct from the city council of Kampala. 

	Under the statutory regulations, the council has the responsibility to prescribe the bus fares (Section 24.2). The council also gives the code of conduct for operators and drivers. So, the council is in charge. By that regulation, “the council” simply means the city council of Kampala.

5. 	This regulation defines “bus” as “a motor vehicle designed for carrying a minimum of 60 passengers, with an entry and exit point and used for the transportation of persons in a commercial seating arrangement for compensation other than a motor vehicle or automobile for hire, funeral car or taxi cab used in a ridesharing arrangement.”

As a committee, we note that in regulation 8, “seating capacity” was changed to “bus capacity”. Ideally, this covers even the standing passengers. So, whereas previously the regulation talked of the seating capacity of the bus, in the new arrangement we have the bus capacity, which then takes care of the standing passengers. 

In the contract (part 2: Statement of requirements), the undertaking was of buses of 65 seat capacity. The current buses, however, are of a capacity of 30 seated and 30 standing passengers. The statutory regulation gives power to the Transport Licensing Board to determine the bus capacity. The committee observes that there is an apparent contradiction in the regulations regarding the capacity of buses that are required in the city.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations 2011 be reviewed in conformity with the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2011 and the Transport and Road Safety Act, Cap 361. All stakeholders in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, and to be specific, the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area that covers Kampala, Wakiso, Mpigi and Mukono, should be involved during the review process. In particular, the leaders of the local governments affected by the regulation should be involved in the review.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I think now you should just give us the recommendations. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. Regarding the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, Mr Speaker, I find our observation quite important. According to the Kampala City Capital Authority Act -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you will have to summarise the observations and not read word by word. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. According to the Kampala City Capital Authority Act, the responsibility to manage public transport is under the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. However, this Authority is not in place. So, it is actually not under Kampala Capital City Authority; it is under the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. The absence of this Authority is what has created confusion with regard to functions that extend beyond Kampala Capital City Authority.

Our recommendation is that the Minister for Kampala should immediately appoint the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority so that it can handle the functions under it. We thought this should be given a timeframe, and we are proposing two months. So, within the next two months, this Authority should be in place. 

Regarding the validity and legality of the contract, Mr Speaker, we found that whereas the concession was for five years, it was first signed for one year and then KCCA would evaluate the performance and extend it accordingly. However, KCCA did not evaluate the performance after the first year, and the process of identifying the bus stop stages, lanes and so on was also not done. Also, the infrastructure was not put in place. The guarantee which had been promised to the private company was not given. 

The direct lender’s agreement was signed only by the Ministry of Finance and other bodies did not sign, so it also fell by the wayside. The exclusivity on the routes was also not effected. So, the bus company ended up running like taxis, and they ended up competing for passengers on the roadside like taxis. They were not able to import all the buses because the guarantee promised by the government within the contract was not effected. They were spread thinly on ground because they were told to start operating in the whole of Kampala whereas they were supposed to operate on only two routes. The absence of bus lanes affected this company. The buses were spending longer times on the routes than they would otherwise spend if these lanes were identified and gazetted. 

It is our recommendation that the contract between KCCA and this company be reviewed holistically and that the executive order of government be lifted immediately. This order is still in place and they say it is indefinite. It is our recommendation that it should be lifted immediately, in any case not later than 15th January. So, we hope that between now and 15th January, there will be a new contract negotiated between Government and Pioneer Easy Bus Company Ltd involving the local governments affected. We hope that the duration of the contract will also be reviewed if it is to be a concession under a PPP arrangement. 

Regarding the mandate of Kampala City Council/KCCA to make inter-district agreements, it is our observation that the Local Governments Act grants the authority to the district councils and municipal councils to manage services within their area. So, they cannot be brought under the authority of the city council of Kampala. For the inter-district services, we are then supposed to have the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. 

It is our recommendation that KCCA should desist from acting outside the law. All future planning and service delivery issues involving the neighbouring local governments should be handled by the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority in consultation with those authorities. 

Mr Speaker, there is a sticky issue of payment of taxes and fees. Remember in October this year, Wakiso presented another petition regarding revenues they had lost as a result of this contract of Pioneer Easy Bus Services. We have examined their petition and we find that the committee should recommend that taxes, fees and other statutory obligations of Pioneer Easy Bus, KCCA and the local government should be clearly agreed on in the contract. So, the contract should be clear as to what is due to Wakiso, Mukono and Mpigi.

We also observe that Government took over responsibility of the buses from March up to date. So, Government is obliged to pay the revenue losses to Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono for the period the buses have been operating under the executive order of government. The minister should reach an agreement on this with the local governments and should accordingly submit a report on this matter to Parliament. 

Regarding the bank guarantee to KCCA and Government, it is our recommendation that the contract be implemented under the PPP arrangement but Government should abide by the terms of the concession and meet its obligations.

Regarding procurement of transport services and operations of Pioneer Easy Bus Company Ltd, it is our recommendation that KCCA should avail the information on service delivery to the local governments affected and to other stakeholders within Kampala Capital City Authority in accordance with Article 41 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Regarding the bus fares, the committee recommends that fares should not be fixed arbitrarily. There should be a clear technical study and breakdown of the costs and benefits of providing the service to avoid overcharging and undercharging by the operators.

On assets, we recommend that there should be a clear agreement on asset ownership and management between KCCA and these private companies. Under the new arrangement, we hope there will be a comprehensive succession plan or roadmap providing for step-in rights for the Authority should the concessionaire fail to perform and to manage these assets in accordance with the agreed standards.

Mr Speaker, we have provided other recommendations generally to improve urban public transport management in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. These include a holistic review of the Kampala Transport Master Plan in relation to environment management, improving the traffic congestion and so on.

In conclusion, we think that the contract was valid but that the parties failed to abide by their contractual obligations. So, the whole contract should be reviewed and each party abides by their responsibilities. 

We thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for your kind attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, you will agree with me that this is a very comprehensive coverage of the subject. Surely, the committee did a lot of work and another round of applause will not harm this House. (Applause)

The debate is now open on this because we need to adopt some of the recommendations the committee has suggested. You will be speaking for three minutes each. 

MR SEMPALA MBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Would it be right for us to continue debating this issue when the minister in charge of Kampala and the minister in charge of transport are not here? I also notice that there are only about six people out of about 17 members who signed this report. Is that okay?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay, hon. Sempala.

MR SEMPALA MBUGA: Okay, I accept that, but how about the fact that there is no minister in charge of transport or in charge of KCCA here? Is it the Vice-President who is going –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have the whole Vice-President here and I can see the honourable Minister for Finance. Everybody is here. I think we are properly constituted to handle this matter.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am one of the MPs from Wakiso District and I can confirm that I signed that petition but the rest of my colleagues from Wakiso District and Kampala are not present. Even some of us who are here have just received copies of the report. Actually, these copies were distributed just here as the chairperson was presenting the report. So, the guidance I seek and request to you, Mr Speaker, is that would it be okay to stay debate on this issue to allow us internalise the report so that we can debate when properly prepared, but also to give the lead petitioner and the rest of the colleagues from the district, even just three, an opportunity to participate in this debate?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have done some consultation and I now stand on a point of procedure in support of what my colleague, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, has talked about. 

First, I would like to thank the committee for presenting this very important report, whose copies we have just received. Secondly, both ministers for Kampala and transport are not yet here and some of us present are not competent enough to respond to issues that may arise on the Floor. Therefore, I request that we stay debate on this issue. Let us go and internalise the report so that we will be in a position to debate and respond to queries from an informed position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have listened to the submissions of the following members: hon. Sempala, hon. Ssemujju Nganda and the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. It is therefore ordered by the Speaker that debate on this matter be deferred until the next convenient date when we will exhaustively debate it. It is so ordered. Okay, let us move to the next item. Mr Chairman, lay the report and the minutes on the Table.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the minutes of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meetings of the committee.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the committee on the petition by the leaders of Mukono and Wakiso districts. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let the records capture the report in its full text.

Honourable members, you know that this affects the local governments that are involved in the operations of Pioneer Easy Bus Services. However, as the chairman has communicated, we will be able to deal with them when we are properly constituted. Let us go to the next item, please.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT AND OTHER KEY PLAYERS TO TAKE STRINGENT MEASURES IN THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF 
HIV/AIDS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an important motion. It was supposed to have been received earlier. You will recall that the country joined the rest of the world to recognise 1st December as the International HIV/AIDS Day. This motion should have come before that date, but still it is important for us to receive it.

Also, be aware that today is Friday and as you know our colleagues from the other faith will be having their prayers at 1 O’clock. So, let us see how far we can get with this motion. Hon. Mutwalante Twa-Twa, Member of Parliament for Iki-Iki.

12.35
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS (Dr Jeremiah Mutwalante Twa-Twa): Mr Speaker, H.E the Vice-President and my colleagues, Members of Parliament, I rise to move a motion asking the Parliament of Uganda to pass a resolution urging Government and other key players to take stringent measures in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS. The motion reads as follows:

“WHEREAS Uganda has been widely acclaimed as a model for Africa in the fight against HIV/AIDS, with strong government leadership, will and commitment, broad-based partnership and effective public education campaigns, which contributed to the decline in the number of people living with HIV/AIDS in the 1990s;

AND WHEREAS the HIV/AIDS epidemic remains a major public health concern, with the recent published Uganda AIDS Indicator Survey of 2011 indicating that despite all the effort that has been directed towards the fight against the epidemic in the last five years, HIV prevalence rates among Ugandan adults rose from 6.4 per cent in 2005 to the current 7.3 per cent in 2011;

NOTING that the current HIV prevalence in Uganda is estimated at 7.3 per cent among adults aged 15 to 49 years and 0.7 per cent among children under five years, and that HIV prevalence is higher in the urban areas (10 per cent) than in the rural areas where it is six percent, and there is wide regional variation in the manifestation of the epidemic and the response;

FURTHER NOTING that the number of new infections was an estimated 145,000 in 2011 and exceeds the annual enrolment into anti-retroviral therapy by two fold, and it is feared that if the status quo remains the HIV/AIDS burden is projected to increase by 700,000 new infections over the next five years, and that there are several theories as to why this may be happening including the government’s shift towards abstinence and be faithful only as preventive measures;

REALISING that there is general complacence or AIDS fatigue and it has been suggested that anti-retroviral drugs have possibly changed the perception of AIDS from a death sentence to a treatable manageable disease, and this in turn has led to an increase in risky sexual behaviour;

AWARE that funding of HIV/AIDS response is dominated 70 per cent by donors with government contributing only 11 per cent and yet donors have threatened to cut aid, posing doom for Ugandans living with HIV/AIDS and on ARV treatment, and of course also on the sustainability of the programme;

FURTHER AWARE that there is need for extensive education among the young generations since the statistics indicate that only 39 per cent of young people aged 15 to 24 years are aware of the basic facts about HIV prevention and control;

CONSIDERING that Parliament has a major role to play in the fight against HIV/AIDS and MPs have to embrace their responsibility as representatives of the people and take the lead in sensitising their constituents about the HIV/AIDS scourge;

FURTHER CONSIDERING that the strong political leadership and commitment to tackling the alarming prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS is a major tool that must be fully utilised by both the Executive and the Legislature;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT that HIV/AIDS has had a devastating impact on the social fabric of the people of Uganda and its economy since it has killed approximately one million people since 1982 and significantly lowered the life expectancy, reduced the country’s labour force, reduced agricultural output and food security and weakened educational and health services, and the large number of AIDS related deaths among young adults left behind over a million orphaned children;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
1. 	Government considers establishing an HIV/AIDS trust fund to provide adequate and sustainable local funding for the epidemic response.

2. 	The Ministry of Health and Uganda AIDS Commission design and standardise messages with positive effects as a means of disseminating HIV/AIDS information.

3. 	Political leaders, especially Members of Parliament, go down to their constituencies and mobilise other leaders to participate in sensitising the masses about HIV/AIDS.

4. 	Government urges the employers, both public and private, to establish HIV/AIDS information desks to provide information and counselling services in the work place.

5. 	The Health Committee expedites the scrutiny of the HIV/AIDS Bill and reports to the House.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Kanungu East and hon. Flavia Kabahenda from Kyegegwa District. Would you like to justify your motion in five minutes.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, as you are aware, this country was hit by the HIV/AIDS epidemic starting from early 1982. The problem was first identified in Rakai District at a place called Kasensero. From there on, the epidemic engulfed the whole country and it peaked in 1992 with levels of up to 30 per cent infection, particularly in the urban areas.

Of course, Government had moved in very quickly to find out the magnitude of the problem and at the same time how the infection or the problem was being transmitted or caused. Today, we know how it is transmitted; it is transmitted mainly through sex and the other route, although minimal, is through blood transfusions, skin piercing instruments and of course there is also transmission from mother to child.

Having known the problem, Government moved in swiftly to implement programmes or interventions to try and check the spread of the epidemic. One key intervention was the political leadership, which came out very openly to tell Ugandans and the whole world that we had a problem. The leadership was very committed and because of that, it managed to mobilise support from within and outside Uganda and also mobilise the response of the people. Eventually, as you realise, between 1993 and 2005 we reduced the epidemic to a prevalence rate of 6.4 per cent.

However, after that, we are seeing a new picture. Recent research shows that HIV prevalence is rising, like you have heard from the presentation of the motion. We have a prevalence rate of 7.3 per cent overall and this rose from 6.4 per cent. Of course, this figure is much higher in certain sectors of the population, for instance, among public servants who are the labour force of this country. The report shows that we have 10 per cent prevalence among public servants and this rate is higher among the ages 35 to 39 years, high among the married couples, and of course wealthy families are also more affected. This is a shift in the epidemic and we need to see how we can address this.

We also know that the impact of HIV/AIDS has really inflicted this country demographically since 1982. We have had over 2.5 million people infected with HIV/AIDS and currently we have over 1.4 million people who are living with HIV/AIDS and over 2.5 million orphans. This is despite the fact that we have undertaken measures before. If we remain adamant and watch the epidemic rising without taking stringent measures or action, the epidemic may impact us with a worse effect than previously. 

This impact varies; it has affected individuals, communities, the nation and even our GDP. It is said that HIV is responsible for a reduction in our GDP by about one per cent. Likewise, the health sector continues to be hit with over 60 per cent of beds in health units occupied by HIV related cases. So, we need to do something to see to it that we address this epidemic. What is worrying is that funding of the response to the HIV epidemic -(Hon. Achile rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the mover of the motion wind up and then you can raise your issues in the course of the debate. 

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, like I was saying, what is worrying is that the funding of the response to the HIV epidemic has been mainly dominated by donors. We know that donors have been contributing over 70 per cent of the funding. Government is just contributing – (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mover of the motion, Dr Twa-Twa, you have three minutes; lay copies of the documents.

DR TWA-TWA: Mr Speaker, I want to lay on the Table, first the motion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is already captured in full. 

DR TWA-TWA: I want also to lay on the Table the report of the Uganda AIDS Indicator Survey 2011, which we have had the opportunity to be briefed on by the technical department. The report is from Ministry of Health together with the Uganda AIDS Commission. 

I also want to lay on the Table a working paper which has been proposed by the Uganda AIDS Commission on ways Uganda Government can raise funds locally to fund the response to the AIDS epidemic. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Dr Twa-Twa. Seconder of the motion, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, you have three minutes. 

12.49
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County, East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Dr Twa-Twa for presenting the motion and I am here to second it. We definitely have a very big challenge before us of HIV/AIDS. We have had it for over 30 years. People think that it is no longer a big problem but we are here to persuade the members and the rest of the country that the problem could even be bigger than when it started and there is need for all of us to take action. 

As we heard, we have gone through phases of the HIV/AIDS epidemic characterised by a rise in the infection rates in the 80s, and then a sharp decline in the 1990s and then at the beginning of 2000, we had stagnation of the infection rate. Now what is worrying is that the infection rates are rising again and we have what we call a generalised epidemic, where all corners and communities in Uganda have been affected, although in some sections of the population the epidemic is concentrated. When you look at the fishing community, the long distance truck drivers, commercial sex workers and other groups of populations, we have prevalence rates which are quite high. We probably need to estimate the prevalence within the Parliamentary community and know how big the problem could be even among us. 

Mr Speaker, it is a very big problem. We know why Uganda was able to reduce the infection rate. One of the reasons why we seem to be having a problem today is the general problem of complacency in terms of behaviour. People think HIV/AIDS is no longer a big threat, particularly with the advent of ARVs and also lack of strong messages coming up. That is an area that Government and all of us must address. 

Also, Mr Speaker, as the epidemic has grown over time, the dynamics and the faces of HIV have changed in terms of who is at risk, which populations are vulnerable and so forth. What is worrying is that our national programme does not respond appropriately in terms of having a paradigm shift to address the current dynamics of the epidemic. That is why we are calling upon the government to ensure that they align the strategies and interventions towards changing the dynamics of HIV/AIDS. 

The other challenge that we have is the issue of funding, which has been clearly put across. Our domestic resources which we are allocating to HIV/AIDS only constitute 11 per cent. The rest is supported by our development partners. What is worse is that from the total resources given to us by development partners, up to 85 per cent are from one partner, the US Government, which supports the AIDS response through project support. That has its own challenges in that sometimes priorities are not set by us as a country and that is why when you go on the ground, a lot of money is being invested but you do not feel the HIV/AIDS programmes on the ground because – (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to wind up.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I was making is that most of the funding from our partners is from the US Government. The way they bring in their money is that they call for proposals from NGOs and CSOs but not all NGOs and CSOs in our communities have capacity to raise proposals which will be funded. So you find that even the resources are not equitably distributed within the whole country and this has to be addressed. 

Definitely, there is need for political commitment and all of us must have our voices raised on these matters of HIV/AIDS so that we can put a lot of energy in the AIDS response in order for us to see declining trends of HIV once again in this country. Thank you very much. 

12.54
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government and other key players to take stringent measures in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS. 

Mr Speaker, the findings from the 2011 national HIV indicator survey announced recently are deeply disturbing to the public, the local and national leaders and to our AIDS development partners as well. I think we need to be very frank about this because it is a trend we cannot keep quiet about and we should not allow it to continue. Like in 1989, let us rise to the challenges because there is urgency and need for serious and unequivocal commitment on the part of every single citizen to be part of the renewed plan to face this epidemic. 

The plan is spelt out, like the mover of the motion correctly did spell out, by the Uganda Aids Commission in the National HIV Prevention Strategy 2011 to 2015. This aims at mobilising all the people and the institutions to work towards eliminating new infections, putting an end to stigma and discrimination, and halting the death from AIDS related conditions by the year 2015.  
This may seem to us as ambitious, but I think we cannot allow to be ambitious on this. 

We want to call upon Government to ensure that the work plans for all sectors, including those of our development partners, are aligned to this strategy. We want to see them reflect that something is being done by every one of us to ensure that the above as mentioned in the National HIV Prevention Strategy are really getting done –(Member timed out).

12.57
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for presenting this paper in observance of the HIV problem in this country. It is true we have not done much as Ugandans on HIV. 

I want to correct this record on the first page. It is says here 1986 but HIV was first felt in 1982 and the government felt that there was a problem in 1984, and that is when Ministry of Health put in place a programme to address HIV. I just wanted that to be corrected. 

We are always talking about the problem of HIV in this country but I wanted it to be made clear how much treatment has been offered towards HIV and how much it has helped. Nobody talks about the people who are still living since they started having treatment. I think my colleague should also do a little bit more research to reflect that figure. What percentage of children are affected, what percentage of adults and also what percentage of women, particularly those who are pregnant, are affected - we need to know that. It would also be good for me to know how much HIV has affected Maracha - (Member timed out).

12.58
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion as moved by Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante. There is no doubt that HIV and specifically AIDS is a disease that will kill you because up to now, it has no cure and this now calls on us leaders to invest heavily.

I have heard before that we have established a road fund, we established an energy fund but I do not know why as a country we cannot establish the HIV fund. You have known from history about instances where these leaders, especially the politicians, and the donors withdraw at will. Now assuming they withdrew their aid at will, what happens to those who are already enrolled? I sincerely second the establishment of the HIV fund as soon the government can and most likely if we can, even today. 

I also have a problem; I think when we talk about messages, some of us leaders should also be consistent. Some messages have changed over time. Someone will tell you abstain, others will tell you use a condom, others will tell you circumcise and others will tell you be faithful and someone will also tell you, when you circumcise, you do not become immune. When you give varying messages to the population, you are actually telling them to may be do away with these messages. 

When I was in Mbarara University, we developed an HIV policy. I do not know how many ministries now have these policies. Every ministry should have an HIV policy. (Member timed out)

1.01
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to create a fund for HIV/AIDS. One of the reasons why I feel it should be supported is the threat we are getting as a country as far as cutting of aid is concerned when we make some small mistakes. I do not know whether they are mistakes. 

When somebody ceases to use anti-HIV drugs when he or she has begun on the drugs, then you have between 24 to 48 hours remaining for you to get resistance. Once you have got resistant strains, it means that the HIV you have will not respond to the drugs and even the one whom you give it to will not respond because he or she has gotten the resistant strain. Seeing people dying and we cannot create a fund like we have created for the roads and leave our people to die is very dangerous.

Another thing is the funding of Government; funding HIV by only 10 per cent and the donors give us 90 per cent, I do not know whether I can call it pretence or what, but it is very dangerous. If we do not put aside this money to cater for these people who are sick - and by the way, babies who are born by mothers that are positive have no case to answer. It is a tragedy! The mothers are at home but their husbands go and get it and bring home. These people are innocent. Look at young girls that are raped and look at the children who have been sodomised here in Kampala. Today, Red Pepper is even showing that there is a man who has been doing it; a man who has been molesting football players for all this time and he has been transmitting it. These are innocent people. We must create a fund to cater for these people because we cannot lose our population, honestly - (Member timed out).

1.03
MRS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of this Committee on HIV and AIDS-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a motion and not a committee report. Proceed.

MS KASE MUBANDA: I stand to strongly support the motion. I attended the AIDS Day at Kasensero and while there, we were told that actually in Rakai the infection rate is about 12 per cent. So, we know the infection rate is really rising very fast. 

We have had HIV/AIDS for 30 years. The President in his speech blamed the spread or the rise in infection to carelessness and irresponsible behaviour. In 30 years, we have tried the voluntary method of trying to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS. I think at this time after 30 years if we are serious and we want to prevent HIV/AIDS spreading to the next generation, I would like this House to join me to advocate for compulsory testing in this country. (Member timed out)

1.05
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion. The figures that are given are so disturbing and those who are highly infected are in the group of 15 to 45. This is the most active group and many of us, by the way, fall in the group; very few are outside this group. 

The most important thing is that people think that we know everything about this disease. I think Government must come up with clear messages. Let us have common agreed minimum messages. Some have been alluded to but when you go out in the field, the young will ask, “What is this condom about?” There are also the female condoms, the circumcision and all that kind of staff. Can we agree on the minimum message for all of us? 

I agree with the recommendations but in recommendation No.3, why should it only be political leaders and especially MPs? It should be all leaders at all levels - religious leaders, cultural leaders and all of us must take up this campaign afresh if we are going to fight this infection and new infections. 

The other and final point I would like to talk about is the access to ARVs. There are more new infections yet very few are accessing ARVs. We may think and say that we cannot afford as a country but how big is the burden of HIV/AIDS on our economy? Let us wake up, let us not hide our heads in the sand; we must face this problem and provide for it. Thank you.

1.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.  I would like to thank the mover of this motion. As colleagues have said, there is need to critically analyse this matter to get the real factors which affect the very issue we are discussing. I think that these are the fruits of the achievements we have registered in fighting against HIV/AIDS. What we are seeing now is because of the arrangements that Government put in place where the President and everybody came out openly and we started receiving testimonies from people living with HIV/AIDS. We are now seeing people marrying and producing children and living happily together. Because we have been advocating for this, people are no longer stigmatised. So, what are we going to do?  I think we have to change the way we have been handling the problem. 

I just want to inform this august House that the Ministry of Health has re-launched a new movement in fighting HIV/AIDS. They have presented a concept paper in Cabinet and all of us stood up and realised that what we are fighting for now is something different from what we fought for in 1982 to 1986, and we can now see the results.

On the establishment of a trust fund, this is something that can be debated. We have the Uganda AIDS Commission and one will argue that we give more money to the Uganda AIDS Commission to do much more work, but the mandate of establishing a trust fund lies in the Ministry of Finance, of course after consulting Cabinet. Lastly-(Member timed out_)

1.09
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add on my voice to support the motion. 

Last week, I had a situation in Teso, Bukedea Constituency, whereby the entire village was almost burying people who are sick. Why? We have the distribution of ARVs in most health centres III, unfortunately there is a bit of negligence by health personnel when administering these drugs. I would like to urge the Ministry of Health to continue encouraging the training of these health personnel. Even as we support this motion and as we look for funds to facilitate the health centres and the Ministry of Health in order to prolong the lives of these infected people, there is need for vigilance from the Ministry of Health officials; people were given drugs which are not reliable and two patients died. Otherwise, financing this sector is the most important thing that Government should do. 

Dissemination of information about HIV/AIDS should continue because more and more people are getting infected every other day.  We are looking at statistics being given but I want to tell you that these are not accurate figures because you get to villages which are not being covered. So, the rate of the spread of HIV/AIDS is really alarming -(Member timed out)

1.11
MR WILLIAM KWEMERA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Like my colleagues, I would also like to appreciate the honourable member for Iki-Iki. 

My concern is about the HIV/AIDS messages both in content and method. The honourable member for Rwampara alluded to the challenges we are having in content, how we are confusing the public by the different messages. To add to his voice, I would like us to look at the method. 

The hon. Baryomunsi pointed out that our biggest challenge is complacency, and complacency needs strong messages. You cannot get strong messages through sensitisation. In Uganda, every community education effort is termed as sensitisation but truly, we need to move from sensitisation to transformative community education. Transformative community education is underpinned by critical reflection, and critical reflection is a precursor of attitude change. So, if you are talking of changing attitudes, the Ministry of Education should come out clearly with transformative health education emphasising critical reflection. That is when we shall change the attitudes of people to solve the problem of complacency. 
Additionally, there is the issue of research. It is good the Minister is talking about HIV/AIDS now taking a new form. The question is: are we constantly carrying out research? Why has it taken that long for us to know that HIV/AIDS is taking a new form? I think the Ministry should also emphasise the issue of constant research and moreover from a critical perspective -(Member timed out_)

1.13
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion. I start by thanking the government because I, as a Ugandan citizen, thought that Uganda has been a very great example to many other countries especially in the fight against AIDS.  There is so much this country has done and many countries have come here to study what is done, but of course there is still much more to be done. 

Recently, the World AIDS Day, 1st December, had a very good theme and it had to do with leadership. We leaders, how much are we doing and how much are we capable of doing? Are we good examples? That is also very important. 

There is a great problem at the Police as I talk right now. When children victims of rape come to the Police, they are sent to the hospitals and for every examination that is done, there must be a fee that has to be paid. If you know the new law that we passed against rape and defilement, a child and even any woman has to be tested to find out the status of the person that raped them. That fee is very prohibitive. We, as Parliament, have to do something about that money; we either pay the doctors ourselves or we ensure that there is free testing. 

Thirdly, the post prophylaxis exposure services that exist are not known to many of us. When somebody is exposed to HIV/AIDS, within 72 hours something can be done to reverse the infection. But many of us do not know those services and yet they exist in many of our hospitals. We can save many people - (Member timed out_)

1.15
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion for this very important motion. 

Mr Speaker, the success in the fight against HIV/AIDS in Uganda probably is also the cause of the controversy that we witness today, and that is the upsurge of the prevalence of the HIV/AIDS and thus its infection. Uganda as a country has done a lot in the fight against HIV/AIDS that has put Uganda on the world map as far as AIDS is concerned. However, I think, as my colleagues have put it, in any success there is controversy that comes up and that is what my colleagues have called complacency.  I think this is much bigger than probably the mover of the motion puts it. I would propose that the prayers in this very important motion would be looked at by the health committee and they inform the debate that will ensue. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

1.17
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also support the motion as has been moved by hon. Twa-Twa. I agree that there is an increase in the AIDS prevalence but I do not totally agree it is due to complacency only. We are not looking at the root cause of AIDS. We are just emerging from the credit crunch and we should not forget that AIDS is a disease which accompanies poverty. I thought we would address the issue of poverty critically in our fight against AIDS. 

I tend to be convinced that although the number of people living above the poverty level has increased, I also agree that the gap between the poorest and the richest has also widened and we should address this gap as we fight against this disease called AIDS. I think, Mr Speaker, we should have another recommendation in this motion that addresses poverty. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.19
MRS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to support this motion on HIV. I have two issues to raise. In the first instance, we should appreciate the work that has been done by our President in mobilising our people to fight against HIV/AIDS in the previous years. At least we have tried our best.

Another thing is that we should also accept that as Ugandans, the statement he made on the 1st of this month while celebrating or marking the commemoration of HIV/AIDS in Uganda is really very true. Why am I saying so? If you can see, the rate of the spread of HIV from mother to child is just minimal and it can be controlled, but the biggest issue is because we wish to enjoy and at the end of the day we find ourselves being infected. So, I think that as we urge ourselves to make sure that we tell the government to ensure that they implement our proposals, there are two things that we are supposed to do. 

One, there is a medicine that is always being injected - I am not a professional in that field but at least I know that there is a drug that can help prevent infection after these girls and women of ours in particular have been forced into sex. Within 72 hours, they can be given that treatment to prevent them from getting HIV and other diseases and also to prevent pregnancy. However, these days it is very expensive and it cannot be accessed in some of the lower health centres and yet most of these defilements and rape are being done deep in the villages. So, we should urge the government to make sure that such treatment is extended further down so that people can use it and know its purpose. 

People who come from outside this country come and have sex without protection because they have taken that drug- (Interjections) - Yes! So, I think that it is very important that that medicine be extended down to our health centres.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is going on? Have you finished? Time is too short for information. 

1.22
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support this motion and I support all the resolutions given here, but I would have loved us to also include a resolution about the media. If the media was not talking about HIV/AIDS - Maybe it should even be one of the conditions for licensing the media because they are so critical, especially during this holiday season. They are going to talk about a lot of other things and not HIV/AIDS. So, I would really want to recommend that the media be brought in so that they can also sensitise the people. 

I want to observe that resolutions 3, 4, and 5 are really resolutions that do not cost anything. This does not cost a lot of money. It is already inherent in the institutions which are there. You just talk about HIV/AIDS and it will be heard. So I support this very much. 

However, resolution No. 1, about the HIV/AIDS trust fund, I want to believe is a process already going on and if it is promoted, any fund which is there already in local government or in civil society should be used to address HIV/AIDS in an integrated manner. I am also wondering, if we set up this HIV/AIDS trust fund, we really have to be very careful to plan what it is going to do. I would urge that it should not address many other things except grassroots activities that can help curb the spread of HIV/AIDS. 

I want to believe that in management of institutions, there has been an effort to come up with HIV/AIDS workplace policies. However, I also want the government to check how many institutions are really practising or living or walking the talk according to the HIV/AIDS workplace policies that they have- (Member timed out).

1.24
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kabarole, the situation is alarming. Kabarole was ranked No.1 in all the districts of Uganda with the highest AIDS prevalence. It is a pity that the people affected are again affected by corruption because the patients who go for these drugs that are supposed to be free are asked for money. These people do not have the money and so the treatment is not consistent, and the result is that the disease becomes resistant and therefore people are dying terribly. 

I appreciate the motion and I second it very strongly. However, without emphasis on moral degeneration in this country, I think we will not go a mile. When you look at the idleness all over the country - bars opening in the morning at 6 a.m. and closing 6 a.m. in the morning, the youth and the young children are uncontrolled, coupled with drug abuse - I think we need to strengthen our laws. We need to deal with drug abuse, moral degeneration and idleness in this country. 

When we come to the youth, they are still lamenting about their fund. The youth are the highest percentage of the population of this country and they are not engaged in productive activities. So, as we think of this fund, we really need to think hard about how to strengthen the youth to make them productive because they are attracted to idleness and drinking because they have nothing productive to do. 

When we get the research and the districts are ranked, what has been planned to combat the spread in these districts? Fine, I have seen my district is No.1 but the ministry has not come to check and find out why Kabarole - (Member timed out)

1.27
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I would like to support the motion and thank Government for the achievements so far in fighting this disease. However, I would like to urge Government to increase the number of testing kits which are sent to these health centres. During the last inspection in Kigezi, we found some health centres without testing kits. In some of these health centres, we found the ARVs were not enough. People had to move long distances to go and pick these ARVs yet they were very weak and could not reach the nearest health centre. 

Another issue I would like to talk about, which I have not heard people talk about, is the problem of tonsillitis, which we have in Kisoro. You can go to the hospital with this disease and they carry out some operation; I think it is called a tonsillectomy. I am not a doctor but at least I have heard of that. We also have these village people who have learnt how to remove them and they do it manually. They get these young children, put in their fingers, remove from one child to another child. At the end of the day, these children are infected. I am wondering whether the Ministry of Health has – because we have reported this but they have not done anything about it. 

I would also like to know how the Ministry of Health has come in to inspect these dentists in the villages because we do not know whether they use machines which are sterilised. I want the ministry to at least help us on that. Finally, I would like to request that at least at every health centre we have a focal person in charge of HIV - (Member timed out).

1.30
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I would like to submit that many of us have phobias. Research has found out that the strongest phobia in man is called thanatophobia, which is the fear of death. When we were growing up, we were impelled with fear of AIDS. I remember as a young boy, my cousin died of HIV/AIDS and his body was paraded. All of us were made to see the body. Coupled with that, there used to be this drum sounded on radio which warned people against the dangers of AIDS. Those were all shock tactics. 

However, over the years, people are being made to know or understand that you can live very long with HIV. It is now becoming like a common cold. So, there is complacency. If we do not address that and go back to those strong messages, people are going to take these things easily and there will be more infections. I want us to be sensitive about stigmatisation of those who are already infected but we also need a very strong message that will make people realise that this disease is still with us and kills. 

Another danger is that we have an age group of young people who were born with HIV in the early 80s and now they are in their 20s. They are beautiful, they are handsome and they want to lead a normal life, they want to marry. That is a potential explosion which we need to start thinking about also. We need to help these young people; we should not cut them off from society but let them know that they need to live responsibly. Fortunately, a lot of them think they want to live normal lives and not infect others but a majority of them want to marry normal, healthy people. We need to address that. (Member timed out)

1.32
MRS ONGOM ATIM JOY (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also want to support this motion and bring up some issues.

When we went for some meeting on HIV/AIDS, we realised that Lira was ranked No.3 in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. This is so bad. Data has shown us that the age group between 15 and 49 are the ones who are so affected. These are the youth. What are we going to do as policy makers? These are people who really spend a lot of their time drinking or just being idle, and if they over drink they do each and everything they want to do. We have to think about this and come up with a policy on drinking as policy makers and regulate that time of drinking if necessary.

Research has also shown that HIV is prevalent among the married women and wealthy women. This is what we should not hide. In fact, when they talked about wealthy women, the female Members of Parliament were looking at one another, but we also have business women outside there. What should we do because we are complaining as women that it is the men who are spreading much of this HIV/AIDS but data has shown that it is much among the wealthy women? Can the women wake up. Can we wake up and we see what to do so that we reduce this prevalence. (Member timed out) 

1.34
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I also support the motion. Unfortunately, I have not heard about any new measures from the Ministry of Health to fight AIDS. I think the government is a bit reluctant. We should have more serious measures put in place. I suggest that we revisit some rights of children. It is too much when you find them attentively listening to programmes which are very funny, reading articles like Ssenga in the newspapers because of their rights. They are free to mix anyhow, which was not there before. 

When you look at other countries like Rwanda, sex workers are limited. You may even not find any now; instead, we are importing some of these people from Rwanda. I think the government should be stricter.

Finally, we are neglecting school programmes. We should include some of these programmes in school activities. We do not have special people to sensitise and mobilise our young children in schools. When you go to these boarding schools, there are lots of problems. That is where we are finding problems. People come in and because they are supported by foreign countries, they introduce funny things which can lead our youth – (Member timed out)

1.37
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to support the motion and I would like to propose and request Government to urge all hospitals and health centres, both public and Government, to advise whichever patient they treat to test for HIV. When you go to a doctor and you are not aware of your status, he or she recommends that you go for a blood test for malaria. I think in the same way, doctors should recommend patients to test for HIV. When you are not aware of your status, you behave anyhow and I think that increases the spread of HIV. But when you are aware whether you are positive or negative, you will know how to conduct yourself. Thank you very much.

1.38
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I support the motion, but I want to say that the messages that are given out in the public usually do not reach the whole audience. When you put messages on radio, for example, then the deaf community does not get the message. All of you will agree with me that deaf boys and girls are very handsome and beautiful. So there is a tendency for men who have the money to lure them into sex and you know, when people go for sex, they do not need to talk; things just happen. (Laughter) So, these deaf people are given HIV/AIDS and at the end of the day, they get it ignorantly; they are ignorant because they did not get the message. 

Sometimes you put messages in the papers and the blind people are not able to read that literature. So, we still have a problem. So when talking about the messages, we need to look at the area or the mode of translation we give to the people.

The other challenge is behaviour change. I am a promoter of behavioural change. Condoms have been distributed; in every workshop we attend, people carry boxes of condoms, but nobody seems to use them. So, where do they go at the end of the day? In the night, it is only two people to make the decision either to use the condom or not. Many of you here are adults and you will agree with me that when you use the condom the first and second time, then the partner begins asking, “Don’t you trust me?” and the third round, you are back to the original state and there we get HIV/AIDS.

Mr Speaker, I also want to talk about children who are born with HIV/AIDS. When they grow up, naturally these children have to get friends and they have to become men or women at a certain stage in life. How do we prepare such children? It was not their fault that they got HIV/AIDS; it was through the actions of their parents. So, that group is there, and remember that now in Uganda the youth are many and many of them are living with HIV/AIDS. So, I think when we talk about the trust fund, it must define the areas that it is going to fund. Again, I want to support the motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.41
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. At the beginning when the epidemic of AIDS started, people feared but with time, people now take things for granted; it is now called flu, not HIV/AIDS. Now once you contract HIV, ARVs are there for people to take. So I think we need to revive the issue of sensitisation. Everywhere we go, we must tell people that AIDS is still there and can still kill; that is very important to revive. If we do not talk about it, people will think AIDS is no longer there.

Secondly, ARVs must be made available; without them, our people die. If you take them today and tomorrow you miss out, then the body becomes resistant to them. I understand we have a factory here in Luzira that manufactures ARVS. Is that factory working? Why do we lack these drugs? Is it for lack of money? It is very important that we make these drugs available. I support the idea of having a fund in place so that we can have ready money to buy AIDS drugs instead of depending on donors. 

Mr Speaker, why has our HIV/AIDS Bill stayed for too long? I remember one time we debated this together with some NGOs. Some HIV/AIDS people were resistant and they said that this Bill is not good. However, there is no way we can operate without an Act in place. When you go for malaria treatment, the first thing for the doctor to do is to know your status. It is for the good of the patient that they are tested. So, nobody should resist the Bill; let us support it because without the Bill we cannot do much. So, I call upon our people to take care because HIV/AIDS can still kill. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.44
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In supporting this motion, I am terribly disturbed by the figure indicated here that 70 per cent of our budget for this department is from donor contributions. I am wondering what contingency arrangements Government has if the donors one day chose to drop their contribution towards HIV/AIDS treatment and prevention in this country. If they wake up one day and say, “we are no longer contributing anything”, what shall we do? It happened recently and I am worried such a situation can occur any day. So, do we have any contingency arrangement? I think it is high time that Government considers very seriously what to do with this 70 per cent because it is too huge a figure. They support millions of people in Uganda; what would happen if they chose not to fund them?

My second observation is about funding religious institutions that play a very important role in efforts to weave the moral fabric. These institutions have been trying to mobilise resources from their followers, from the flock, but as they continue to seek funds from the flock, the flock have been running away from churches. The consequence is that they are preaching to empty chairs on Sundays. I feel that the experience in other countries like Germany and Malaysia where Government provide direct support in form of budgets to religious institutions should be something to emulate in Uganda. At least make some modest – (Member timed out_).

1.46
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to add my voice to the previous speakers and say that AIDS is an enemy and we should all mobilise our people to fight this enemy. From the information available, it seems AIDS has reorganised. We thought that we had won the battle, but it seems AIDS has reorganised and we need to reorganise ourselves. 

On the resolutions proposed and submitted by the mover, I would like to add that the government, through the Ministry of Education, and religious institutions, the media and all political leaders should be the commanders in this war against this enemy, AIDS. The Ministry of Education has a big role to play. You will agree with me that what we learnt when we were in primary school still lives in our minds. So, if the syllabus can deliberately include the teaching about HIV/AIDS - how it is acquired and how it can be fought - then it can be a big step in the fight against this enemy. 

The media is letting us down. If you observe what goes out in our media today, it leaves a lot to be desired. If the media can be controlled from giving these obscene messages and pictures and they give a coordinated message that can be regularly given out, then it can also go a long way in fighting the spread of AIDS. 

Mr Speaker, religious institutions should all be given a clear message to give to all people of Uganda. Now that we are going on recess, we should go with a clear message to give to our children and our people so that we can rejuvenate the war against this enemy.

1.48
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. It is important. However, it is unfortunate that as we are debating about this issue, the line ministers of health are not present in the House. I think in future, we need to see them here so that they can note some important issues being raised by Members. 

Mr Speaker, I want to assure this House that the problem of HIV/AIDS in this country is not sensitisation - since 1987, when I was still in primary school, everybody has been talking about HIV/AIDS – but the problem is funding. When you look at the programmes for HIV/AIDS in this country, they are being funded by donors, and that is why we have a problem of sustainability with some of these programmes. 

We want the Government of Uganda to come out and support the programmes on HIV/AIDS so that we are sure of sustainability. You find that you have a programme being run by a donor but within five years after it has ended, the programme ends. This is the problem, and the government should come out on it. To say that the problem is sensitisation is wrong; I think we need funding. Let the minister tell us whether there is money to fund some of these activities. 

Lastly, the messages that we transmit as leaders are confusing. On 1st December, the messages were different –(Member timed out_)

1.51
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for the motion, which I rise to support. I have three issues to raise concerning this motion. 

We agree, in principle, that HIV/AIDS is a multifaceted problem and, therefore, it has various ramifications on our society. I would like us to imagine whether AIDS is only a health problem, and I think this is where we have a very big problem. My sense is that the Ministry of Health is overwhelmed with the problem of HIV/AIDS. Reflecting on the debate Members have had here, and with due respect, Mr Speaker, it is very clear that the debate is scattered over issues ranging from palliative care, treatment, messaging. If the minister was here, I am very sure I would have spoken in the same manner. The concern then is that, is AIDS only a health problem? I think this is causing a challenge on how best to mainstream HIV/AIDS. 

Mr Speaker, I am all for a small government and even for a small Parliament but if the President came up and said he is going to have a minister dedicated to HIV/AIDS, I would pass that minister without hesitation, of course in exchange for any of the other ministries. (Interjections) I am not referring to colleagues here; their jobs are safe. Seriously, if that were the case, maybe it would have been easier for us to mainstream HIV/AIDS in our country. 

Just this year, when we were debating the health budget, I remember raising a matter on the funding of the Uganda AIDS Commission, which is under the presidency. Members were at pains to accept the fact that we could raise their budget because they had lots of unfunded priorities, and I thought there was a problem. Right now, we do not know, given the aid cut by our partners, how much of the realignment by the – (Member time out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I am trying to say is that, how much of the realignment of the finances now available by the Ministry of Finance will reflect into cuts in the health budget? I believe if we would like to mainstream this problem, there must be a dedicated institution in total control. If you cannot control, then you cannot influence; which is why the messages are various. Whoever has some money from wherever has their own message and that is a problem. I think shall not make headway unless we clearly mainstream the problem and have a new bearing to the problem. I thank you.

1.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Flavia Nabugere): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I agree that there has been an increase in the HIV/AIDS prevalence and this is attributed, in part, to the laxity in the perception of HIV/AIDS and its impact. It is sad that initial counsel on HIV, such as abstinence, being faithful, has been overtaken by approaches that are friendlier to sexual liberty such as use of condoms, including testing, which in my view means exposure to more infection and has implications for the spread. 

The other point is that those who are already HIV positive tread a delicate balance between good health and ill health. Apart from the recommendation for funding and also funding ARVs, increased education and sensitisation, there is need to have some other approaches in the perception of these health phenomena. 

There is need to ensure a healthy environment in order to reduce on the opportunities for those who are already HIV positive to get other opportunistic infections. Therefore, I wish to urge colleagues to sensitise their constituents to maintain the integrity of the environment by avoiding acts that lead to deforestation, encroachment on water bodies and water sources, which lead to pollution of such water sources and thus contribute to the high prevalence of infection and compromise the health of the people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want to make the final statement?

1.57
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have only three minutes.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay. I want to emphasise one point, and that is to appreciate the concerns of colleagues and the specific words of the acting Leader of the Opposition on the need to strengthen the capacity of the Uganda AIDS Commission, which is the coordinating agency and is being housed in the Office of President. The reason is so that it should coordinate with other sectors and not the health sector alone.

There is one point I want to interest you in. Before you conclude whether it is an issue of funding or of conflicting messages, I think we should call for more study. There are scientists and doctors here who understand very well what epidemiologists do; they study trends especially of behaviour. How come when we achieved almost no prevalence, when our campaigns worked in the late 1980s, we did not have as much amount of financing as we have now, including donor money?

I think there is also this general complacency, general relaxation, among all actors. I think we must also study and understand the relationships between people’s behaviour and their welfare. How come the more people tend to be fine, the more they tend to think of more partners, to an extent that even if you continue to churn out your ABC messages, they are regarded as adverts for Rwenzori Mineral Water, which moved from being informative to being just entertainment? We need to understand why people are becoming stubborn. Why aren’t the messages working anymore? Is it because of the frequency of how they are being run? Is it because of the unnecessary adversarial relationships between the advocates of abstinence and the advocates of condom use; or is that people do not just think that AIDS is a threat?

Mr Speaker, when I lost my mother – she succumbed to arthritis – I said how I wish she had got HIV because I felt HIV is less of a burden than arthritis or cancer. So, there is this general relaxation. People fear other diseases more than HIV.

Yes, it is good to have a fund, and I support that, but we must first of all study the trends of the new infections. Are they for the young people, but research shows it is now mainly among the married! So, what does that tell you? Is it because there is more confusion – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Mover of the motion, I do not think you have any more contributions to make on this except to allow me subject this motion to a vote.

Okay, are we going to vote clause by clause, or do we just adopt the motion as proposed in the heading? Okay, honourable members, the motion is for Parliament to urge Government and other key players to take stringent measures in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS. The specific prayers in the motion are five. I will now start with the first one: “That Government considers establishing an HIV/AIDS trust fund to provide adequate and sustainable local funding for the epidemic response.” There is an amendment from the honourable member for Ntenjeru.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, thank you so much. The amendment should read as follows: “Government considers increasing funding and establishing an HIV/AIDS trust fund” and so on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal is to insert the phrase “increasing funding”. Is that acceptable to the mover of the motion? Okay, I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The second prayer is that “Ministry of Health and the Uganda AIDS Commission design and standardise messages with positive effects as a means of disseminating HIV/AIDS information.” I put the question to –

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, when I was submitting, I proposed that the Ministry of Education or Government should include these messages in the primary schools syllabi. If you can properly guide, Mr Speaker, I propose as follows: “The Ministry of Health and Uganda AIDS Commission design and standardise messages with positive effects as a means of disseminating HIV/AIDS information, which should be included in the school syllabi.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we have this included in the school syllabi? Can it be a separate prayer, standing on its own? Can we pass this before I ask the mover to craft a stand-alone clause to take care of this?

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose more information to the amendment. The amendment is that, “The information should be in an accessible form to all people including people with disability.” That is important because if you put those messages on the screen, I will not read them. If you do not draft messages in sign language, deaf people will not understand them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is appropriate. So, it will now read as follows: “The Ministry of Health and Uganda AIDS Commission design and standardise messages with positive effects as a means of disseminating HIV/AIDS information in accessible forms to all people including people with disabilities.”  Are we agreeable to that?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, Ministry of Health and Uganda AIDS Commission are not the only actors. So, I would like to add the component of “all stakeholders” like the civil society organisations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are talking about standardised messages, not so?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want it to be open, because how can they all standardise the messages? We are saying that somebody should provide leadership in standardising these messages.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, but we can say this: “Ministry of Health and the Uganda AIDS Commission, in collaboration with all other stakeholders…” If you do not do that, the other independent actors will issue what they feel –(Interruption).

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think that sounds superfluous and I think it is already implied in here. We do not have to mention it since we are talking about standardising. It is implied in here that you can consult anyone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes; how do you standardise without consulting all the others, honourable minister?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the biggest debate in the anti-HIV/AIDS crusade is different actors giving different messages; unless you are saying that the law that is coming or the one that is already there will compel all the other actors and players to take on the messages of the Ministry of Health. But if it is just a resolution urging everybody, I may not be the best draftsperson but we could bring in an explicit provision that recognises the input of other stakeholders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but the honourable member for Ntenjeru is saying it is redundant or implied. However, for the avoidance of any doubt, would it harm the recommendation if we say, “The Ministry of Health and the Uganda AIDS Commission, in collaboration with other stakeholders, design and standardise messages with a positive effect as a means of disseminating HIV/AIDS information in accessible forms to all people including people with disabilities.” Would there be a problem with that?

MS BOONA: I have a question, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not need a question here, just make your submission.

MS BOONA: It is something to do with the phraseology and I am looking at the word “standardising”. If we look at the church, it will not preach condoms. The church has its own message and the Minister of Health has a different message. So, when we talk of “standardising”, are we talking about uniformity? Is the church going to say, “All the youth in this church, can you go and use condoms to fight HIV”? The Ministry of Health is talking about circumcision but when you circumcise, it does not mean you are free and cannot get AIDS. So what do we mean by “standardising”? Are we talking of uniformity, the same message everywhere? What do we mean?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding would be that there would be a standard set of messages and you pick the one that you are comfortable with.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The brief information I just wanted to give hon. Boona is that there is a national policy on HIV/AIDS that is coordinated by Uganda AIDS Commission and Ministry of Health. Therefore, the responsibility we are giving is that Uganda AIDS Commission and Ministry of Health must ensure that all the actors comply with the national policy, which is agreed on, so that you do not get an organisation in Kanungu giving its own message, which conflicts with the national policy on HIV/AIDS. This is so that everything conforms to what has been agreed upon as a country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to resolution No. 2 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three, “Political leaders, especially MPs, go down to their constituencies and mobilise other leaders to participate in sensitising the masses about HIV/AIDS”.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to amend No. 3, if it is acceptable to the mover, to say that “All HIV/AIDS messages be integrated as part of communications by all leaders while communicating to the people they lead.” This is because as it stands now this would need finances and yet when you integrate the message in all leaders’ communications whenever they are communicating to the people they lead, it does not need any finances.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think three is talking generally about HIV/AIDS; it is not about carrying the message as designed by the Ministry of Health. This is about a politician going to the constituency and talking about it and not about a standard message. I think there is a distinction between the two.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to bring in the element of cultural and religious leaders here. We must highlight these leaders and say “cultural, religious and political leaders, especially MPs”. That is my amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Suppose we just say, “all leaders at all levels participate in sensitising the masses about HIV/AIDS”, would that capture it?

MR KYEYUNE: Yes, Mr Speaker, but it would sound better if we conclude by saying that as leaders, we must lead by example.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not in a resolution. I put the question to 3 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Resolution 4, “Government urges employers, both public and private, to establish HIV/AIDS information desks to provide information and counselling services.”

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The amendment I would like to bring here is that we should urge Government to come up with policy guidelines on mainstreaming HIV/AIDS by both private and public employers. When you say “a desk” what does a desk do? “Mainstreaming” means they are duty bound to even include that in their budgets. I do not know how the phrase will appear but I would rather that we have a policy on mainstreaming as a guide to private and public employers.

MR KYAKA: The information I want to give to the honourable colleague is that he has really brought out a very good point, but we should go beyond the policy; let us directly say that “Government urges employers, both public and private, to mainstream...” When you mainstream, that means you are going to have an HIV/AIDS policy in place, you are going to have a desk, a focal person and counselling services. Mainstreaming embraces even the HIV/AIDS policy, so let us be direct and say that these organisations mainstream.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: State the amendment properly.

MR KYAKA: “Government urges employers, both public and private, to mainstream HIV/AIDS in their organisations.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that capture it properly?

MS MARY NALUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I am of the same view as my brother who talked about the policy because when you talk about the HIV/AIDS workplace policy, you are talking about the non-discrimination of a worker, the treatment of that worker who is sick and so on. So I think we should add on the policy other than the information alone.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the best of my understanding, the HIV policy is there, and actually hon. Baryomunsi alluded to it, but it is not being operationalized or followed. So we should urge Government to follow up this policy, and that is why I buy the amendment that all these departments, both private and public, should mainstream HIV/AIDS issues in their activities. Otherwise, the policy is there. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, mainstreaming is a general statement which is already contained in the AIDS policy. I thought that the mover wanted to be more specific, that he would want to come to Parliament and find an AIDS desk there or to any other institution and finds an AIDS desk, which provides counselling and so on. When we begin to generalise, we shall have killed the spirit of this. 

MS KYABANGI: I want to agree with hon. Lugoloobi’s suggestion, but I would like to add that government urges employers and health centres, both public and private, to have those desks.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, if we just provide a desk, I think that is quite limiting. Mainstreaming is more encompassing. If, for instance, we say we mainstream HIV/AIDS within the work of Parliament, we would expect the counselling services, condoms distributed maybe in the toilets, and there should be a policy to treat those who are HIV positive within Parliament. So, it goes beyond just establishing a desk. 

I think the intention of the policy is to mainstream and ensure that through the work of an institution like Parliament, HIV/AIDS cuts across, whether on information or counselling or treatment and other aspects of managing HIV/AIDS. So I think “mainstreaming” is a better word. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, “Government urges employers, both public and private, to mainstream HIV/AIDS in their work places.” Do you agree with this?

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find the word “urging” not compelling enough. It is as if we are begging – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the normal language of resolutions.

MS NAMBOOZE: Yes, Mr Speaker, but I would prefer if we used a stronger word which is more compelling than just “urging”. When we are moving motions, we urge Government because we know that Government may not be in position to do that thing at the time. But when it comes to employers, we want to find a stronger word like Government “directs” employers –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Government directs employers, both public and private...” You want to substitute the word “urges” with the word “directs”. I will put the question to that proposal that Government directs employers both public and private to mainstream – 

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, I would like to support the use of the word Government “directs” because when we use the word “directs”, then Government will make sure that it follows up. For the many years that Government has said “mainstream HIV/AIDS”, I have not seen a follow-up from Government in any institution seeking to see whether they are implementing it or operationalizing it. So when we use the word “directs”, I think the onus is on both the actors and Government to take action. So, I support that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “Government directs employers, both public and private, to mainstream HIV/AIDS in their work places.” I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last one is, “The Committee of Health expedites the scrutiny of the HIV/AIDS Bill and reports to the House.” I put that question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had proposed an amendment but my proposal becomes a standalone. I have the following submission: “The ministry responsible for Education introduces into the curriculum for primary and secondary schools HIV/AIDS education to help learners acquire skills, knowledge and attitudes that enable them to survive the risks involved with HIV/AIDS infection.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Suppose you just say, “The ministry responsible for Education incorporates HIV/AIDS in the curriculum to...” 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Yes, to teach them how HIV/AIDS is acquired and how it can be avoided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just say, “...incorporates HIV/AIDS in the curriculum to create awareness.” 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform you that already that is part of the curriculum. We should make a resolution urging the ministry maybe to improve on how it is taught, but it is already part of the curriculum. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I have a problem there. I do prep with my children who are in primary school every night and I have not seen anything related to that. They do arithmetic, English, social studies – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe they have not reached there yet. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: No, I have children from primary 1 up to 7; it is not included. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Issues to do with the curriculum need to be handled cautiously. We have heard from the Government Chief Whip that it is already catered for in the curriculum. Maybe what is lacking is the implementation and examination. However, you may find that in one way or the other it is disseminated; for example, you may find they have clubs of that form. It would not be right for us to sit here and start formulating a resolution and a motion for students to be equipped with skills; skills to do what? It is wider than we think. Also, since it is catered for, we should concentrate on the implementation of what is already there in the schools.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that in schools there is already a reproductive health programme. Actually, this is part of re-packaging. In schools we are not going to talk about HIV/AIDS specifically; the package is reproductive health. The course through which somebody acquires HIV/AIDS is through different issues that involve reproductive health, but it is not examinable. We can only try to amend hon. Mwesigye’s proposal by trying to make sure that the Ministry of Education and Sports tries to enhance or put in place measures to see that all school programmes to do with reproductive health are active.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I would support hon. Col (Rtd) Mwesigye. If we are saying it is in the curriculum, most of us are parents; who would love to see a child who is not knowledgeable about HIV/AIDS? If we really want to make sure that we not only control but prevent, I think schools and homes are places that these children should be able to access this information with even deterrent measures as hon. Obua said. 

I also do some homework with a few of my children but I have not seen this. If you say it is in school, if it is not examinable then they have not attached much value to it. I hear some people murmuring-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is the honourable House.

MR OBOTH: Much obliged. Mr Speaker, I am only praying that we see how to harmonise. If we can be able to let the minister fast track the implementation of the HIV/AIDS information in the curriculum, it would be better. We want to see that our children are informed, not the sex education which I know is going on and not the placards that they put up that “AIDS kills” but we want to see that they know about HIV/AIDS. We want to see it being taught thoroughly, not as a subject but it could be a topic.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like they teach about whooping cough, diarrhoea and things like this.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I have heard something arising from the debate from colleagues about having this whole idea examinable, and I think there is a very big problem there because schools are supposed to provide vocational skills to our children. I find this should have been one of those vocational skills; health as a vocational skill. 

I do not think that in our recommendation to the ministry or whoever is supposed to undertake this recommendation, we should really have a tinge of compelling them to make this examinable. We shall be losing what we would like to capture because this is information for survival but not for passing exams. I do not know whether we are really moving well if we veer into examinations. Are we right on track?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the Government Chief Whip is right when she says that issues of HIV/AIDS and reproductive health are in the curriculum, but the worry as expressed is that they are not examinable. So, even the coursework which teachers give the children are about examinable subjects. That is why you will not find your child having questions on HIV/AIDS. 

There was presidential directive on communication on HIV/AIDS, which is being implemented through rallies and assemblies at school. What they do now is that they just call an assembly and address children. I think our recommendation should be that the ministry ensures that there is implementation of the curriculum in terms of teaching the children HIV/AIDS and other reproductive health issues in the classroom, which is not being done-(Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, what the honourable colleague is talking about is very right. What is happening in schools today is passing on messages, which messages are generic in nature. If you have worked with teachers in this country, today teachers do not have time to think of packaging information that should be passed on to their children. When you look at PIASCY messages, they are already made. A teacher goes to assembly, reads the message out and leaves the children without any knowledge about HIV. Whether the language is tough for the children, whether the children do not understand English, the teacher goes ahead and reads a message specifically for that day and goes away. So, children are not picking the information on HIV/AIDS the right way they should. 

I would support colleagues who are saying that something must be done to make sure that the passing on of information about HIV/AIDS is more effective and better catered for maybe in the sciences and other related curricula. Thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: She is right, Mr Speaker. If I am speaking to P1 children and then P7 children, the message I will give on HIV/AIDS will be different because you have to segment it to the age group. Therefore, what we need to do is to ensure that the curriculum which is already provided should be implemented so that HIV/AIDS is taught in the classroom. So, our resolution should be on that, that we urge the ministry -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it should be implemented in a differentiated way so that it takes care of all the age groups. Can somebody then propose?  Chief Whip, would you like to propose and we close.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to propose that our amendment should do with reviewing the messages because the PIASCY messages have been around for over 10 years but things have changed. So, there is need to review the messages and segment messages according to age.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support what Dr Baryomunsi has said, that it actually be included in the curriculum and be taught. It may not be examinable but it can be taught as he articulated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Chief Whip said it is already in the curriculum.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: But it is not being taught. They are simply passing messages at parade.

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am a teacher by profession and I am also in the business of education. I even teach and I do homework with my children. I am saying, it is included in the curriculum but it is not examined and the messages are not very appropriate to what is happening now. So, there is need to review those messages and to review the curriculum especially to do with that part and then give messages at appropriate ages or level of education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is in the curriculum requires review. I think it comes back to the point made by the honourable Col Mwesigye.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would suggest that even before we talk about equipping the pupils and students, we would also talk about the teachers while at their training colleges. Are we sure that our training colleges for teachers equip them with these messages so that they can pass over the same messages to their pupils and students? 

Most probably, if we do not target the teachers for training first, we would find that at the end of the day they would not be able to give the right information to the pupils, in view of the very fact that AIDS can hardly be talked about without talking about sex, which is a very delicate subject, particularly when talking to children. So, I would suggest that we improve the suggestion of hon. Mwesigye to even include targeting the teacher training colleges.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The syllabus is comprehensive. It covers everything.
 
DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would go with the proposal by the Chief Whip just because when you look at the curriculum in the schools, it is true that even before that directive, HIV/AIDS was being taught. Unfortunately, it is taught under development or the subject of science. Now, if you look at the curriculum of primary schools, when do they begin teaching science - the human body and so on? It may begin maybe at a later stage in primary schools. Now, where do we leave children in pre-primary to about Primary 4 or 5? I think what the Chief Whip was talking about here is about reviewing. How do you review this so that it influences the culture or habits of a child to talk about HIV?  

It is not examined because when you look at the papers, they just ask what HIV is in full, how is it spread and how it affects the body. All these are taught but does this convey a message that is relevant for the spirit that we are talking about here? I think it is important that we review the curriculum so that what we are talking about starts right from the lower levels of education.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I should not have got up again but I think we are mixing up a few things.  We are on the right track, we are agreeing, but the truth is that the dissemination of information at assemblies cannot constitute what is in the curriculum. So, we want to take it from the assemblies to the classrooms. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why the Chief Whip is saying we review the curriculum and not the messages. 

MR OBOTH: You cannot review what has not yet even been implemented. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe because of the weakness in the implementation. 

MR OBOTH: If we go by just reviewing, I have no problem, but from the general assemblies and meetings, peer education to classrooms and cutting across through all other areas, I think this is one way; the earlier we initiate our children and they access this information, the better for this country. This is the only thing this Parliament can do in the right direction towards sensitisation. 

Whom do you go to sensitise? In other clubs, you state it and people are closing their ears. But if you make it a subject or a topic, somebody, for purposes of even just passing, will be able to get the knowledge. From information to passing of knowledge; that is what I am talking about.
 
MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We seem to be on the same page because all of us are concerned. Whether you call it education, sensitisation, examination, we are saying it has not reached the level where it should be. We may say that it is not being implemented but I do not imagine any teacher who will be teaching sexually transmitted diseases either in primary school or in O’ Level without mentioning AIDS. 

Mr Speaker, those who are in the teaching profession know that when you are teaching, there must be a source, unless you have authored a book. In this case, all the authors have said something little about AIDS in their publications and, therefore, these teachers will be getting what they are teaching from these sources. Have we, for example, asked ourselves why it is not included among the killer diseases, so that we have seven? You know the author said the killer diseases are six and, therefore, the teacher will base on that to teach our young ones, that we have six killer diseases, even though we know that AIDS is a killer disease.  So, this goes back to research. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to assert that we should not do away with assemblies because I remember when we were in O’ level, at one time we were told at assembly that the best way not to catch AIDS if you are a boy is to say to a beautiful girl, “I was almost loving you but the problem I have with you is that you have AIDS.” Equally so, a girl should say, “You boy, I was almost really loving you but you have AIDS.” That was a message at our assembly and this message was very serious. So, all I am saying is that all the forms, whether in class, at assemblies, in drama, everywhere, we need them to be strengthened. So, I support the reviewing.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are talking about two things. One is about the messages that are being given out at various levels. I do agree that those messages should be reviewed and synchronised to have some kind of meaning to the various levels of our population. I am looking at the various age groups of our children. 

Two, there is a gap in the methodology of delivering these messages. I think that is why Col Mwesigye is insisting that it should be taught in the classroom. I completely agree with him on that; let it be taught in details and not just as “the six killer diseases.” HIV/AIDS is really a unique disease, which we should handle. Therefore, I would propose to amend or improve hon. Mwesigye’s amendment so that the HIV/AIDS messages should be reviewed to suit the various age groups and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is talking about the curriculum and not just the messages. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, that is part b, which is talking about the curriculum.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you can put both the messages and the review together; you can review both of them.
  
MS KABAKUMBA:  Yes.

MR KWEMERA: I would like to inform my colleague that when we talk about a curriculum, it also includes the content. So, when you talk about a curriculum, you are talking about content, methods and the aids. So, the messages are part of the content. When you talk of reviewing the curriculum, impliedly you are also talking about the messages.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can you now propose substituting the word “messages” with the word “curriculum” and we see what happens.

MS KABAKUMBA:  I would like to propose that Government, through the Ministry of Education, reviews the curriculum in aspects related to HIV/AIDS.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Reviews the curriculum in aspects related to HIV/AIDS


MS KABUKAMBA: Yes. That is one. Two – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is it. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Once the curriculum is reviewed, we assume it will be taught at all levels. I rest my case. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can somebody state it properly so that we can capture it? Can you restate it now, now that you have got it properly? 

MRS KABAKUMBA: That we do urge Government, through the Minister of Education, to review the education curriculum to include HIV/AIDS in all education institutions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that Government and other key players be urged to take stringent measures in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to the end of this particular matter.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I can see that now in the House we have the Minister for Kampala, we have our Chief Whip, we even have the chief petitioner who is also the Shadow Minister for Local Government and the House is fairly well attended. Our Leader of Government Business is also here. 

Mr Speaker, I fully respect the earlier decision we made, but I beg to seek your indulgence on this matter - the report we presented on Kampala Capital City Authority and Pioneer Easy Bus. Today this is a very serious and contentious issue in Kampala. There is a lot of anxiety among all the stakeholders, including the local governments neighbouring KCCA and also the commuters. Recently, you are aware of a strike by the bus company to lay down their tools. Kampala City Council Authority itself is saying they are waiting for guidance from this House. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and the indulgence of the entire House that we proceed to debate this matter. I think it will help to give guidance as we proceed to recess so that we do not leave a very big vacuum in terms of guidance on this critical service delivery.  Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason we had deferred debate on this matter is because the request was made that the people representing those areas are not in the House and we needed to have a comprehensive debate on this matter because it affects many people. Also, there are issues of the constitution of the House. The way it is constituted now, it might not be proper to handle it. 

I think what we can say is that there are remedial or interim measures that you should take, now that the minister is here, in respect of what the committee has proposed, to deal with the situation for now until Parliament eventually passes these particular recommendations of the committee. We cannot go back on that guidance I gave at the beginning so that it is handled comprehensively because I do not think we are constituted in a way that we can give it a very fair debate and conclusion. 

So, I think we will stick by the old guidance but also now request the minister to see how we can, in the meantime, try to harmonise certain things. The committee recommendations are out there published. We can look through them and see which ones we can take on and run with until the House comes back and debates this matter more comprehensively. Is that a fair way to handle this? 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek guidance from you. Most of the time, when we raise petitions here there are interim measures which are agreed upon by Parliament, but they are published in the newspapers and there is no official communication between Parliament and the concerned organisations or institutions. So, when you go and raise it with them, that Parliament resolved this in the meantime, those people will say that they cannot depend on the media. We want official communication to that effect. 

The guidance I am seeking now, Mr Speaker, is how do we proceed with such issues? Specifically, I still have about three petitions before this Parliament; one is about the eviction of vendors in Mukono and another one about the management of Kampala Capital City Authority. There were some prayers which were made in the interim and it was resolved by this House but no official communication has been made. In circumstances likes this one, where does the communication come from? Does it come from the Office of the Clerk? Does it come from the chairperson of the concerned committee? I do not know, Mr Speaker. This is the guidance I am seeking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is resolved by the House, the communications come from the Clerk and it is published. I always receive copies of these resolutions. Once we have passed them here, they are extracted, signed, sealed and distributed. That is what happens. The person to go to is the office of the Clerk. But for this particular one, we have not come to any decision. So, we are asking the minister to take responsible steps looking at the recommendations from the committee in the interim while we come back and deal with this matter more comprehensively. Okay? I think that is fair.

Let us have the honourable member for Okoro. He had a matter to raise.

2.54
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a statement on a matter of urgent and public importance under our Rules of Procedure, rule 45(1). 

On Sunday, 2 December 2012, one of our prominent businessmen was returning from his place of work in Paidha Town Council in Okoro County, Zombo District, to his home at Nyapea. On the way, he was ambushed by some thugs and murdered. 

On Friday, Paidha policemen arrested some of the alleged murderers and took them to Paidha Police Station. When the relatives learnt of the arrest, they mobilised themselves with other people and came to the police station wanting to lynch the six suspects. The Police got frightened. Thinking that the mob would overpower the Police and therefore lynch the suspects, they first of all used tear gas and then fired in the air to disperse the people. Unfortunately, when the mob became rowdy, they started firing live bullets into the crowd, injuring four people who are right now whimpering at Nyapea Hospital where they are admitted. These people are: Jaswa Samuel, Onegiu Andhaim, Odaga Michael and Adamu Richard. All of them are from Paidha Town Council. 

First of all, I would like to thank the Police for arresting these people within the shortest time possible. However, my concern is not the murder per se of Innocent, the man who was murdered, but the way the Police acted in controlling the mob by firing live bullets into the crowd. They should have stopped the use of tear gas and maybe used rubber bullets. My prayer is that next time the Police should act humanly when controlling such mobs and refrain from firing live bullets into the crowds.

I urge the Police and Government to take responsibility and pay the hospital bills for the four people who are now languishing and whimpering in pain at Nyapea Hospital. These are poor people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, please state it clearly. Do not start elaborating. There are people in front here who will respond to you.

MR OMWONYA: Okay, that is one of my prayers. Lastly, I urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate this issue and at an appropriate time, make a statement on the Floor of this House. Mr Speaker, I beg to state. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of Government Business, there is this situation in Zombo. Please - 

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I am sorry to hear that that incident occurred. I can only say at this time that I will ask the minister responsible, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to cause investigations to be carried out immediately and indeed bring a report to Parliament as soon as possible. We will look into what may have gone wrong, if anything, and take corrective measures. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The sick in hospital?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I said we will look at what may have gone wrong and take corrective measures. This is overall, including everybody.

MR OMWONYA: Mr Speaker, I think the Prime Minister is just trying to avoid responsibility. What I am appealing for is – because these people are already in the hospital and the bills are accumulating. We are urging Government to immediately look into assisting these people with the payment of their hospital bills. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Zombo District, do you have a matter to supplement?  
 
3.01
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo):  Mr Speaker, I would like to supplement in a way that this is a season where there is a lot of violence –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable, what is the supplementary point being raised? 

MS KWIYUCWINY: During the Christmas season like this, there are many killings. Even last year, we had killings. Now this year, there have been killings again starting with this prominent businessman and we yet do not have a district police station. During this time in Kampala, the streets are beefed up with Police yet we, in the rural areas, do not have enough Police to survey to prevent crime. I ask that Government gives us enough policemen to survey the rural areas during this season so that we can bring down the rate of murders and other crimes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a new matter, honourable member for Zombo.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I take full note of that reasonable request and I will pass it on to the relevant authorities to ensure maximum security in all parts of the country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, thank you for sitting this long and this far. We started early. 

I have communication about what will go on from today in relation to the mourning which this House is in, arising from the death of the father of the Rt Hon. Speaker. Today, we have a service at Namirembe Cathedral at 6.00 p.m. Please, let us join the Speaker and her family at church. Tomorrow, we have service at 10 O’clock at Balawoli Church of Uganda in Kamuli District. Please, those of you who can make it tomorrow for this service, come. On Monday, the burial will be at Mbulamuti, starting at 12 O’clock. Please, let us join the Speaker during this moment of grief. There will be transport. Details of the transport arrangements will be communicated. The Parliamentary Commission is working on those details and you will get messages on your phones. Please, respond accordingly.

Finally, there was a party which had been arranged for Members of Parliament to take place today, 14th. Arising from this situation, it has been postponed to next Saturday, 22nd. You can avoid everything else but please come on Saturday, 22nd and let us see how we say goodbye to this particular year, where we have been engaged in very many issues, and see if we can tone down. That will be Saturday, 22nd. There will be a party hosted by the Parliamentary Commission and the Clerk. Please, come back and do this. 

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I felt that being the end of the year, I should, on behalf of Government, say something. 

I would like to extend my congratulations and the congratulations of Government as a whole and its gratitude for your contributions and hard work towards the work and business of the House this calendar year, 2012. Suffice to add that a number of sectors, as stipulated in the government manifesto, have been addressed during the course of duty and mandate of this House to perform mainly three functions: legislation, representation and oversight. As you know - (Interruption)

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It appears the Leader of Government Business is reading a statement. It has been the practice in this House that whenever statements are being read, we get copies. Is it procedurally right, therefore, that we go on in this way when the Leader of Government Business is reading a very important statement from Government and we do not have copies? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, statements to the House are always served to the Speaker but this particular one are notes prepared by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and he is making constant references to his notes. Please, proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to thank this honourable House, under the great leadership of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, for the Bills that were presented and passed by Parliament by 13 December 2012. These are:

1. 	The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011 
2. 	The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2011 
3. 	The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011
4. 	The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 	2011
5. 	The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011
6. 	The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011
7. 	The Appropriation Bill, 2011
8. 	The Companies Bill, 2009
9. 	The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture 	Bill, 2010
10. 	The Uganda National Meteorological 	Authority Bill, 2010
11. 	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 	2007
12. 	The Petroleum (Exploration, Development 	and Production) Bill, 2012
13. 	The Companies Bill. 

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for this great job that this Parliament has accomplished this year. (Applause)

There are many Bills that are still under consideration; there are 29 of them, which are before committees at different stages of the passage of enactment that we have. Maybe I should not read them; it may not be necessary to read them. This is why I am using the notes, because of things like this. It is not a formal statement in the sense that was envisaged by the Rules of Procedure. As we go for recess, in my view the following are salient issues that need mention to our people:

First, as we close this year, 2012, we note with appreciation this Parliament’s support and hard work exhibited during the consultations, debate and eventual passing of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012. As you may all be aware, it raised quite a bit of debate both in Parliament and in the public. When I entered with steaming water that I collected from the Government side’s source of water, I received a note from a very honourable colleague of mine from the other side wondering if it was oil I was carrying. I have not replied her note yet, but I want to tell her that I really look forward to the day when the oil will come out of the ground. 

Therefore, I implore you as you go to recess to continue sensitising our constituents about Government’s commitment to put this strategic resource of this country to good use. The President’s address was very clear on this and as you said, Mr Speaker, we will be moving a motion so that the House has the opportunity to debate it fully. 

Secondly, I would like to reiterate Government’s commitment to fighting corruption in the public service. Honourable members, please assure our constituents about Government’s commitment to fighting corruption in public office. The process may take longer than we would wish, but as the President said yesterday, the fight is on. I keep telling people that what you see in the media about corruption and the pictures that emerge about the problem of corruption in Uganda are part of the fight against corruption. 
It is part of the fight against corruption to give absolute freedom to the media to talk about corruption and to have an enhanced performance of that part of this Parliament that exercises oversight, especially regarding expenditure by Government, that is, the Public Accounts Committee. Also, there is the fact that we have established history in this regime that nobody is above the law, nobody is above oversight. That is why all of us, including your very own Leader of Government Business, are always ready to appear before PAC on any question that Parliament deserves explanation. Of course, the due process has to be followed - the laid down procedures and the laws. We, therefore, call for patience and we want to assure the people that there is no doubt about our commitment to fighting this scourge in our society. 

This year, I wish to remind members that we celebrated Uganda’s Golden Jubilee - 50 years of independence. We congratulate all our constituents for this landmark achievement. The message to all of us is to continue to propel Uganda into a modern and industrialised society. 
Let us empower our constituents to know and appreciate that each one of them can make a fundamental contribution to this change. As you may all be aware, this Government has a plan to fight poverty. The President did indeed hold conferences with every district of Uganda; each area has been zoned for specific activities geared towards fighting poverty. My message, which I hope you will pass on to Ugandans, is that let us all be committed to this fight because it is possible for Uganda to totally eliminate corruption and also poverty in our midst. 

Under the oversight role of Parliament, Government commits itself to improving service delivery next year. We are mindful of the sectors that directly affect the welfare of our people – health; education; the infrastructure including the roads, railway, electricity and so on; agriculture; poverty and household income projects and programmes; water and sanitation.

On peace and security, we would like to assure the people in Uganda as a whole that the state has been rebuilt. Our capacity to maintain stability within our borders is obvious; the whole of Uganda is peaceful, from corner to corner and we are determined to contribute to the peace and stability of the region as a whole. As you know, right now Government is engaged actively in promoting peace and stability not only in Somalia but within our immediate neighbourhood, the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

On our part as leaders, we need to inform our people about these important developments and engagements with our neighbours and partners in the region outside Uganda. We need to assure them that for the first time in the history of this country, people can make long term plans because stability is assured, and we would like to tell you that it will not be threatened because we have the capacity to maintain it.

Mr Speaker, I want to wish you and all honourable colleagues a merry festive season and a prosperous new year, 2013. I hope when we come back, the Christmas season will have engendered the spirit of togetherness that in the recent debate was eroded by certain positions that some of our colleagues took. 

I had the singular honour and privilege to be received by His Holiness the Pope and I passed on the greetings of the people of Uganda as a whole, of the Christian community, in particular of the Catholic Church. The Pope sends his regards and he gave me -(Interjections)- Yes, through me. (Laughter) He sent blessings to Ugandans and he wishes all of us peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The acting Leader of the Opposition has requested for one minute to give a rejoinder. 

3.18
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I thank you most sincerely, for your indulgence. I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business for his statement. He has promised to pass on his copy after we have left this place so that we can make an official response to the issues. 

I would like to thank him for variously touching on the issues, especially those that transpired in this House. Of course, we did not like the ambush. We should have been privy to this kind of arrangement from Government so that we can also give our official point of view because I thought the Prime Minister is giving the official position of Government on a number of issues. I pray, Mr Speaker, that in future the Prime Minister is kind enough to first of all ask that we have it on the Order Paper so that we can ably prepare this kind of response. Nonetheless, if it turns out to be a culture that we are entrenching today, then next time round, we shall be ready. 

Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, just briefly, I would like to assure the Prime Minister that it has always been our desire to work with our colleagues on that side of the aisle to move forward matters of national importance. Where we had sharp disagreements, it is because we viewed things differently. It is our prayer that we try at all times to move away from our extremes and come closer to the centre and try to legislate for the sake of posterity and not for the sake of – I am talking about posterity because this country will live beyond us, and that is our prayer. 

The Leader of Government Business gave us a message to take to our constituents, which I thought was a good message, especially the one on the fight against graft. He conveniently referred to corruption in the public sector, public service especially, but it is our prayer also that official political corruption should be tackled. At an appropriate moment, we shall talk about this political corruption, and it is actually the biggest vice affecting the body politic of this country.

Of course, I would have loved to hear a message from the Prime Minister as to what we should tell our people in view of the shrinking national resource envelope, after the partners have chosen to take what belongs to them because of how we have managed this partnership. I would have loved to hear a message from him on this so that those who are direct beneficiaries from donor projects know how best they can behave themselves in the new year and bear in mind these challenges.  

Mr Speaker, of course, the Prime Minister is aware, as much as I am that the social sector enterprise is utterly corrupt in the country. The health sector, roads – We needed a message for the new year. Members have variously complained on this Floor of how services are not being properly delivered. I certainly know that we can say we are committed but there are realities which we must prepare our people for, and indeed if they must prepare for the worst, then we could have something to tell them.

I am yet to hear something from Government in regard to civil servants who have not received their pay for almost a quarter of a financial year. They never had money to pay for school fees for their children. The pensioners need a message from government. These people have not been paid for over four months. They have end-of-year obligations. The Prime Minister has wished them a happy new year full of hunger and misery. How do you make a meal without pay for four months? This is really terrible. I do not know what to tell my people on this matter; no comment on it from Government?

Lastly, on regional security, we would like to get assurance from Government, as we go into this merry-making, that our people who ply their business across borders are safe because our borders are under threat. We believe Government is totally in control and can actually tell us some truth about regional security. Forget about the usual politics about “we are in charge; we are in control” and yet the threats are actually eminent and around us.

Once again, Mr Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence and I thank the Prime Minister for this surprise gift of an end of year message, and next time we pray that you make us privy to this arrangement. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) There are issues you want to clarify?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my colleague, hon. Mpuuga, for that positive response. I think he has raised two points on which I need to comment. 

Indeed, some of our public servants have not received their pay, some of them even for more than a month, possibly even four months as he was saying. I had heard this report from my area. When I asked, I was told that the Ministry of Public Service was going through a process of sorting out, I think, suspicions of ghosts and things like that. But it appears that the ghosts are the ones who are –(Interjections)- I think the affected workers and the public at large deserve an explanation and those that have worked deserve to be paid. So, I can only assure you, colleagues, that we will take it up with the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance to make sure that this is done, and we will make a public statement about it in the course of next week.

Secondly, there is the question of what my colleague called the withdrawal of budget support by development partners. Let me again make a correction. It is not true that they have withdrawn support. What is true is that they have frozen the budget support following the revelation of the stealing of money in the office of the Prime Minister and other departments of Government as you all know. I have made a public statement on this before. Of course, this is a very serious matter; it is not only money from our development partners but also from our own taxpayers as well. 

I would like to assure you that we will come with a comprehensive statement on this to inform this House and the country on the strategic measures we are taking to protect the money entrusted to the public officials for given activities of Government. It is this that we have been discussing with development partners. We have been looking at measures that we have already taken and those that ought to be taken in order to assure everyone, including our fellow Ugandans, that the money in the public kitty is safe. As soon as this is done, my expectation is that monies will flow as had been planned. But we will come, Mr Speaker, with a comprehensive statement when the discussions we are having with them and within Government have been completed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on behalf of the management of this Parliament, on behalf of the Office of the Speaker and on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, I want to express my sincere appreciation for what you have been able to achieve this year.
 
The attendance has been remarkable, except on a few occasions where we had hitches when business could not proceed because of shortage of numbers. We are also conscious of the fact that there are constituency demands that occasionally require Members’ presence outside this House. However, on the whole, I think we have done fairly well and we should take the opportunity to congratulate ourselves for what we have been able to do. (Applause)

The new year should bring a new spirit. It is the first year we are taking a bold step into the next 50 years as we prepare to cerebrate 100 years of Uganda’s existence. We take this bold step basing on the foundations built so far with our contributions. We are not taking off from a negative point; we are taking off from somewhere as we commit ourselves to make the next 50 years even better. That is the commitment we go to our people with and it should be the commitment we will come back with from the recess. It will be about launching ourselves and this country into a higher gear for prosperity and to achieve the purposes just elaborated by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

So, we wish you, your families and constituents happy cerebrations. Have a good end of this year. Have a great Christmas. Let the new year open new opportunities so that we can engage in the furtherance of the purpose for which we exist as Parliament, acting on behalf of the people.

As I said earlier, the burial of the father of the Rt Hon. Speaker will take place on Monday, 17 December 2012 starting at 12 O’clock at Mbulamuti. The bus arranged by the Parliamentary Commission will leave Parliament parking at exactly 8 a.m. So, if you intend to travel for that burial using that bus, please be here before 8 a.m. to join the rest of the people going there.

There is a lot of business pending. So, those committees that feel it urgent that they keep doing some work while Parliament is on recess, please communicate to the Office of the Speaker in writing so that appropriate leave is granted, so that after we come back from recess, lots of it has been completed. That authority will be granted by the Office of the Speaker once requested. The House is, therefore, adjourned until Tuesday, 5 February 2013.

(The House rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 February 2013.) 
