Wednesday, 3 December 2014

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: His Excellency the Vice President and members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have two small pieces of communication: The first is that, we note with concern the terrorist attack in north-eastern Kenya, which left 70 people dead in cold blood. We want to sympathise with the people of Kenya and appeal to all concerned to ensure that terrorism ends so that we do not create more widows and orphans in the East African region. I want to invite you to stand up for one moment of silence in honour of these 70 Kenyans. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

Secondly, today is the International Day for People with Disabilities. This date was set aside to commemorate progress in breaking down the barriers, opening doors and realising an equitable society for all. 

I want to congratulate the people with disabilities in Uganda, especially our members of Parliament who represent them here, on attaining this day. I know that we have achieved some progress. I think we are the only Parliament in the world, which has PWDs members of Parliament but I think we still need to do more as a government to improve their access; to ensure that there are lifts everywhere, to provide for the roads, which they use and also to modify the transport at some stage. 

So, I hope that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will come up with the best strategies to enable our people to move in comfort.

The back bench Commissioners had invited you for a meeting this morning but it coincided with the NRM Caucus. So, you will be informed about another date for that meeting.

I also want to announce the Science Week organised by the Parliament of Uganda, especially the Committee of Science and Technology. They have an innovation week and they will have activities in the CHOGM Gardens from 9-12 December, 2014. 

It is intended to –

    i. provide a high-profile platform for local scientists and technology innovators to exhibit what they have innovated;
    ii. encourage job-creation through scientific and technological innovations;
    iii. enhance economic development;
    iv. promote and accelerate the use of research, innovation and applied technology;
    v. encourage adaptability of the new and local scientific knowledge and technologies;
    vi. eensitise the public on local innovations and new technology development;
    vii. enhance dialogue between Parliament, private sector and government agencies; and
    viii. demonstrate the need for increased funding to science and technology.

So, honourable members, please keep that in your diaries and visit the exhibition during that time.
3.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is on record that in this country, we lose over 3,500 people out of road carnage. The road from Jinja to Kampala, specifically from Kitigoma to Bulyantete, has very big potholes. Of recent, those potholes are responsible for the many accidents taking place on that road. The same applies to the road markings. The road from Jinja to Kampala has no road markings and if you drive on it in the night, it is more or less a death trap. 

So, Madam Speaker, given the statistics of people who die as a result of road carnage in this country, I know that since the Government Chief Whip comes from the East to her place of work or any minister in Government, if the ungodly thing occurred, we would have to spend a lot in a state burial. I am making an appeal that Government urgently attends to that situation. Thank you.
 
3.06
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Thursday, the people of Buliisa-Bugungu woke up to a shock that whereas we are preparing and waiting for the Government Development Plan, we realised that about 48 herd of cattle had again sneaked into Buliisa without a single movement permit. This matter was handled by the last Parliament, by Government, by the President and by courts up to the Supreme Court. We thought it was settled but unfortunately, they have come back. I want to thank the DPC and the new RDC who have worked with the community and managed to turn back about 300 animals and arrested about 240. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make two requests: One is that this impunity will only be stopped if the report of the select committee of Parliament, which was put here during the last Parliament but whose work was shelved by this Parliament and has never seen the light, is heard. Can this report be tabled so that all the injustice therein is dealt with?

Secondly, we are trying to prosecute these people in court for movement without permits but already the police officers involved are getting calls from Kampala to the effect that they should not produce them before court. I would like support from the Judiciary because last time, all levels of prosecution were denied, including where they were caught with arms and where they were being taken for lack of movement permits. Can we, this time round, get justice and this people are penalised once and for all? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.09
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. In December 2012, over 30,000 people were evicted from Kyangwali in the parish called Bukinda for purportedly being in the area of refugee land as said by Government. 

Madam Speaker, when these people were evicted, I brought this matter to the attention of Government because they were suffering. There was no food everywhere in the sub-county, over five people died and their houses were destroyed. 

The then Prime Minister constituted an inter-ministerial committee that comprised of the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Lands, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and the Minister of Bunyoro Affairs. We handled the issues to the extent that the government apologised to the people because they had done what was not supposed to be done in that situation.

Madam Speaker, even when a directive was made by that inter-ministerial committee for these people to return to their land, what surprised me is that over ten thousand people were stopped from going back to their land. They stayed at the sub-county and more than six people died from there. The dead were denied burial at the site so we had to suffer with dead bodies because of the eviction.
Madam Speaker, last week what surprised me was that there was a move by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, of course that is the Prime Minister’s Office, which came with over 17 trucks and forced these people who had camped at the sub-county into these trucks. They were taken to places, which we do not know up to now.

I have been called by my people and I visited the site. We have been working with the local leaders to see how we can arrest this situation. Madam Speaker, we held a meeting last week with the Prime Minister but nothing seems to be taking place and I have come to this House for a solution. 

My prayer is that Government explains where these people were taken and when they are identified, let them be restored back to their land in Bukinda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, do you have any response to the issues of Kyangwali?

3.12
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of Kyangwali and Buliisa, they are not happening for the first time. Actually they are repeating themselves. Perhaps we could ask the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Presidency to follow up this because it is a basis for insecurity. Those who are moving with cattle - [Member: “Balaalo.”] No, do not do somebody’s job. I know what to do. If you want to come, you can cross easily; no problem.

Secondly, we will ask the Minister of Disaster Preparedness because if he is the one moving people then I believe those people are safer than - (Laughter) - I think let us believe and give me time to find out from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness as to where he has taken those people - (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable member of Parliament raised the issue of the whereabouts of his people. They are asking the government to let the people of Bunyoro know where those who were removed were taken and how safe they are. 

Is the honourable Prime Minister in order to allude that if the ministry removed the people without the knowledge of their relatives, they are safe? He is just assuming instead of answering the honourable member and telling this country why those people were removed, where they were taken and whether they are safe. Is he in order?
                                                                                                            
THE SPEAKER: I do not know what is in the Prime Minister’s mind; maybe he knows that they are safe. But on a serious note, Prime Minister, I think we need an explanation on where those people are.

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I have also just heard from here that these people have been moved. I would also want to know where they are but I believe since the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is mitigating disasters, I do not think they will be party to cause more problems. We should give them time to find out where these people have been taken. I think that is the – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank my senior brother, although it has taken long to catch his attention. I am talking in my capacity as the Chairperson of West Nile Parliamentary Group. 

I have been fully involved and following the suffering of the people that my honourable colleague from Hoima has talked about. Many of those people, if not 100 per cent, are people originating from West Nile. I have been working very closely with the district leadership, the Chairman LCV of Hoima and the situation is so appalling that, Mr Prime Minister, as a son of West Nile, you should not down play it.

The matter is right now before the High Court of Masindi but the most unfortunate thing is that the party, which is in suit, that is the Attorney-General, never comes to court as and when he is expected to do so. I would pray that you impress on him the need to appear in court because these are human beings who have been displaced, who have been sleeping in primary schools and community centres to the extent that many of them lost their lives. 

Please, take this as a serious matter. These are your own brothers and sisters for your information, Mr Prime Minister. You might have not known but that is the situation on the ground and it is very appalling. 

Although the government apologised through the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, they withdrew the apology shortly thereafter because there seems to have been bigger forces behind this massive eviction. 

So I appeal to you, Mr Prime Minister, to have pity on your own West Nilers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, Prime Minister, can we direct the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to come with a statement next week on Tuesday so that we can know where these Ugandans are?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is hereby directed to come with comprehensive information about these issues in this House without fail. 

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday. Minister of Internal Affairs, what do you have to say about the pastoralists with guns in Buliisa?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, as the Deputy Prime Minister has said, it is a matter that has reoccurred and he said he is already on the ground handling it with the local leadership, police and intelligence. We will check how far they have gone. Certainly, guns are a preserve of Government and no civilian can, in that nature, go around terrorising people with guns. But we will get on the ground to see what our local security leadership have done and then we will report back.

THE SPEAKER: There is a law called the Firearms Act, which makes it an offence for anyone to possess a firearm illegally but people walk – I do not know why no one is implementing that law. In the Firearms Act, it is an offence for anyone to have a gun illegally. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, that is why we left no stone unturned to disarm the Karimojong warriors under that arrangement. That law is in force and we cannot tolerate anyone who does that. I am sure the police of Buliisa must be taking action on such people.

Madam Speaker, that law is in force and it is enforced. If there is weakness in enforcement, we would check it but it is in place. Thank you.

3.19
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I rise on the point of national importance. In Butambala District, we have one hospital that serves Butambala, part of Mpigi and Gomba and this is Gombe Hospital. This hospital has been running without water and electricity for two weeks now.

I have communication from the medical superintendent who has told me that he is unable to carry out blood transfusions. Therefore, all patients that need blood are referred to Mulago Hospital. The sterilisation machine is not working and so there is a standstill in the hospital. 

We would like to know what we can do because for two weeks, UMEME took away the transformer that serves both the secondary school and the primary school and they have not been able to replace it. 

This is so adverse because the information I have from the medical superintendent is that people suffering from HIV/AIDS cannot get the help they need and other people are at a risk because the sterilisation machine cannot work. 

This is a very pathetic situation and I do not know what the government can do because the hospital does not have the resources to run on an automatic generator. So I beg the government to do the needful most urgently. I beg to move.

3.21
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is two months since I moved a matter of public concern regarding one Amon Byarugaba, a retired army officer, who was been languishing at Makindye Military Barracks for 11 years without trial. 

The Minister of Defence came here before all of you and vowed to make sure that he would answer that question of public concern in two days’ time but he has never done so. I am even in doubt whether Amon Byarugaba is still alive.

I would like to know why the Minister in charge of Defence has not answered my call and I would like to beg you, Madam Speaker, that in the event that he does not answer tomorrow, he should allow me to move under the rule of habeas corpus Article 44(d) of the Constitution to oblige him to produce Amon Byarugaba.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, the habeas corpus is not within my power; you should go to the High Court. I cannot issue a writ here of habeas corpus but I do not know what the Minister of Defence has to say on this matter.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that my brother hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised this concern about Byarugaba. Indeed, I have been ready at any time to respond but when I am here, my colleague hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is sometimes not here.

With your permission, I can actually give the essential elements of this question. It is true that Byarugaba is under detention –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure, which we have to jealously protect. The minister should be aware that he has a date to bring a comprehensive written statement on the Ipad so that we organise and debate the matter. So it would be out of order for him to attempt to answer.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you want information about where the young man is and the minister is giving you the information. Minister, give us - I think we are interested in knowing where that man is - the information.

DR KIYONGA: Well, I do not know why my brother wants to insist on a written statement. What we are saying is on the Hansard if you want to make any reference. 

So, it is true that Byarugaba was arrested with other Ugandans. They were charged under the law relating to taking up arms to fight the established Government. His other colleagues that he was with accepted that they indeed took up arms and they asked, under the law, to be given amnesty and it was granted to them.

However, Byarugaba continued to plead not guilty. He was taken through the process of the court martial. He employed a lawyer but most of the time when court was sitting, the lawyer was not turning up. 

I think coincidentally with the time that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised the issue, the lawyer turned up and now the case is being handled within the court martial. That is the information that I would like to give.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) REQUEST FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT UNDER ARTICLE 123 (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 2 (B) (1) OF THE RATIFICATION OF TREATIES ACT CAP. 204 TO RATIFY THE MUTUAL DEFENCE PACT

3.26
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 123 (1) of the Constitution and also under Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap 204 for ratification of the Mutual Defence Pact.

This motion is being moved under Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap 204 and Rule 47 of the Procedures of Parliament. 

I will attach and lay on the Table supporting documents to this motion: 

“WHEREAS Article 123(1) of the Constitution mandates the President to make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country in respect of any matter: 

AND WHEREAS Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act requires that where a treaty relates to armistice, neutrality or peace, it shall be ratified by Parliament by resolution; 

AND WHEREAS on the 20th day of February 2014, the presidents of Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda, during the 4th summit of the Northern Corridor Integration Project held in Kampala, signed a Mutual Defence Pact on cooperation in defence among the three partner states;

AND WHEREAS the Mutual Defence Pact is to encourage and maintain an atmosphere that is conducive to peace and security through cooperation and consultation on issues pertaining to the prevention, better management and resolution of disputes and conflict in the region;

AND WHEREAS the signing of the Mutual Defence Pact is in tandem with the United Nations Charter, the Constitutive Act of the African Union, the Treaty for establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, the Treaty for establishment of the East African Community and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows: 

(1)That in accordance with Article 123 (1) of the Constitution and Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act Cap 204, Parliament ratifies the Mutual Defence Pact signed by the President of the Republic of Uganda during the 4th Summit of the Northern Corridor Integration Project held in Kampala on the 20th day February 2014.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker, and as I said, there are accompanying documents:

    1) The Mutual Defence Pact 
    2) The Mutual Defence Pact (Amendment) Instrument number 1 of 2014
    3) The Mutual Defence Pact implementation framework. 

I beg to lay them on the Table. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, there are several documents the minister has laid. You have listened to the motion but I want to propose that our committee looks at it for a few days and gives us a report so that members also have the opportunity to look at the attachment. It is seconded by hon. Nyakairima, hon. Omach, hon. Mulongo, hon. Mwesige and hon. Baryayanga. It is seconded. 

So, the motion and the annexures are sent to our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I know you have a Bill but if you could do this work expeditiously, we would appreciate it. Thank you very much.

    II) REQUEST TO PRESENT A MOTION SEEKING RATIFICATION
OF THE MUTUAL PEACE AND SECURITY PACT

3.30
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, closely related to the Defence Pact, is a Mutual Peace and Security Pact. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Articles 123(1) of the Constitution and Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act, cap 204 for the ratification of the Mutual Peace and Security Pact, moved under Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification Treaties Act, cap 204 and Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Article 123 (1) of the Constitution mandates the President to make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country in respect to any other matter;

AND WHEREAS Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification Treaties Act requires that a treaty that relates to armistice, neutrality or peace shall be ratified by the Parliament by resolution;

AND WHEREAS on the 20th day of February 2014, the Presidents of Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda, during the 4th Summit of the Northern Corridor Integration Project held in Kampala signed a Mutual Peace and Security Pact on consideration of peace and security among three partner states; 

AND WHEREAS the purpose of the Mutual Peace and Security Pact is to encourage and maintain an atmosphere that is conducive to peace and security through cooperation and consultations on the issues pertaining to prevention, better management and resolution of disputes and conflicts in the region, thereby establishing a framework for combating transnational and cross-border crimes such as terrorism, trafficking in persons, drugs and wildlife trophies;

AND WHEREAS the signing of Mutual Peace and Security Pact is in tandem with UN Charter, the Constitutive Act of the AU, the Treaty of the establishment of the East African Community and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS the 5th Summit of the Northern Corridor Integration Project, in May 2014 this year, adapted the implementation framework for the pact and also directed the Mutual Peace and Security Pact to be ratified expeditiously by respective partner states; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Article 123(1) of the Constitution and Section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification Treaties Act, cap 204, Parliament ratifies the Mutual Peace and Security Pact signed by the President of Uganda during the 4th Summit of the Northern Corridor Integration Project held in Kampala on the 20th day 2014.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker, and I will lay on Table the Pact, the Implementation Matrix and the certificate of financial implications. Those are the relevant documents supporting this important treaty. 

I beg to lay on Table and I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Minister of Finance, Minister of State for Trade, Minister for Minerals, Gen. Tumwine, Maj. Mpabwa and hon. Sabila. 

Honourable members, in the same way I want to again send the pact and annexures to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs who will advise us at the earliest so that we can handle it before we go for recess. Thank you very much.

Hon. Byandala, there was an issue raised about the potholes in Kitigoma on the Jinja-Kampala road and the lack of markings on the roads. Hon. Mwiru, since the minister is here -

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From Kitigoma up to Bulyantete, there are very big potholes on the road to the extent that once you hit one, you swerve off the road, which can result into an accident. I think they have intelligence that there are many accidents that have occurred in the past two weeks as a result of those potholes.

In addition, the Jinja-Kampala road has no road markings and I am aware that the honourable minister has been travelling in other countries and you have seen how roads in other countries are. They have road markings and lights. I think you should borrow the same.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF WORKS TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for raising these issues. First of all, as you may realise, we are also doing road markings but when you do this, it has a life span and we have to get enough money to continuously do it and we continuously do road markings. 

When you look at Kampala-Jinja road, you must also have realised that we have been doing some rehabilitation. The rehabilitation is still going on and it would not be good practice to start markings when you are still rehabilitating. As soon as we are through with rehabilitation, we shall endeavour, funds permitting, to provide road markings not only on that road but other roads as well. 

On the other road where there are potholes, it is very unfortunate and I apologise on behalf of Government but you must have also realised that we are undergoing severe rains and water is the biggest enemy of an engineer on the road whether on road works or concrete works. But we are trying our level best to see that -

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable engineer for accepting the point of clarification that I want to get from him. When you are from Njeru coming up to Mbikko, then from Mbikko you leave Nakibbizi and you are sloping down the junction going to Nyenga and climbing at Kitigoma, you find that the road for heavy vehicles coming from the East has developed deep depressions.

I do not think that depression is as a result of the rain. If it was as a result of rain then it should be uniform; both on the left and right. How do you account for such deep depressions for that stretch? Is it rain causing it or are there other things, which are best known to engineers like you? Thank you very much, honourable minister.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the issues raised on the Jinja-Kampala road. The clarification I would like to add is on the issue of road signs. You said you are still doing some rehabilitation and the signs should not be there. 

In a situation where we have a road like the Arua-Kwilikwilinga-Obongi-Adjumani, which you worked on sometime back, the culverts and humps were put but there are no signs. That is not a tarmac road. I would like to inquire whether road signs are only for tarmac roads and those murrum roads in the rural areas do not deserve road signs. This is because you are not working on these roads. You finished the work on the roads but there are no signs. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now running away from the issue, which was raised and going to others. But give them the policy issues. Yes, yesterday you wanted the remedial work on Katosi-Njeru. You can tell him, he is here.

3.42
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I just wanted to chip in because this is a related matter. Yesterday the honourable Prime Minister assured this House that he was going to direct the Minister for Works to do remedial action on the Kyetume-Katosi road because of its dilapidation and impassability. I want to also get assured by the minister, since he is here, so that we can understand what he has done in the interim. Thank you very much, Madam speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We discussed this late yesterday. What he is planning maybe but not what he has done because he could not have done it in the night.

Honourable minister, they say that because of the controversy on that road and stoppage of the contract, there are problems of access and they wanted remedial works, pending the resolution of the conflict over Katosi road. They say it is not passable and people are not able to move at all.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Starting with the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Wadri, I was talking about potholes not depressions. The rains easily cause potholes whether on tarmac or murrum. I was not talking about depressions. 

However, I appreciate your observation about the depressions and these are due to non-law abiding people who are overloading the vehicles. That is why we are constantly fighting with the vehicle weight control. But those who pass are the people causing the depressions because they move on a pavement while having vehicle weights beyond what it was designed for. That is why we are intensifying and we are going to do more on vehicle weight control.

About road signs in Arua, I totally agree with my colleague. By law where we put humps, zebra crossings and pedestrian crossings, these are accompanied by road signs. However, you know as well as I do that road signs are stolen by Ugandans. We have put many signs on the roads, people have seen them and they have been stolen. I do not think anybody can deny the fact that these road signs are stolen by our people.

So I appeal to all of you because we come from Uganda. Please sensitise our people to respect these road signs because they are not there for fun. They are there to offer messages, instructions and directives.

On the Katosi road, Madam Speaker, the road is passable because even this morning, I have been with people who were coming from there. I have been with them in the church so the road is passable. Yes, it may not be the best –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister knows the problems surrounding this road including the decisions that he has made on this road. How can he say that it is passable yet I live in the constituency where this road passes and I have witnessed accidents and the inability to pass numerous spots on this road? I came and told Parliament so and I was assured by the second Deputy Prime Minister that he would make a directive. For the minister to say that it is passable is to make me a fool. 

Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to deceive this House yet he has not witnessed the things I have on this road?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not been to that side so I do not know whether he passed there or not. So it is difficult to rule whether he is out of order because I do not know. Anyway minister, the member says the place is not passable.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, hon. Lulume should know that he is not the only person staying there. I have been in church with somebody who has come from there. So when he fails to pass and he says it is impassable, I think he should respect other citizens that they are also people. I have been with somebody in a church service that has just come from Katosi. Where did he pass? 

However, Madam Speaker, we are doing everything possible to ensure that that road is constantly passable.

3.48
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A very serious matter of national importance was fronted here about three weeks ago relating to circumstances under which a Ugandan of hardly two years of age was killed at City Hall. The minister was given one week to come with a comprehensive statement relating to the matter.

Madam Speaker, we are entering the third week and the minister has not come up with a statement. I wonder whether we are proceeding well when the minister comes here and seems very innocent of what he is supposed to be doing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we direct him to come with a statement tomorrow because it was due last week. So you should bring that statement tomorrow on the accident, which occurred at City Hall. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure in regard to the continued absence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on Wednesdays to answer questions. This continued absence of the Prime Minister to jump that chapter should not simply pass. The members of Parliament -(Interjection)- No, I am not accepting information. 

The members of Parliament, through that chapter, speak for the people they represent. We also check Government through that chapter of the Prime Minister. How do we know whether the Prime Minister is reported to have gone outside Uganda when he is still languishing within Kampala? 

So, Madam Speaker, I beg the government to assure this House that the Prime Minister will be answering that chapter every week. It is now over four weeks since we had that important programme. When is your Government assuring us that this is going to be a serious talk? 

3.50
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it is true the Prime Minister is not in the House. He is in Munyonyo for a retreat and, therefore, arrangements have not been made yet for the deputy to answer for the Prime Minister. Therefore, I have asked the Speaker to postpone this to next week. It is up to the Speaker to say what she wants us to do. 

Last time we had a view that Prime Minister’s questions should be given ahead of time so that preparations can be made. I do not know whether that has happened or not so until I check with the Prime Minister, I think I am not in position to answer for him. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are forgetting that you are dealing with a man who is a soldier so he obeys the hierarchy. I think let us discuss with the Prime Minister on how to handle issues in his absence. We shall sort that one out. Let us go to Agriculture. The Minister for the Presidency should bring a statement as we have already agreed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were requested to make a statement on the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, FMD is an endemic disease in East and Central Africa. In Uganda it was introduced in 1953 and has been occurring with different frequencies. Outbreaks of the disease are always anticipated but it is very difficult to predict precisely where the next outbreak takes place. There are however known high risk areas where outbreaks have been more frequent than others over a long period. We have been precisely concerned with the high risk areas to make sure that we do not get necessary outbreaks. 

Since the beginning of April 2014, we have received reports of FMD outbreaks, confirmed them and accordingly imposed quarantine restrictions in 29 districts. For these recent outbreaks filed, laboratory investigations have shown that FMD Serotype ‘O’ is the most prevalent in Uganda. However, the outbreak in Kiruhura at different times has been confirmed to be SAT 2, which is a new development.

A massive outbreak of FMD occurred in Kotido in May 2014 and has been ravaging parts of the country especially in Karamoja region. This was followed by a period of relative stability of about seven months without fresh outbreaks. The disease spread to 39 districts, all of which were placed under quarantine. The affected districts, specifically the affected sub counties and dates of outbreaks are shown in table one. 

Actions taken. We released 131 doses, which were in stock and procured more vaccines. We have vaccinated a total of 724 animals and the cost of these vaccines is very expensive; it goes to Shs 2.7 billion. However, the allocation of the vaccines per district is shown in table two. 

There is great improvement in the FMD picture at the moment and I have been personally visiting these districts especially in Teso sub-region where we have agreed that we should lift the quarantine before the 15th of this month, if we do not get fresh infections.

Madam Speaker, if this trend continues where we do not have fresh outbreaks, we hope to authorise slaughter of stocks in time for Christmas and we allow partial quarantines where animal products and animals can be traded within their local areas and also transported directly from farms for slaughter in city abattoirs and municipalities.

There are however risk factors that can cause flare up of the disease. These include illegal trade and movement of animals, pasture and water shortages where animals have to move long distances in search of water and pasture. The festive is characterised by extensive livestock movement, especially for slaughter, dowry and other cultural functions that involve livestock movement.

Madam Speaker, we still have some constraints owing to insufficient vaccine stocks. The MAAIF has been responding to outbreaks rather than maintaining a proactive preventive campaign where we would now be vaccinating against the disease in high risk areas routinely. The viable way to eliminate a contagious disease like FMD in endemic areas is to carry out preventive approaches through routine outbreak vaccination. This can be modified to routine vaccination in high risk areas with good results. Unfortunately, the resource envelope of MAAIF is still low.

Restocking 

Most restocking programmes run counter to established guidelines and regulations with regard to livestock health. This explains the suspicion that the restocking exercise contributed to the outbreak of the disease, especially in the East. It is known that many animals entering the restocking process are purchased from markets and supplied within a few days of purchase, non-quarantined as required. The animals are rarely subjected to veterinary inspection or vaccination.

Extensive livestock movement in search of water and pasture often complicate outbreaks as infected animals move to fresh areas and spread the disease. This is what happened in the swamps in the North East and Eastern parts of Uganda where animals from Karamoja mixed freely with those from Teso.

Weak regulatory capacity especially in local government

Enforcing livestock movement control is a daunting exercise because the veterinary staff are not equipped to perform the function. Actually, they are thin on the ground. In addition, law enforcement agencies have relegated the crime to be managed only by veterinary functions, which does not require their involvement. 

Madam Speaker, what we are saying is that we have very thin staff in local governments and we hope to step them up next financial year but currently, we have a constraint of staff.

Carrier status - recovered animals 

Many politicians and people put us on pressure to open up markets but I want to ask my colleagues in this House to support our efforts because a fraction of animals that recover from FMD transform into carrier status for a few months ranging from two to six months, during which period they can cause infection of other animals. This explains the prolonged quarantine period imposed to control FMD outbreaks. 

When cows go to the market, they mingle with others and as a result, when they are not sold, they go back home. So if a cow has recovered from FMD within six months, most likely it is going to spread the virus in the whole market and those cows, which will go back home will go with the virus and those that will be sold will also take the virus wherever they are taken. 

Unregulated livestock movement especially in local governments. Many people just wake up in the morning and put cows on the trucks without moving permits and start moving. There is a lot of unregulated movement of animals, especially those going to markets and the ones looking for pasture and water. These movements lead to mixing of animals whose disease status is unclear. For example, the current outbreak in the East and Northern Eastern regions could have stemmed from such mixing of Karimojong and Iteso animals during the dry season while grazing in the Teso wetlands. 

The way forward

The current pockets of active disease pose significant sources of infection that can reverse the improving disease picture. In addition, premature removal of quarantines is a threat because recovered animals are ineffective. In order to clean up the affected areas and to be able to respond to new flares-up, more vaccine is needed. An addition of 500 doses of vaccine will be needed to deal with risky areas and transit routes. 

We have already made this requisition, Madam Speaker, to make sure that even when we open the quarantine, we should be able to vaccinate in those high risk areas and transit routes. Transit routes are those routes where stocks are moved from place to place. For instance, all the way from Mbarara to Mutukula, all cows converge in Bukedea and these livestock traders and keepers have got known transit routes so what we do is to make sure that all these transit routes are covered to deal with any bad chances of outbreak. 

The figure takes into account that we are entering the most risky period of prolonged drought and festival season, all of which are high risk factors.

Madam Speaker, I only beg that we support the efforts. For the districts in Teso, I visited the region and we are very sure that we can open quarantine very soon. For Karamoja, I think we still have a threat in one of the districts. We are going to see how we can deal with it, especially by imposing partial quarantine in those areas.

Madam Speaker, that is what I can say today. I want to thank the leaders who invited us to their districts to interact with and sensitise the population not only about FMD but also how to deal with disease control because we stand better chances of doing farming as business when we control disease. 

We are entering the international market. As you are aware, we are exporting milk to the Middle East and milk products to USA markets and so we need to be free of disease. So I want to ask everybody to support Government efforts in fighting disease especially investment in preventive mechanisms. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the response to this issue, but also for taking the initiative to go up to Teso to check on this particular matter. 

Honourable minister, I appreciate the response but I think that while you impose the quarantine, it is important to ensure that timely efforts are made to vaccinate the animals. This has gone on for almost a year and as a result, while we want to celebrate that there will be meat for Christmas, the children were actually chased out of school because people could not sell their animals and they could not raise the resources they required. 

I also think that in dealing with restocking, it is important that in the later efforts, you integrate a vaccination programme in the restocking exercise. That might help us so that we do not recirculate FMD all over the region. 

When you talk about animals from Teso and Karamoja, your ministry has Water for Production. What I know is that as of now, most parts of Teso have not benefited from Water for Production and I think you need to probably allocate us some water sources.

Lastly, I would like to ask the minister to really supervise his ministry as there is a problem. The Auditor-General pointed out that the money, which Parliament allocated in the Financial Year 2012/2013 for purchase of vaccines for FMD was diverted. It is in the Auditor-General’s report. 

Even where the vaccines and drugs for other pests and disease control were bought, these drugs were left undistributed. The technical people came to PAC and said, we distributed them on dates beyond their sell-by dates. We asked them, “How can you poison animals and crops?” They said, “This vaccine still works even after the sell-by date.” I thought this was being very irresponsible. 

So, honourable minister, I want to invite you to read that report so that you know that some people are not helping out on this matter. Thank you.

4.07
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this very good statement. According to the statement of the minister, 29 districts are said to have been subjected to the quarantine restrictions. From April 2014 to date, you will find that, that is a time lag of eight months while animals are in the quarantine. Eight months is not a very short period. 

When you go further, you will find that from the 29 districts, 24 are said to have reported improvements, which implies that five districts are still experiencing the active disease. We would have loved to hear from the minister, which five districts these are. That would then give us the magnitude of the problem. 

Even before he mentions it, Napak where I come from is definitely among the five. I reached the place and found that the situation was not okay. People have been crying to me and saying, “What are you people doing?” I managed to talk to the minister -(Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and member for giving way. I just want to give the member some information. The report says out of 29 districts, so far 24 have been cleared. Hon. Achia is wondering about the other five. 

I just want to inform the member that when you are carrying out a vaccination campaign like this one we are doing, after identifying the areas, which are affected, you map them out and make rings beginning from out coming inwards. You begin with the safest and the periphery or the last ring outside is the safest. You then move inwards. The most dangerous or the worst affected area is the one, which is at the centre.

So, by the time you come to the centre as you do your vaccination, you have completely cleared to prevent any further spread away from there. So, it should not be surprising to find that they have covered so much of the other areas, which they are saying are now clear and can therefore comfortably begin lifting the quarantine in some areas. 

I will not be surprised, Madam Speaker, if the other five are towards the centre and are still being addressed. That is how it is done technically.

Let me also use this opportunity to inform my dear sister, hon. Alice Alaso, on the issue of the vaccines. You can see from the -(Interjections)- I thought I was using this opportunity to give more information. May I please have some protection, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: But the Minister of Agriculture will have to answer to what they are saying.

DR MUTENDE: Yes, but I am just giving some information. Madam Speaker, like many other viruses that we have for human beings and other animals, there are many types of FMD virus. In fact in that report, they mentioned two but there are about five and every strain comes with its own conditions. You cannot use the same vaccine for another strain of the virus. That is why you cannot say we plan restocking and also stock vaccines in advance. Until the condition is properly known, you cannot begin stocking vaccines. As has been mentioned, vaccines are very expensive. In fact they are more expensive than curative medicine and so, you cannot stock the two. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you are abusing our Rules of Procedure. Hon. Achia, please conclude.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I will kindly request you to give me one extra minute because he has taken a lot of my time. 

My point of emphasis was, we would love to hear from the minister concerned on what the strategic plan will be for these five districts so that we feel happy. We have already spent eight months and the situation is not good as cows are dying. 

Unfortunately in the report, it is states that there are inefficiency stocks of vaccine. The situation is still bad and we are saying there are no vaccines. In that kind of situation, what should people do? 

Therefore, my request to the Office of the Prime Minister is to come in and offer support to us in this matter as it is an emergency situation. If we continue saying, “Let us hold on, we shall get the vaccine” that will really take a long time and yet the situation is not okay. So, I would ask the OPM to come in and -(Member timed out.) 

4.14       
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for the report. The honourable minister pointed out a number of constraints to controlling the disease but when it came to giving the way forward, I am sorry to say that you left a lot to be desired. 

You pointed out a number of constraints but when it came to the way forward, you were just saying 5,000 more doses of vaccines are needed. How about the other constraints? What are you going to do about those other constraints?

When it comes to the issue of restocking, you were saying the restocking programmes are running counter to the established regulations and guidelines and that restocking animals are not first quarantined before they are given out. Why? 

When we were getting updates about the restocking programme, we were told that the procurement is being done by the Office of the Prime Minister. We were also told that the cost of one animal was quite high and when we sought clarification, we were told that, that cost catered for vaccines, quarantine and all these things. So, why are you telling us that it is not being done and yet the cost has already been taken care of under this money for restocking?

The honourable minister talked about the FMD. I do not know whether you are aware that in Northern Uganda, particularly in Pader District, we also have a problem of the contagious bovine pleuropneumonia. A quarantine was imposed in February this year. It is now coming to one year but this quarantine has not been lifted and it has affected the people in a number of sub counties. 

I do not know whether you have information on this. For almost one year, nothing has been done. Farmers are suffering and yet as we talk, most of the farmers are now relying on animal husbandry because crop -(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Lowila. I wanted to give you information that, that contentious pneumonia is not only in Pader District. It is also affecting animals in Agago District and there is already quarantine. In my district, people are not eating meat because of that and this has been for quite some time now. Thank you. 

MS LOWILA: Honourable minister, if you are aware of this, I am appealing to you to take action. Maybe since you have been in Teso sub-region, you need to come to Northern Uganda as well and assess the situation and then ensure that something is done to help our farmers who are now relying mainly on animal husbandry because the weather conditions are not allowing them to get any harvest as far as crop enterprises are concerned. I thank you.

4.17
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and I want to begin by referring to the statement on page 2 where the minister is talking about weak regulatory capacity. He goes on to say that the law enforcement agencies have relegated crime to be managed only as a veterinary function, which does not require their involvement.

Madam Speaker, this is a very fundamental revelation and I am happy the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. I want to refer to the cases that exist in Kotido. At one point when the council was controlling the free movement of local liquor, the police that were called upon to deal with this turned this into a money making venture. 

Currently, we have also been facing a problem of a lot of charcoal burning and environmental degradation. Again, the police are always coming in to benefit out of this. 

I think Government needs to rethink the question of law reinforcement because without us dealing with issues of law enforcement, how are you going to deliver Government policies? How are they going to be realised?

Secondly, even when the quarantine had been declared, the vaccination process began late. In Kotido, for example, the process is just about two weeks old. This means that there was a vast amount of time that was left for the FMD disease to spread adequately. 

Now, we are responding with a very small amount of vials that you are talking about. I was trying to add up the vaccines you are talking about that have been provided in the districts and they are about 550,000. Now, the population of cows in Kotido District alone is about 900,000. At what point shall we be able to deal with this if we are just giving 500,000 for the whole of Uganda?

The other important thing is FAO; we are confused in Karamoja. Is FAO the one bringing the vaccines, or is it government because, three weeks ago, when I was visiting the kraal, there was an outcry for vaccination, and when I went to the veterinary department, I was told to go to FAO! When I went to FAO, those guys said, “No, we are the ones who determine what we will give. We have a limited number of vaccines” and they were distributing to the sub-county only. So, at the end of the day –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: This one is one of the cattle keepers; I give you one more minute to conclude. 

MR LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker. How would you, for example, be able to deal with this matter if you are looking at the district in terms of 40,000 vials, yet there is a sub-county that has more livestock than the others? How do you deal with this? 

I think, Madam Speaker, it is important that the question of the inadequacy of the vaccines also be talked about - because, I am not hearing minister asking for resources from Parliament. So, where is he going to find resources to solve this problem if he is only telling us the vaccines are inadequate? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Nakaseke District falls within the Cattle Corridor, and it is one of the major suppliers of animal products to Kampala. One of the sub-counties in my constituency has been put under quarantine, but is not listed among those affected. I do not know whether it has been by default. But, when I checked from the farmers, they told me that there are two farms in one of the remote LCs which are suspected to be having FMD. They have approached the commissioner for vaccines, but the vaccines are not there. So, what they have done, through personal efforts, is to barricade the suspected area; they have put up fences so that the animals from that LC do not cross into the neighbouring area. 

Madam Speaker, our concern is that the whole area has been put under quarantine, yet the ministry is not making any effort to provide vaccines. The farmers in the constituency are willing, as long as government can find a private partner to pay for the vaccines; because that is the source of their livelihood. Right now, they have no food and their children were thrown out of school due to lack of funds. 

And, what worries me most is that the minister has lamented about the source of resources, but he has not come up with any recommendation to Parliament to assist government to look for resources. I would like the minister to explain to this House how that vacuum of inadequacy of vaccines is going to be filled. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.23
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Madam, Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for having responded when we invited him to Gomba District for the same cause of the Foot and Mouth Disease. But, I want to propose that we take this state as an emergency situation and urge the Government to, as soon as possible, provide all the necessary vaccines so that the ministry can take up more interventions because in most districts, like Gomba, the partial quarantine has overstayed. 

So, I am wondering when it will be lifted without the government intervention. So, I want to propose that we urge government to, as soon as possible, provide all the necessary resources to make sure that all the required machines are provided so that more intervention can be done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I also join friends in thanking the minister for the statement. Kween is one of the districts that were affected and had the quarantine; just because of the two sub-counties on the lower side which are bordering Karamoja region. 

Madam Speaker, when I look at the issues the minister has risen as problems of controlling this disease, most of them are actually under their docket and I thought it is the minister responsible for controlling this disease. When you look at vaccination, for example, it is supposed to be their ministry. Look at restocking programme, where he is talking about “No veterinary personnel to check these animals before they are given out during the restocking programme” and all the others, I thought the ministry would come up with strategies, and where need be, ask Parliament to support the ministry in the funding. I do not think there would be any member in this House, who would not support more funding to the ministry so that we add on the resources for vaccination; we add in personnel so that they have enough people.

Then, I wanted to comment on the statement that the minister made where he was talking about mixing of these animals during grazing. He did not mention Sebei Region; we actually have so many animals that come in from Nakapiripirit and Amudat to be grazed in Kween District and they are the major causes. And, I would really want to support the issue of water for production. There is a programme for water for production; it has been there, but the implementation has taken so long. I thought if we actually had this one implemented, then we would reduce even this movement of animals across so many of these districts, causing the infection of these animals.

4.27
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this report. Bukwo District is one of those which were affected by Foot and Mouth Disease. But I want to thank them for the response because when the case was reported, though it took about three months, we were able to get some vaccines which saved the lives of some of the animals. However, enormous losses were incurred. Farmers lost a lot of animals and resources in terms of treatment.

Now, the issue at hand is that we are going into the dry season where we need these vaccines available. We need to prevent than curing and be able to save these farmers of all these losses. Like hon. Chekwel rightly put it, our animals do not move far, but we are getting problems because of animals from Karamoja and West Pokot; they cross over to our side. So, I think the responsible ministry should also make these animals stop at the border because we are now going through other expenses that are uncalled for. When these diseases come over, we are the ones who suffer. Aware that Bukwo District and Sebei in general did not benefit from the restocking exercise, it is not on a happy note to note that the places where restocking was carried out are infecting the disease on the people who lost the cows. We lost the cows to mainly Karamoja and Pokot. Now it is the same people who are infecting the few animals remaining with Foot and Mouth Disease. I think something should be done about it; give us the cows through restocking and also vaccinate the few ones that we have. Thank you very much.

4.29
MR KENETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for the statement. I have only two issues that I would want the minister to clarify. 
The first one is the budget. On page 2, he said that when it comes to vaccination, only two to three percent of what is required is available. He said that, “Unfortunately, the resources available to MAAIF for disease control and specifically vaccine procurement is often limited to two to three percent of that amount that can be used for routine vaccination.” 

This brings the question that, how many years shall we take to have sufficient vaccination done in the whole country? We have always had a debate here on the increment of the budget for agriculture and the argument of government has been that the sector of agriculture is linked to other sectors. So Government said when money is in road, you can somehow link it to agriculture. But if you can only afford two to three percent to do the vaccinations, then I think not enough is being done. Probably, your department is being failed and you need to start finding out whether the department is doing what it is supposed to be doing.

Madam Speaker, I have looked at the tables of the affected districts, and then those districts that have been supplied with the vaccines. I think, honourable minister, we need to consider the proximity of the districts which are not yet affected to those ones that are already affected. I am from Kaliro, bordering Namutumba. From your table, you show us that cases of infections were detected in Pallisa and Kibuku and the nearby districts. However, when you look at the position, I find Wakiso, where no case was even detected, was given vaccines. I am wondering whether you are considering vaccinating the proximate districts for purposes of prevention than to respond to districts where the problem breaks out. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Mujungu comes, join me in welcoming children of Mango Children Development Centre, Busia, represented by hon. Oundo and hon. Maganda. (Applause)  They are here with their teachers. You are welcome.

4.32
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. Ntoroko District is in a cattle corridor and we have no Foot and Mouth Disease at the moment. But, my main concern is about the honourable minister’s concerns where he has stated that there are risk factors that can cause or flare up the disease and these factors he mentioned them as illegal trade and movement of animals.

Madam Speaker, Ntoroko District is a border district. We border Congo and truly we have - I may not want to call it illegal movement of animals but we have free entry and exit of animals. Our animals move to Congo during dry seasons and even at times the animals from Congo also come to Ntoroko District and as a result they cause a fear that at one moment we can get disease in the district.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of pasture and water due to drought that compels animals to move far away, the honourable minister has been in Ntoroko District and I think he really knows when the drought is there what really happens.

We had floods last month; we had a lot of water but by beginning of this month, the water has already dried up and we are getting into a dry season and we are going to begin looking for water which we cannot really find; not even a drop. So we will have to take our animals across to Congo. And yet, moving from one place to another poses a risk of contracting Foot and Mouth Disease. So, honourable minister, what measures are you putting in place to tap the waters so that we can get water?

4.34
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement. We are all aware that Kaabong District is also one of the national parks of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, in the statement, they have talked about Karamoja; Kaabong is one of them but we have a concern in Kaabong, Kotido, Napak where we have an attack of Tsetse flies and these Tsetse flies are causing that bad disease, I do not know how to say its scientific name, and the animals are dying -(Interjections)- it is not Sleeping Sickness, Sleeping Sickness is for the human beings not – yes, it is called Nagana. Thank you very much for correcting me. 

So, Madam Speaker, I am asking the minister that as we are handling the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease, what are you doing with the Tsetse flies which are finishing the cows from Kaabong, Kotido and Napak? You are only vaccinating against the Foot and Mouth Disease, but the Tsetse Flies are also killing the animals. 

I remember in June, I and some of my colleagues went to the minister and told him about this disease and he said he was going to take care of it and go there and up to today, I have never seen the minister in my district. So, Madam Speaker, here we are with this disease. As we are handling the other one, may we request the minister to do something against these Tsetse flies which are finishing our animals? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.36
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister said very clearly that owing to insufficient vaccine stock, MAAIF have been responding to outbreak rather than maintaining a proactive preventive campaign. I am wondering why the minister is lamenting to Parliament when it is his responsibilities to make sure they plan for it, and make sure they ask Parliament or government to provide resources for that proactive preventive mechanism instead of waiting to respond to diseases which they are not even able to manage. I believe prevention is better than cure. 

This Parliament every year has always asked government to provide enough money for Ministry of Agriculture. So where is the problem? Can the minister tell us where the problem is, because Parliament at least tried its best to express the need for provision of enough money for Ministry of Agriculture?

Lastly, the minister also said there is weak regulatory capacity; that enforcing livestock movement control is a daunting exercise because the veterinary staff are not equipped. Who is supposed to equip these staff, honourable minister? Is it Parliament or your ministry? I thought you were in charge of the ministry and you are charged with the responsibility of carrying out everything that is required to take care of the animals. Who therefore is supposed to equip these staff? If there is lack of money, come to Parliament and say what you plan to do and how much money you require instead of every year saying you do not have enough money to do the work that you are supposed to do. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.38
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With the Foot and Mouth Disease, there is a challenge in our communities that do more of cultivation. The Ministry of Agriculture tend to relax to extend veterinary education to the communities. And yet, Madam Speaker, even in communities where they tend to do more of cultivation, there are normally farmers on a small scale who actually rear animals.

When it comes to an outbreak of such an epidemic, Madam Speaker, also the surveillance is done more in those cattle corridors and yet they forget that actually the problem can also spread to the communities which are surrounding the cattle corridors. For example, most of our sub counties do not have veterinary staff and that one puts the lives of our people at risk. I would think that even when we have those cattle corridors- yes it is important to focus on them more critically but equal consideration be given to those communities which are surrounding. This is because eventually the animals from the cattle corridors - there are markets around and in the cattle corridors.

Madam Speaker, I would also like the minister to explain to the country and this Parliament in regard to the information which appeared in the papers last week.  It was stated that most of the pork that is supplied within the country is contaminated and has the potential of causing epilepsy.

Madam Speaker, since we are going to the Christmas season, you know that most of the people around Kampala enjoy pork. It would be unfair for their lives to be at a risk even when there is that bit of information that has been supplied to the citizens of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement.
 
We take the concern of animal health seriously because it is also linked with human health. We, people of Moyo District also keep some livestock –(Interjections)- yes subsistence farming; this is well known West Nile is also a livestock rearing area. We have been affected by that disease; we welcomed the action of the Government in terms of the quarantine.

However, Madam Speaker, I wanted the minister to explain to this House whether there are different types of quarantine or there is only one. In Moyo, we had the disease in only one sub county and less than 10 heads of cattle died and it was reported and controlled immediately. We expected that by now we would have been given at least some pastoral lifting of the quarantine if not complete. 

You referred to Teso, Karamoja here but you never mentioned anything about West Nile. I do not know if in your records West Nile does not exist as a cattle keeping place.

But, on behalf of the people of Moyo, I would like to report here that the disease has been brought under control; you need to review the quarantine status there and probably lift the quarantine so that as people go for Christmas they can have meat without any problem.

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest this to the minister as the alternative to handle this predicament in the ministry. There should be quarantine. If the disease is deemed to have come a little bit down, you can downgrade the restriction from inter-district to inter-sub county or county so that you minimise the effect of the quarantine on the issue of school fees and people crying –(Interjections)- yes, a Government like this one at this stage of dying is right to complain about lack of money. If your ministry does not have money for providing treatment to animals in the sector, then there is no problem. Accept that but look for alternatives. You can provide information as the technical people are in the ministry. Why don’t you look for private clinics, private vaccinators and advice the people on radio; you give information so that people can help themselves? We know that when you the minister tells us that the ministry is defeated, then the whole government has a problem.

Our Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is going to come here with full alternative information to help this country out of this predicament where the government lays. (Laughter)

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for the statement as far as the magnitude of FMD is concerned. 

I want to appreciate the effort done to this effect but I would like to request the minister to make a few clarifications to the following: He mentioned the action taken which states that there were 724 doses provided. How much and what was the magnitude of the infection in the 29 districts? 

My brother, hon. Peter Lokii has mentioned that Kotido alone has over 700,000 cows. How many per district - let the statistics could be put clearly for all the 29 districts to show the magnitude of infection? Did you send the drugs and doses based on the magnitude? Or was it based on the clinical cases which were carried out - I know there are trials which were carried out when the outbreak started? Do we have the right statistics in as far as the district by district infection is concerned?

My second issue, Madam Speaker, is that during the presentation of our Report as a Committee of Agriculture we requested for increased enhancement of revenue for the ministry. It is very unfortunate that the ministry is not in custody; we do not have a system of having vaccines readily available for carrying out routine vaccination. How can we help the ministry through the Ministry of Finance to wipe out the diseases in this country? The ministry must have custody of vaccines? Even the whole chain should spread out in the entire country, like how we have the human vaccines which are routinely carried to ensure that our human health and animal health are taken care of. 

This is a major consideration and I would request that the minister comes up with a more comprehensive statement in as far as animal health is concerned to give us a direction as we prepare for the next budget. I submit, Madam Speaker.

4.48
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for bringing this point which is very serious to the economy as well as the animal keepers; not only of cattle; when you talk of Foot and Mouth Disease you are not only talking of cattle; it includes sheep, poultry and pigs.

First of all, I want to say with all due respect that if farmers were to depend on government efforts then many of our animals would have been finished. Farmers depend mainly on themselves and their efforts, because much as government is making an effort to help it is not easy for it. 

The Foot and Mouth Disease is a disease that has been around since 1953, we grew up seeing how it was handled up to now when it is just chaotic. Foot and Mouth Disease has a method to be handled. It is still depending on the 1964 Animal Disease Control Act. There is no policy on controlling Foot and Mouth Disease as of now. And I do not know why, that is what we should be having. It is not there. 

I want this to be put on record, why is it not there? Government mainly depends on veterinary doctors and police to do Foot and Mouth Disease control; this is absolutely impossible. This disease from what I know was normally controlled by the community themselves. The community is the one which can control Foot and Mouth Disease, because they have an interest, but these days things have happened like this. The police benefits from it by getting bribes and the veterinary doctors too. To make it worse, markets were tendered to local government. The ones who were the tenderers of local governments, their interest is to make as much money out of the market as possible rather than control the disease. Therefore, just getting vaccinations or those doses he is asking for, to me, is actually scratching very far from the real problem. We have 11.4 million heads of cattle, and he is only asking for about the 19 districts which are already attacked by the disease –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute, hon. Tumwine.

GEN TUMWINE: Instead of asking for those few diseases, I think this matter should be taken seriously because we shall not export meat which is the main economic interest. The livestock industry has been growing very fast. We earned $290 million in 2008-2009, from $210 million. But we shall not export meat without dealing with Foot and Mouth Disease and without dealing with wild animals on our borders of the cattle corridor, which move freely and spread diseases without control and without having a proper strategy. There is protocol for Foot and Mouth Disease, which is no longer followed. One is supposed to report in 48 hours to the veterinary doctor and in 24 hours action is supposed to be taken in by the whole community. What we now wait for is the vaccination where they are trading with the vaccine easily. Even these veterinary doctors who are supposed to give these medicines, do ask for money as if they are selling those –(Member timed out.)

4.52 
MS NAMOE NYOMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. The statement was carrying a lot of challenges, which I think are still there. The livestock sector in the Ministry of Agriculture is underfunded; even the ministry is just gambling to get the vaccine for the animals. 

There is no budget to cater for such emergencies and I wonder how the people who are having livestock as livelihood are going to survive in this Country. The livestock sector contributes to the economy of this country. And I do not know which reason the ministry or government can give to explain as to why this sector is not funded, not getting services in terms of veterinary services to our farmers - farmers are just gambling! And as they gamble, this is their main livelihood. Like in Karamoja, once the crops fail, the livelihood turns to livestock. Farmers sell livestock to buy food. 

Now if this sector is killed by the ministry, how are we going to survive? (Laughter)  I am also challenging this Ministry of Agriculture, especially the Minister in charge of Livestock; the ministry does not have the data of the animals we are talking of. He has been telling us about the rotation of the vaccine but he has not told this House how many animals are we talking of. The infection rate is so scary; it means the Foot and Mouth Disease cannot even be managed. When you look at the budget of 1.2 billion, it is just on a sampled number of animals. What about the infections which are already on-going? 

In my district, not all the animals are vaccinated, and I am sure the infection now is on-going and the numbers will increase. And the minister is telling us that we need 500,000 vaccines, which is not the case. This is a lie; the infections are increasing which means that the number of animals to be vaccinated has increased as per his statement. And I do not know who is going to rescue this emergency. It is going to be an emergency and I do not know if it can be managed.

I also want to urge government to consider the livestock sector, like it has considered the crop sector. We have been talking of NAADS, mainly on crops; we have not talked about livestock –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude, she was going to present very important issues. (Laughter)  

MS NYOMERA: We have been considering the crop sector and investing a lot of monies there; mention coffee and bananas among others; but the livestock sector is being killed. And I do not know why it is being killed by the ministry and government. I really urge this House, next time when we are appropriating, we should consider the livestock sector. 

And also, we should ensure that the veterinary departments at the districts are well facilitated so that they can provide education for our farmers, to be able to manage these simple diseases. Even this Foot and Mouth Disease if there was education, it would have been managed. But just because there is no personnel down there, that is why we are incurring costs. Thank you.

4.57
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement he has made. But I want to tell the minister that, they should not only confine to areas that are traditionally with cattle. And I think that the minister is aware that Northern Uganda has been having re-stocking. And these re-stocking programmes draw animals from the areas that have been affected by Foot and Mouth Disease. 

So, when he is planning for vaccination, he should not leave out Northern Uganda, including Nwoya.  Recently just about a month ago, we received over 2,000 cattle and where they have come from could also be affected areas. So, honourable minister, please think of those areas. 

Secondly, related to vaccination of animals, you know in Nwoya District majority of the people are hunters since they live near the park, and they keep domestic animals like dogs. These dogs of recent contracted rabies and we lost four people who had been bitten by the dogs and died of rabies. 

I, therefore, request the minister to also plan for the vaccination of these dogs as they used to do in the past. Four people died but three pupils were bitten and are still undergoing treatment. Sometimes they come to us. So I request the minister to also put this into consideration. 

Then related to problems of farmers generally. I am sorry if I am going to get out of the topic. Recently, I was in Amuru District. There are two sub-counties that are suffering from weeds, and these weeds are called “Abua” in the local language. I do not how it is called scientifically. They are affecting the cereals greatly. People in these two sub-counties cannot harvest any cereal crop, whether maize or any other cereal. The only crop they can grow is cassava. 

I put it in the question for oral answers about one and half years ago but the answer has not been given yet. So, I request the minister to also look into this and save the farmers of Amuru District particularly Pabong Sub County and Atyak Sub County. Thank you so much.

4.59
MR GODFERY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his quick reactions to public outcry; it has not been common to other ministers. My worry now is about the districts which are not affected but are connected to those which are affected. Now that we are expecting a lot of movements during Christmas session, I would like him to consider that any time we may come up with some epidemic because of these movements in Christmas session. 

And I will also thank the minister for the provision for those who are expecting this disease because in his statement he says “in short of vaccines” but please keep monitoring any time we shall be calling you for reaction. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had allotted only 30 minutes to this matter but because most members here represent farmers and cattle keepers, we have gone beyond one hour. Let me ask the minister to answer in 10 minutes.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Rtd Col. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable colleagues who have raised issues and also those who have supported the initiative and called for more funding of the sector.

Madam Speaker, on vaccination programme, I think this was the way forward. I did not clarify interventions on many challenges raised. Surely, we are not keeping quiet on the issue of challenges of low doses of vaccine. I did indicate that we are targeting risky and affected areas; this is an efficient system which is scientific and when we do it routinely we make sure - you remember last time this Parliament appropriated money for massive vaccination. We spent four years without any outbreaks and this was because we were routinely vaccinating risky areas; risky areas are those transit routes.

So on the other issue of stuffing, we recently carried out transformation of NAADs to make sure that we have more extension service providers at every sub county who can reach the parishes and guide the farmers on crop and animal husbandry.

Now the issue of CBPP, yes CBPP is a very dangerous disease and we have - fortunately enough it is not a responsibility of Government, it is not one of those vaccines that we actually give free like FMD. But fortunately we sourced these vaccines from AU, IBAR and FAO. And we gave these vaccines free to those affected areas.

The issue of Moyo has just come to me; I need to find out because I am not aware that we have quarantine of CBPP in Moyo. Madam Speaker, I will check out and inform the members. But elsewhere we have used the available tools to make sure that we fight the disease.

Now is there vaccine coming from FAO? First, FAO, Uganda is a member of United Nations and we get benefits from FAO but FAO provides when we request and we did request FAO to intervene. Last time when there was a problem in Karamoja, we requested AU and IBAR and they gave us one million doses. Government is asking our share from these agencies where we are members. FAO has no veterinary officers in the field, they work with MAAIF, they use our officers; we are the ones who request for vaccine.

Hon. Syda Bbumba, yes there is an outbreak in Nakaseke. One of your farmers bought a breeding bull from Lufula here and he took it to Nakaseke. It is a new case; this came before this report was prepared; there is a very fresh outbreak out there in Nakaseke; so we are dealing with Nakaseke.

And you asked about students not going to school, surely this is not true because it is  a question of yesterday, we have just rammed a quarantine a week ago. Just one week I do not think- may be they could have not gone to school for other reasons but I have been to Nakaseke myself addressing those farmers there was no FMD until last two weeks.

Also Hon. Syda Bbumba’s recommendation to the House for money - yeah, we have made recommendation to cabinet to consider more funding of vaccine and surely cabinet will send this request to this House.

Partial quarantine has overstayed as said by hon. Kyabangi. Really, Madam Speaker, we need to be frank and share information on collegial basis. I have been to Gomba myself with her, with my team and I have explained the benefits of partial quarantine for Gomba District. First of all, they want to open the market because they are not getting revenue from cows which were smuggled from Tanzania.

And the Chief Administrative Officer put it in writing. I can bring this letter and tender it in the House that we need to open that market because cows are not coming outside. So for us to save the other districts from this disease, I went with hon. Kyabangi and we agreed that you stay under partial quarantine as you are selling cows, milk, you are not taking cows to the market.

But those traders - I think it was Gen. Tumwine who brought it out; because these markets are tendered out to some politicians - they are putting us on pressure to open the market because that is where they get money from and yet these markets are source of the disease problem.

On Kween District, yes it is part of the cattle corridors, and according to our restocking programme Kween, Sabiny in general, you are on the government ladder. We are not ignoring issues from Kapchorwa, Kween and those areas, we know about Ngege how productive it was and really we would like to see it restocked. So we are not forgetting you.

Budget for vaccine is still very low; yes but you know we appropriate this money in this House - (Interjection)- can I finish then you take a clarification? Now considering the districts in the - but before I leave this point, partial quarantine, I think somebody also asked whether there are grades of quarantines – yes: “Total quarantine” means you are not selling anything outside the district, no movements. “Partial quarantine” means that you are trading in animal products but with restrictions; for instance, you cannot take cows to the market. Cows can move from farm to slaughter places, they can leave from farm to farm within the same locality. You will sell milk, meat; you can transport meat in refrigerated trucks -(Interjection)- just hold on. 

There is a scenario where you have recovered from FMD and we think that there may be some animals incubating or storing these viruses. So for avoidance of these animals spreading the disease, we allow you to slaughter them because the FMD virus will die under frozen conditions or under hot conditions –(Interruptions)– yes -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Fungaroo please you will go with the minister to the canteen later -(Laughter)- we have got other work here. 

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: So, we need to consider districts within the proximity and, Speaker, this was his point, we are not leaving those districts which are not affected within the proximity, no. We cover all those transit routes.

Hon. Mujungu, the cows are moving to Congo and now you had floods, but soon water will be scarce and they are going to start meandering. You know, hon. Mujungu, I came to you, we sent a team to survey where to put the valley tanks. Now, during that process the rains came and there were floods; we cannot make valley tanks in floods. Surely, it is logical that since the water is receding, we are now going to come. 

I also remember that we have been sending vaccines to Ntoroko routinely; you can see that in the table. So the plan of action is that, now that the floods have gone, we are coming to provide water but you also must arrange farmers because it is cost sharing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have taken more than 10 minutes -

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Now, issues to do with Tsetse Flies; these are very dangerous insects. It is a vector for trypanosomiasis which causes Nagana in cattle and sleeping sickness in human beings -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes to conclude.

COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: It is a zoonotic disease and we are not only dealing with it as Uganda, but also as a region because it does not know boundaries. So, we are working together with our neighbours to deal with Tsetse Flies. But in Uganda, we are working with Ministry of Finance to do Tsetse Flies suppression in Karamoja and other parts of the country which are affected. But now you should encourage your farmers to use a colour side which contains Deltamethrin which kills both ticks and Tsetse Flies like other farmers are doing in the rest of the part of the country. 

Hon. Tumwine, I want to say that, it is not true that we have not attended to the animal industry; you must know we have made some milestone in the animal industry. We are reconstituting milk here, we are now exporting powder; we are producing 1.96 billion litres per annum and our headcount has moved from seven million to 14 heads of cattle.

On the 500,000 doses - yes they are very few, but if we get them routinely, we shall administer them scientifically to affected areas and risk areas. I think this was the honourable member from Napak: we cannot kill the animal industry; we are trying to do everything possible to deal with the problems. All I ask for members is that we continue to interact and sensitise our communities.

Hon. Alaso, I was in your place and the farmers are very happy. Yesterday I interacted with your chairman in the retreat; we are opening quarantine. It is better we work together and solve the problem because we need to look at farming as a business, we need to export our products, we need to get money out of what we do in farming. 

With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. (Interjection) With pork, there is a worm which causes some disease called psychosis which can also lead to epilepsy. When this warm goes in the brain, it becomes a big problem. In fact, we are trying to find out between the veterinary and medical officers, we suspect that the nodding syndrome -(Interjection)- yes I am telling you, it may be associated with this kind of problem. 

Madam speaker -(Interjections)- but you have people in the camps, you can pick tapeworm anywhere - you know our simple science in secondary school. You do not need to eat; sometimes you may contract tapeworms by only walking barefooted. So it is suspected that it could be one of the problems. But naturally, for pork, you have to cook it thoroughly if you have to eat it including fish. There is a country, I think it is Malaysia - those Island countries, have got a problem of this worm because they eat row fish, so if -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Next item. 

Honourable members, I wanted to just make a clarification about Lt Col Mpabwa. Earlier when she was seconding the motion for the defence, I referred to her as Major, but she is a Lieutenant Colonel. So, let the Hansard be corrected, Sarah Mpabwa is Lieutenant Colonel. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE A COMPLAINT ON THE UNDER PERFORMANCE OF THE LAW DEVELOPMENT CENTRE AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES
5.16
MR JACOB OBOTH	(Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate a complaint against the under performance of the Law Development Centre and other related issues brought under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament: 

“WHEREAS, the Law Development Centre is established under Section 2 of the Law Development Centre ACT CAP 132 of the laws of Uganda, with its functions clearly enumerated under Section 3 of the said ACT; 

AND WHEREAS, Regulation 2 of the Advocates Enrolment and Certification Regulation Statutory Instrument number 2,6,7 (1) makes it a requirement to acquire professional skill and experience for purposes of enrolling as an advocate to be the attendance of a post graduate bar course conducted by the Law Development Centre and an award of a diploma in legal practice;

AWARE THAT, as per Regulation 3 and the first schedule of the advocate school enrolment and certification regulation, the only other legal qualifications recognised for purposes of involvement as an advocate to the courts of judicature in Uganda are those which imply to a person to be called to the bar in England and Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland or Republic of Ireland;

NOTING THAT, the above provisions of the law have created a monopoly of the Law Development Centre in the facilitation of the postgraduate bar course, which is characterised with unacceptably high failure rate of the bar course, unethical conduct of professional advisors, promotion of state of fear among students, poor structure and design of the bar course, promoting examinations malpractice and insufficient seriously;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament of the Republic Uganda duly convened and sitting in Kampala on this 3rd day of December 2014 as follows: 

    1.  That a select committee be appointed under rules 178 and 179 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to investigate the allegation of unethical conduct of professional advisors, monopoly of the Law Development Centre, high failure rate, poor structure and design of the bar course, promoting examination malpractice and insufficient seriousness. 

    2. That proper terms of reference be drawn up to guide the select committee in the execution of the investigation.”

 I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded. Hon. Lukyamuzi, hon. Bahimba, hon. Mwiru, hon. Wadri. Justify 

MR JACOB OBOTH: Madam Speaker, if I may speak briefly about this motion. The Daily Monitor on 3 August 2009 quoted the Deputy Attorney-General - this is off cuff – who represented the President and I want to refer to a speech he read where the President directed the management of the LDC to check the high failure rates currently bogging the institution and establish the root cause and address it. This speech was read for the President by the Deputy Attorney-General and Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, hon. Freddie Ruhindi at the 36th Graduation Ceremony of LDC held at the LDC campus - it was a Friday.

The purpose of this motion is purely to seek the mandate of this House to create and establish a select committee to establish why we have high failure rate at the LDC. Examples can be drawn that in 2011/12 out of 404 students who sat for the final examinations only 104 passed and the 34 passed marginally and yet the law graduates are subjected to pre-entry exams before they can be enrolled for a bar course. About 2009, pre-entry was established to screen out students who want to join LDC but just even last week over 130 again failed. We are wondering where the problem is! Is it about the course content at the universities or the way they teach these students at LDC? Why are the failure rates so high? Is the problem -

THE SPEAKER: Order, he is moving a motion

MR OBOTH: The law council introduced pre-entry and in their finding in 2012 they were saying students do not know basic things. And some of the questions they posed that time were: “Give the meaning of the abbreviation JJA”. These are lawyers being asked to give meanings of abbreviations to enter a professional bar course and the law council when they examined that most students failed, they said that they do not know basic things, they had never read any court of appeal judgement. But abbreviations are abbreviations “JJA” could go for “June, July, August,” or many other things. For a lawyer to be subjected to this very basic level; we are demeaning the profession and we shall be reduced to asking, “What is the meaning of CJ” and CJ in the mind of the Law Council is Chief Justice but CJ can mean many things unless they are unified. 

At one point, we find that in 2013, out of 1,075 who sat for the pre-entry, and these are now graduate lawyers, only 302 passed; 773 failed pre-entry examinations and even those 302 who passed, there was no guarantee that they will pass the LDC. 

So, Madam Speaker, there are deep rooted problems that caused even the head of state, the head of Executive to ask the management of the LDC, through the Deputy Attorney-General who is listening attentively, what the root cause is. It is a matter of concern.

The education system we know has been liberalised, but are we seeing the quality we need? Would the quality assurance be by failing and examining these people at the LDC both for pre-entry and even when they have entered there? 

So there are a few matters that have come out that at LDC there are excessively harsh rules of passing the course. For example, Rule 47 provides that if a student fails three or more subjects in the practical exercises he/she shall be discontinued from the course. But there is also Rule 86 which is coached in a more or less the same language; it provides that if a student fails four or more subjects in the final examination he/she shall be deemed to have failed the course. These rules contravene. We find that the students are dismissed but also Rule 15 provides to the effect that a student must complete the course within three years. The same rules now when you fail one, two, three four, a few times before three years end, you are dismissed from the course and we find that in contravention of the same rules.

Madam Speaker, going into the merits of this motion, in addition, the LDC does not teach anything new except from drafting.  The LDC would be the equivalent of the Medical School where you go and do the practical. After four years, when you go to LDC you begin what you do in four years, it is done in one year. So honestly, what you did in first year cannot be examined in fifth year now of your study; that is quite strange. Is it about the curriculum, what is the cause of the failure rate at the LDC?

There is so much taught and so little is examined. This is where you are taught to draft all the documents, professional ethics but when time comes for examination very little is asked of you. Some of you, including our Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business is freshly from there, he can attest to this. You find that you read so much –(Interjections)- and he passed - (Applause)- and very little is asked of you. 

There has also been an issue of unethical conduct of professional advisors where some professional advisors lack basic ethical conduct and bearing in mind that most of them are not teachers. To be a professional advisor at LDC you only have to have a law degree, practicing advocate; so there has been issues of allegations of deliberate attempt to fail students, bullying of students, malice and so on.
 
Madam Speaker, these and many others go into the very reasons for request for establishment of the select committee, and also you find that whatever is happening at the LDC promotes examination malpractices. These days you have to pass, people do connive, buy out exams, there are examination leakages and this is one of the reasons that kill the quality. 

Madam Speaker, we would only call for this House to establish a committee to inquire and if possible to go and look at the role of the Law Council, Law Society and the LDC itself. Would it be the time now that when we have the liberalisation of education that these universities as they are would be empowered probably to administer additional professional training and the examination could be set by the LDC at their premises.

The LDC has only capacity to host about 500 to 600 students but usually we have so many students in thousands applying. Outside there, the students believe that they all pass but it is just a mechanism of controlling and manipulating the system because there are no adequate facilities to accommodate the students at the LDC.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Parliament resolves to establish a select committee to inquire into the underperformance of LDC. I thank you so much.

5.31
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. What we are seeking from this Parliament today actually is not to determine the merits of the petition. We are only seeking for the authority of this House to allow an investigation into the issues being raised.

At this juncture, Madam Speaker, we have the powers under Article 90, of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda for Parliament to establish this committee. And even our Rules of Procedure actually give us the mandate to establish this committee for purposes of giving effect to what we are seeking. But what is most important is that education is a right under Article 30, it is to the effect that everybody has a right to education. What does this mean, Madam Speaker, that out there people have actually spent money to pay tuition for their children but end up being disappointed. 

And since this is a requirement for people to practice law and earn a living, we are saying that history is a problem, the way it has been demonstrated by hon. Oboth Oboth. We are saying that if you have 1,000 students sitting for pre-entry and you are having 400 to join and you are having 100 to pass that means that the majority of the students are left out.

With unemployment, which is becoming almost the biggest security issue in this country, it means that we need to re-examine the problem, the setting of LDC? The LDC was set up when it was taking students only from Makerere. Today many universities are churning students to go to LDC. 

Madam Speaker, I am on record, I brought a motion in this House that when you examine universities in terms of academic teaching staff, you hardly have any which is operating at 50 per cent. So, if there is a problem with the students being churned out in the universities then the solution does not lie to stop them from practising as lawyers because this same thing applies to other disciplines, that if the universities operating below 50 per cent academic staff and it is churning accountants and other people - if the quality of people who are getting out of these universities leave a lot to be desired, then the sector should be actually reviewed. 

By us, Madam Speaker, asking that a committee be set up, this means that all the stakeholders are to appear to this committee. How unfair is this; if you say that someone who has passed the entry has joined the LDC up to the fourth term, that because he has failed three subjects then you dismiss him, he has no right even to be readmitted at LDC. This has been now just corrected and now they are saying because they knew there was a petition - we are saying that education is a right, someone should be given the right to study.

Finally, Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that the Director of LDC appeared before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and he admitted that these people whom they call failures, go to Rwanda, Kenya and become the best students out there. So, this may even point to the fact that we need to holistically look for a solution in this matter. And by this House appointing a committee it will interface with all the stakeholders and then we shall be in position to form a decision as Parliament as whether to adopt the decommission of the committee or not, but at least we are saying that we are not asking for too much from this Parliament by doing its work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.35
MR JOHN KEN–LUKYAMUZI: (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the previous speakers for making my work very easy. I will answer just a few issues in support of them. Those that are negative about what we are aspiring argue that there are many lawyers. If there are many lawyers, is it a crime? The legal profession is becoming internationally famous that once you qualify as a lawyer your employment base is beyond Uganda.

So, why are they making noise? There are also issues to be looked at. Who tells you that the LDC is very perfect after the little experience I have had in the study of law - I have discovered that the lawyers at LDC study legislative drafting for only a very short while. And yet the mechanism of legal drafting is so vital to a lawyer that one needs it to be studied exhaustively. So, there are many things which will be reformed as a result of this committee we are talking about. 

Another very important point which is a matter of law, Madam Speaker, and it should not be discarded is in regard to a case which appeared in court that caused all the amendments. In Niwagaba v. the LDC, court held that there was need to liberalised legal education in all universities. After liberalising legal education in all the universities then you must break the bonds of a monopoly at only one institution. Why have we talked successfully about Dar-es-Salaam? Why was Dar-es-Salaam University successful in law teaching because they conveniently provided avenue for concentrating and enabling the students of law to process what they are doing conveniently. You cannot do the same when you go to the current LDC.

So, the issue which is being advanced is that we may be wrong in our assumption, but many people have made noise about something at LDC that must be done and we should not sit on a time bomb. The time is now for that committee to be constituted so that we know where we have gone wrong.

Lastly, when you read our preamble in the Constitution, Madam Speaker, you will see a certain extraction view of the bad history we have had. We do not want to have another type of this history. Why they are saying so, they are saying so because Uganda badly requires legal knowledge, the human rights suffocation we have had in so many ventures of life demand that we invest in more legal professional.

5.39
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues, I also stand to support the motion and this time from an education perspective. Whereas not everybody is expected to pass, but if the failure rate is high like in this case 75 per cent and it is perennial, then as educationists we start wondering and we think there is a problem in the system. And it for that reason I support the motion. In a university setting, if you are a professor or lecturer, and you have a high failure rate then you owe an explanation to the senate; the academic governing body of that university. So, I believe there is a problem.

Secondly, what is the essence of teaching?  The essence of teaching is to make people understand and learn. In education, we believe that everybody can learn as long as we follow the basic principle of economy and simplicity. And, I think this principle is being abused. I am wondering if at LDC there is what we call “externalisation”. The essence of having external examiners is to check, are you doing the right thing? I am wondering, does a sister academic institution check what is being taught and how it is being taught? Are these exams moderated? Is the assessment looked at so that there is fairness and equity on the side of the students as well as the quality assurance?

I think we need to do a curriculum evaluation; we need to look at the pedagogy; how is the teaching being done. To me LDC needs to move away from the “Ivory tower” mentality. This ivory tower mentality is what is killing our universities; the belief that knowledge is supposed to be for a few people. I do not want to buy the argument that we have very many lawyers. Actually, law can be applied everywhere; we have got very high crime rates in the countryside; people can set up legal clinics; people can even educate the community using legal knowledge and we would save quite a lot in litigation. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the efficacy of the pre-entry exams. When we give a pre-entry exam, what are we testing? In most cases, the role of pre-entry exam is for placement, not for elimination; to see, where is this that this person has got a gap; where can this person be given remedial teaching; and then you have a better person.

On teaching, all of you know how we lost mathematics. All of us believed that maths is very difficult. Normally, I use the concept of the gradient; when you go to Senior Five, how you have moved in the horizontal axis and how you have moved in the Y-axis. They normally say, change in the Y-axis over change in the X-axis. Then, they reduce it to use the sign of change using a triangle; they say delta Y over delta X. Then, they do not talk of delta; they say DY over DX; and you get lost, when actually they are talking about a simple principle on how you move horizontally and how you move vertically. I think that is the type of teaching that we have at LDC, and that is why people are failing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, members, let it be two minutes now.

5.43
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Oboth Oboth for bringing this motion, which I believe will carry the day. If you look at the history of LDC, LDC was a labour camp during the colonial era. And, by the time it became Law Development Centre, the population of this country was about five million people. Today, our population is 35 million people. At that time, education was not as well buttressed as it is today, where we have got UPE; we have got USE; we have a lot of secondary schools; we have a number of regional universities. 

This, therefore, means that each of those institutions is rapidly and continuously churning out students who should all end up getting the qualification at LDC, which unfortunately is as stagnant as it was during the time when the British left it for us. Therefore, there is a reason why we have got very many failures from that institution. Even if you look back, there are prominent lawyers in this country who have even risen to high positions who got pass degrees in the Faculty of Law in Makerere University, but they were able to be admitted and passed their courses in LDC. What is the reason for people who are now coming out of university, getting First Class Degree in LLB, and when they get to LDC, they fail! Isn’t there something really wrong?

I even have a case in point of a gentleman who went through Makerere University; he holds a PhD in Law and is a staff of UN. He was based in Geneva and at the same time a visiting lecturer in the University of Manchester. When this friend came back to Uganda, wanting to pursue the post-graduate diploma in law at LDC, he was said to have failed –(Interjections)- the point I am making is, unless you have designed your curriculum, for certain people to fail; honestly a teacher who is teaching law students at that level to come and fail a pre-entry at LDC? Surely, there is something for us to question; whether we are being professional or we want just to establish some monopoly for a few. 

Therefore, I would want to appeal to honourable colleagues that we give this motion overwhelming support so that the select committee can help us and government to see if we can also expand LDC, so that we can have regional centres so that students can have one centre of examination setting in order to maintain quality of education. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.46
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I am very uncomfortable, and I stand to oppose this motion because, we are opening up a Pandora Box. If we really agree with what has been proposed, we will not be in position to handle the many other interested parties in other fields. Medical students study for five years at Makerere University and then, they go for internship. When you look at those who are offering architecture, there are few who are admitted for that course. When it comes to pharmacists, very few are admitted for that course, yet there are so many who would wish to do that.

The issue of LDC is quality control. If we could have our colleague like Gen. Moses Ali, who is very busy, go there and pass what is the criterion. That means that LDC is in for quality. The moment we allow to interfere with institutional frameworks, especially academic institutions, we would not handle that. 

I will support a move maybe to cut away the monopoly since we now have so many universities. We can cut away the monopoly by engaging National Council for Higher Education because by the time LDC was in place, we had only one university or two. Now, we have many universities. So, if a move is to have other institutions that can give services at regional level so that we can enrol many students, then that is it. 

5.49
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, this is very interesting. This motion is being brought up by one of my closest friends, who knows me as paralegal, hon. Oboth Oboth. 

I do not know whether it is necessary for us as Parliament to give ourselves the power to look at some of these academic professional institutions which have existed up to this point, for so many years. Most of the professional colleagues here who are lawyers, including our very beloved Speaker, went through LDC. I do not what happened at that time but they were able to go through with the very rules and structure that we have right now. 

I remember when hon. Okot Ogong was submitting, he talked about the structure and the pre-entry exams. Who sets the pre-entry exams? Is it LDC? I want some of these issues to be clarified. Is it - (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give is that these pre-entry exams, as hon. Oboth knows, are not set by the Law Development Centre. They are set by the Uganda Law Council. They are the ones who set, mark and determine who has passed or who has failed. 

The other information that will save the time of this House is that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is handling this very issue -(Interjection)- I am telling you because I am a member of this committee. We have had an opportunity to visit the Law Development Centres of Tanzania, Rwanda and Kenya to make comparisons and answer some of these issues raised in this petition.

I want, therefore, to inform my colleague that if he does not mind, we really should end this. There is a special committee already handling this very issue -(Interjection)- I am telling you this because I am a member of that committee and at any time, we shall bring a report to answer these issues. If it is not adequate, then a committee will be set up at that level. Why are we wasting a lot of valuable time?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I am somehow persuaded that we should look at the issue of the increased population - the issue raised by hon. Wadri about an increased population of students. Probably, we could look at how best we can decentralise LDC -(Member Timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you half a minute to conclude.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To this extent, we may actually look at how best we can do this so that we take into account the increased number of students we have now across the country. 

Apart from that, what kind of precedent are we setting with other professional bodies? Tomorrow, Dr Lulume’s professional body will now be questioned by us. The institute of physical planner will be questioned by us when the physical planners do not perform well. Architects will also be questioned. Really, we must be very cautious as we move. 

I can only support this motion to the extent of having an increased population of students so that we do not have limited numbers. Apart from that, I may not accept the other conditions. Thank you.

5.54
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhanguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise in recognition of the issues and concerns raised by the mover of the motion. However, I have one big challenge because we seem to be getting too many select committees in this Parliament. In my view, the issues raised in this motion can possibly be handled administratively by the Ministry of Education and they can bring a statement to the Floor. 

I am more worried that as we talk, if we look at our performance even in terms of examinations of UPE, the next day I may be required to bring a motion to set up a select committee on the performance of UPE in Buhanguzi particularly. So, Madam Speaker, I really appreciate the issues because the issues which have been brought up in the motion need the understanding of this House, but must this be done by a select committee? I am looking at a possibility where if we must go that direction, then it should be the Committee on Education to take that up. The Committee on Education must go deeper and study the situation at the Law Development Centre other than looking at why we are failing. 

There are many policies which are coming up, for example emphasis on science subjects; how have we prepared ourselves for the science subjects at the university level if we have not instilled that culture from primary, secondary, up to the university? Perhaps the failures at LDC could be a result of the quality of the students we are getting from UPE, secondary and university. Look at the universities, look at the curriculum -(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your statement.

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns raised; my only point of departure is on the select committee. We should either the minister to come and give a comprehensive statement on the issues surrounding LDC or this matter be referred to the Committee on Education for a comprehensive study and report to this House. Thank you.

5.55
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA (NRM, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my good friend, hon. Oboth, and the seconder, hon. Mwiru, for bringing this motion. 

People who study and pass law are among the best brains in our country. So, to have people going and failing as we have heard is a cause of concern. It will cause frustration amongst our people. Also, law is a highly professional area and we must accept that. Thirdly, because we have many universities teaching law, the opportunity to enter LDC should not be so restricted. We need to be a little more flexible. 

I like the words used by hon. Mwiru, that we should investigate because we think there is a problem and if we are going to investigate, we should not be biased a priori. We want to find a solution. Is it because the facilities are lacking? Is it because the law schools are of low quality? Is it because of bad teaching? We do not know, but we want to find out. 

My view, Madam Speaker, is that Parliament has done well to identify the problem. So, let us find a proper forum so that proper work is done. I would love to know that a professor from Dar es Salaam, from Nairobi and even from London is part of the system to go and examine our institution so that when we get a result, we are really very happy with it and it gets wide acclaim. 

I would like to therefore persuade my good friend, hon. Oboth; the issue has been raised but let us not leave it to ourselves at Parliament. Let us find a deeper, more professional body to examine this issue for us and then we find a solution.  I also do not support the idea of a select committee or a committee of Parliament; let us find a more professional formation to do this work for us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Oboth for this motion and hon. Mwiru for supporting it. 

The concerns raised are really very important and pertinent. We have to be very careful with the way we handle them, otherwise we may be misunderstood. About 15 years ago, there was a strike by university students in Bangladesh and the reason was that they had been refused from cheating in exams. (Laughter) When my friend, hon. Oboth Oboth, was presenting, he said, “You see, the work is so much and they test very little…” That is very good; you are becoming a professional. 

I will give you an example; in my case, I did my masters in slope stability, which is a very wide study. Any good university does not give you room to manoeuvre as if you are on preliminaries. They gave us only one question, because you are becoming someone who should be competent in that subject. If they give you very wide questions as if you are in O’ Level and A Level, then we will not know that you are really a professional.

Somebody mentioned that if they are failing - In fact in good universities, if people are passing so well or failing, those are the areas they ask about - how have they managed to pass so well or why are they failing? We do not need a select committee of Parliament to really find out why and investigate such issues. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I totally agree with my colleague, hon. Kiyonga, that we do not involve ourselves as Parliament in this. The next time another MP will come here and ask why universities are allowing only scientists to go for engineering and medicine –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Oboth. 

I was seated here listening and I was wondering how this can happen to Uganda’s brightest, people who have gone through various levels of elimination, have studied seven years of primary, four years of O Level, two years of A Level and have also done a degree, and at each level there is elimination. Now, these are the people who LDC is telling us that in the last nine months, after spending 16 or more years of studying and are the cream of the country, cannot pass that course. I hold a similar view to hon. Mwiru’s that we need to examine whether there may be something wrong. It might not be the students. Why should there be a 75 per cent failure rate? 

On the issue of limiting the number of lawyers, that can be catered for by the market forces. If there are many lawyers, at some point the course will become less attractive and fewer people will apply. 

The other issue is the need to liberalise and have other institutions offering that bar course so that we can be able to compare it with others. Maybe the East African Community will help us in that. If Uganda could allow people who do the bar course in Kenya, Tanzania and other countries to practice from here, then that would be helpful because the bar course will not be restricted to only LDC. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.05
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for bringing up these issues and I would like to react to some of them.

First of all, we have the National Council for Higher Education; why can’t they bother to find out whether the way lectures are being done at Law Development Centre is the right way, and then maybe stop them if what they are doing is wrong? What is the purpose of the National Council for Higher Education to the Law Development Centre, and it is one of the institutions of higher education that we have in this county?

Secondly, someone may pass and get a degree, even a first class degree, at these other universities because the courses are being examined yearly. But this LDC course consolidates all these years and the examination is carried out within nine months. So, those people may have passed because the courses are being examined within one year, but here they are being examined on everything that they covered in five years, before they graduated as lawyers, within nine months. I would also encourage the creation of other centres so that we reduce on the student-lecturer ratio for better examination and quality education. 

I do not support the setting up of a select committee in Parliament to investigate the quality of education or why the 75 per cent are failing. People may take things for granted that if they pass with a first class degree from Makerere or any other university, they have the potential to pass and for -(Member timed out.)

6.07
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like I had earlier on indicated, the Law Development Centre of Uganda is ranked best in this entire region – the east, the central and even south. If you did not know this, know it from me because I have had the opportunity to visit all these law schools with my colleagues who will maybe give more information.

We went to Kenya and we found out that they do this course for a much shorter time. They do not have pre-entry exams first of all, and that is one difference. They actually want to adopt this very system, actually starting next academic year, because of the quality of our output. The only advantage in Kenya is that they set eight questions and you have an alternative to answer say only five while in Kampala here, there are no alternative questions – you must answer all of them. That is one disadvantage we found.

We went to Dar-es-Salaam and until about five years ago, Dar es Salaam did not have an equivalent of LDC. They would only be tutored by a senior advocate. They have been coming here to benchmark what we are doing here at LDC. Go to Rwanda, I think they essentially do not have a serious LDC, and it is only those with very poor passes that go to Rwanda. 

Madam Speaker, given that background, I want to re-assure my colleagues and ask, with humility, that we give an opportunity to your committee, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. This committee is charged with oversight of that particular institution and it has carried out a very comprehensive investigation. They will soon be coming to present their report to this very House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.10
MS JENNIFER MUJUNI (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which is mandated to oversee the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) institutions and the Law Development Centre is one of them. I want to thank hon. Oboth for this motion because the challenges that he has indicated are all before our committee. 

Recently, we benchmarked in Nairobi, Kigali and Dar-es-Salaam at their law schools. We were trying to get best practices. We are doing a lot of investigations and actually addressing these allegations- the unethical conduct, monopoly of LDC, high failure rate, poor physical structures and examination malpractice. We are soon finalizing that report. We are actually working hand in hand with the director of the law school and all the officials of the law school. 

We have done this exhaustively and when it is ready, Madam Speaker, the report will be brought here to the Floor of Parliament and we shall have a debate. We will have recommendations which, at the end of the day, will address the fears that are in this motion.  Looking at all the challenges that have been highlighted, we shall address them in the interest of all Ugandans. So, I do not really support the proposal that a select committee should be set up. Maybe the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will handle this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I find interesting is that some members of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee are the ones who actually brought this. I do not understand this.

6.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago):  Madam Speaker, it has become very clear that the movers of the motion have a point. The only point where I differ from what they are saying is on the committee; it may not necessarily require us to form a separate committee, now that the members of the legal and parliamentary affairs committee have asserted that they are working on issues like these.

Another fear I have with creating another select committee is that there are other disciplines also which have similar challenges like those at LDC. We have the discipline of accountancy, for example; the challenges that LDC is facing are the same that the Institute of Certified Public Accountants is facing. So, many Ugandans enrol for a course in accountancy but very few complete the course or even pass it. So, the moment we open this box to have a select committee, it will mean that this committee has got to widen the scope of its investigations. 

If we want to handle LDC, therefore, it would be prudent that we leave it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Let them bring the report, now that we have identified and accepted that there is an issue. Indeed, there are issues, we all agree, but the modality of how we want to do it is what matters. If it is supposed to be like that then all these other disciplines that have challenges also have to be considered.

6.14 
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank members for bringing up this issue because people have been complaining about LDC. 

However, I differ from those saying that we create another institution. I believe that we do not want to dilute the professionalism that we have been having with Law Development Centre. Even when you go to other countries, Kenya has one law school – KLC - and as they have said, it is the same thing in Dar es Salaam. Creating parallel institutions would mean that we are going to have half-baked lawyers, and you know what it means and what they have been doing; our learned friend, the Attorney-General, knows that very well.

Many institutions have been coming up. Most of them have been coming up with different courses and yet they do not have the capacity to handle the courses. They are training lawyers, they are training in everything and if we let these institutions create parallel institutions, it means that we are going to have low quality lawyers in this country.

For that matter, Madam Speaker, I do not why we like creating parallel committees even within Parliament. We do not trust our own committees. Why don’t we give them terms of reference such that they work within those terms to dig out those problems, particularly with regards to the sectors that they oversee? If we put these issues before a select committee, what does it mean? They are the same Members of Parliament. Members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs are also Members of Parliament and we even have lawyers in that committee.

Madam Speaker, what Government should dig into is what hon. Kiyonga’s has just said; we should expound and even try to investigate further their capacity to take up all the students from other institutions like Mukono, Nkozi among others. Maybe it is small and we need to make it bigger, but they should remain under the Law Development Centre. (Member timed out.)

6.16
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I really want our colleagues to know that not everybody can be a lawyer, just like not everybody can be a doctor, not everybody can be an engineer or even an MP. (Laughter) It is true that there is a very high failure rate at LDC and I would like us to establish the root cause of the failure.

I want to concur with my colleague, hon. Franca Akello, that there are problems in all these institutions. So if we single out LDC, it is as if we are a dictatorship. This is an institution which has its own rules, laws and setup. I really feel that we should not impose our will on them. I feel that it is really wrong. We have institutions that check LDC; we have the National Council for Higher Education. I suggest that it should be the National Council for Higher Education to work with Ministry of Education and find out the root cause of the failure.

It is true that there is a high failure rate, but could it be because we have poor quality students? Could it be because of the admission requirements? Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was talking about the University of Dar-es-Salaam bringing out very good students; do you know the admission requirements of the University of Dar-es-Salaam? If you fail English language at O Level, you cannot be -(Member timed out.) 

6.19
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Oboth Oboth and the team for bringing this motion. What the motion is asking us to do is to go and find out; why do we fear finding out? 

Secondly, this problem has been there, even with the existence of your committee of legal and parliamentary affairs; so, this select committee is actually to investigate you - all the stakeholders – (Laughter)- because may be they are also part of the problem. Yes, this is a special mission because this problem has been in existence with the existence of all other –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, honestly, with all due respect, is hon. Fungaroo in order to allege that the all-powerful Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, a committee on your own affairs, is a huge suspect in this investigation on Law Development Centre? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, he is not in order.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, most obliged. The point here is that there is a problem and there are signs and symptoms and only one is the most important here – the failure. It is the one leading us to the conclusion that there is a problem there and we want to find out what it is. 

To me this motion is in order. There are stakeholders that have been there for a long time - the National Council for Higher Education, the lecturers, the students, etc. All these combined, what are the factors responsible for this problem? This is why I support the proposal for a select committee. 

There are bodies that deal with highly professional knowledge and skills. Medicine, for example, deals with life and death; does it mean the people in the medical field do not need professionalism? Dr Bayigga is here; they have a national council, a medical and dental practitioners’ council, allied health, etc, which take care of professionalism and quality. Why don’t they have this kind of problem? 

Madam Speaker, let us relax. We want to find out what the cause of this problem is. Parliament is the one that established this institution, why do you fear to find out whether what you established is performing well vis-à-vis the times that have changed?  

Madam Speaker, I respect you but I support the idea of a select committee without necessarily undermining other entities. This will help us to study all the stakeholders combined and the environment to come up with better information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 18 members have contributed to this motion. What is clear is that there is a problem. What we do not agree on is how to establish the sources of the problem. I do not know whether the Attorney-General can give us a way forward because there is a problem. How do we move because there is disagreement about a select committee; there are proposals that we look elsewhere for answers. 

6.22
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, this is a very important subject that we are debating and I have tried to internalise many of the issues being raised. I have sufficient background to this matter and I agree with the quotation made by hon. Oboth. Yes, it is true that I represented the President one time at the graduation ceremony and that was part of his message. 

The challenges at LDC have been live to all of us. Having listened very carefully, I am now persuaded that in order not to have duplicity of work - In any case, we are competing for scarce resources and that is one challenge that LDC is facing anyway. You know, of course, that you voted for money and we have been trying to complete an auditorium, which will sufficiently increase on the intake in terms of lecturing capacity. However, it would not be sufficient enough for intake of students into the Law Development Centre. The decentralisation is being processed but as you know, the challenge is also money. 

It is true that there may be so many other problems and challenges leading to the failures. It may be partly the staff, partly students and partly the systemic nature of the process, learning environment and everything. 

I was told of an interesting story where three students approached their professor, they had smeared themselves with grease on the eve of the examination and they told the professor that they were coming from a wedding and one of the tyres burst and they had a nasty accident and they could not actually do the exam. So, the professor politely said, “it is okay, young men; go back and prepare and come back after three days and we will give you the exam”. So they went away happy and the three of them came back on that day. 

He made them sit in different rooms and gave them the paper: “Question No.1, who and who wedded? Question No.2, which tyre got burst? Question No. 3, which was the venue? Each question carries these marks. Good luck.” If you were the one -(Laughter)- More often than not, the challenges in the examinations are many. Sometimes such students are the ones who normally cause strikes in schools when they find themselves not prepared for the exams. 

All those are matters that you say need to be investigated. Fine, let us investigate them; the idea of investigation is good. Now that the committee is already carrying out this exercise, let us receive their report. If we see that that report needs to feed into another investigative process, then we shall get there. I am sure Government, because I have been consulting, shall be in a position to identify resources for that particular component of further investigation using a professional body, to take it further from where the report that we shall receive from the legal and parliamentary affairs committee stops. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

6.27
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South): Madam Speaker, investigation calls for witnesses to be summoned. We are not told by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs whether they have bothered to find out those who have suffered and those who have gone through the pain. I am not doing this for my own but for the many parents and students who could have gone through the pain. Lucky is you who has gone through or will not go through or your children have gone through. 

The lack of employment we talk about - You pay fees for four years and your child at the end is told by somebody that they cannot join LDC or after joining, that they have failed and we continue to come here and lament about unemployment. Without the LDC diploma you are not a complete lawyer. This is the dilemma. 

We are taking it so lightly and I might even concede that the committee deals with it, but we have to know that this matter has been there for some time. The Deputy Attorney-General represented the President in 2009. The President reached a point in his speech and said that this is a concern. 

Madam Speaker, I went through the same LDC and I have taught law and lectured at the university myself. The issue is deeper than what we think. If you think that the sectoral committee of Parliament can handle it without the need for a specialised small committee, well- I have raised this on behalf of the people that are concerned about this matter, who are interested in justice. I should have declared that I am not one of those who have failed LDC that I may have a conflict interest. 

I just want to conclude. Madam Speaker, the Deputy Attorney-General has said, and I agree with him, that there is a problem and I would be surprised if he said the contrary. The Deputy Attorney-General has said the sectoral committee is handling this but investigation is not complete when witnesses are not invited. Would it be possible -(Mr Alex Byarugaba rose_)- Hon. Alex Byarugaba, I listened to you. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we hear from the committee? Tell us what the committee is doing because we are now speculating.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I do respect you, sir, and you know that. Take heart, we have met even the students who failed; we tracked them down wherever they were. At one time, we finished our meeting at around 8.00 at night, meeting students. 

So take heart, honourable colleagues. We are trying our best. You all know the circumstances under which Parliament operates but we are trying as much as possible to give the best of what we have found out. Take heart.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the issue is not about me taking heart; I have no personal interest in this matter to take heart.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I have had the benefit to listen to the debate and we seem to actually agree that there is a problem – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we all agree.

MR PAUL MWIRU: I am only wondering whether it is not procedurally right that since hon. Oboth did not move the motion for himself, we propose that those who petitioned through hon. Oboth appear before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. So, when the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is producing a report, they will have interfaced with these people other than merely trying to suffocate this. 

We have a petition before us and we cannot run away from our responsibility; so, we must dispose of this petition by suggesting that the people who petitioned hon. Oboth appear before the committee and then at the end of that, it will close. Of course -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in support of hon. Oboth, I want to inform you that the petitioners have been coming here, writing letters, threatening to demonstrate in the car park near my office because they think we are not taking action. So, it was important that this matter actually comes to the Floor. However, let us find a quick way of getting them some form of justice. You brought it out, they wanted it heard.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I wanted to conclude by making that proposal, which hon. Paul Mwiru has given. That is why I said that investigation is not complete until you listen to all witnesses, but we are good at jumping the gun. However, I want to thank all of you who are at it. Hon. Alex Byarugaba, there is nothing like taking heart; this is not a personal war and you do not want to console me. (Laughter)  

If the Speaker or the House resolves that the petitioners go and appear before the committee - because they have grievances and they want to be heard - I would have no problem -(Interjection)- I think I have heard enough from the legal committee; just hold on and I conclude. 

I think I have done my part, I have fought the good fight, I have run the race and I would concede to the view that this matter is referred to the sectoral committee to handle. I would then accordingly - I believe the Speaker’s office has over 300 signatures of people who have complained. So when you see Oboth here - I passed those things with additional professional qualifications. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable members. I think the position is that we accept that there is a problem and it has also taken time without being resolved. I know that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs only have two Bills, the Anti-Corruption and the Pensions Bills. So, can we require that you complete this matter in time for the Third Meeting? 

It has taken long and I think those petitioners want answers. So, we urge you to expeditiously handle this matter, receive the witnesses, receive the petitioners so that we can get a report to this House. We want to thank honourable members for doing their job to air the issues of the population. (Applause) Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION ASSESSING THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES 
IN SIRONKO DISTRICT AND SEBEI SUB-REGION

6.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I wish on behalf of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation to present a report of the findings of the committee when we paid a visit to the districts of Sironko, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo.  I believe this report has been uploaded on our iPads because it was submitted way back in September. 

The introduction just gives the mandate of this committee. Paragraph 2 is about the background: Accordingly, in respect of the above mandate, in June 2014 this committee travelled to the districts of Sironko, Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo to assess the progress in the implementation of government assurances in those areas. This particular visit was conducted as a follow-up on the assurances made to the people of Sironko and Sebei sub-region and the findings are reported below.

Paragraph 3.0, which I will not go into, is about the various promises or assurances which were given to those districts. Quickly, Madam Speaker, I want to go to page 4 which is on the methodology: The committee visited and inspected the projects where applicable; held meetings with the district leadership in the different districts; received memoranda from the district leaders; and held public hearings to capture the views of the public on the state of affairs in the sub-region as far as implementation of government assurances is concerned.
 
Observations and Findings 

Sironko District

In Sironko District, the committee held a meeting with the district leadership and noted the following: 
a) Assurance No. 1 - University bursaries for needy students pledged in June 2012 in Rwakitura. The observations and findings were as follows:
    i. The committee noted that three students from the district had been sponsored to receive university education. 

    ii. This arrangement could no longer hold since the State House bursary scheme has been abolished in favour of the new student loan scheme.
 
The recommendation made by the committee is that Government facilitates the students who were already on the programme until they complete their studies, for those that may not have completed their courses by then. However, a follow-up mechanism should also be established to identify continuing students who may need further support.

b) Tarmacking of Namagumba–Budadiri-Nalugugu Road (41 kilometres)

Observations and Findings	

The committee noted that while this road is important for the development of the area and the tourism sector since it serves as the way to Mt Elgon National Park as well as being the people’s access to basic services, it remains largely impassable. 

On that particular day, we had to abandon the parliamentary bus and we had to mobilise four-wheel drive vehicles from the district to take us along this road. The district officials were not happy with the appalling state of this murram road. Efforts had been made to remind the Government and the Ministry of Works and Transport about the non fulfilment of this pledge. During the rainy season, accessing the health centres using this road is difficult.

Recommendation

The Minister of Works and Transport should ensure that the works on Namagumba–Budadiri-Nalugugu Road are expedited in order to improve the quality of lives and service delivery of the community. A progress report should be provided to Parliament within three months. Of course, this was then; the minister for this sector will have to tell us whether any work has been done from that time when we visited this area.

c) Establishing a polytechnic in commemoration of the late Prof. Nabudere

The committee learnt that Prof. Dan Wadada Nabudere, born on 15 December 1932 and died on 9 November 2011, was a Ugandan academician, author, a political scientist and a development specialist. He was a professor at the Islamic University in Uganda and Executive Director of Marcus Gravey Pan-African Institute in Mbale. He was a barrister and a former member of the Uganda National Liberation Front. 

At his burial in 2011, His Excellency the President, on behalf of Government, promised the people of Sironko that a polytechnic would be built in his honour to augment the fight against illiteracy that he was passionate about.

Observations and Findings

The committee noted that whereas land had been identified and several reminders had been communicated to the Office of the President by the district leaders since 2014, no work had been done to date.

The committee demands for a status report on the establishment of the polytechnic, availed to Parliament by the Minister for the Presidency in liaison with the Minister of Education and Sports within two weeks. That was then but we still believe that this recommendation still holds water.

d) Upgrading Budadiri Health Centre IV to a referral hospital status

The committee noted that Budadiri Health Centre IV is a government-funded health unit and the only district referral facility headed by a medical officer, who works with other 19 health workers and 14 support staff. The health facility offers health services to the community; for example, on average 89 caesarean birth cases are handled monthly.

The only ambulance which is available to this health centre IV had been written off. Other inadequacies included lack of investigative machinery like X-ray and scanning machines, a store for drugs, an administrative block, a mortuary and also being understaffed with no staff houses at all. The district officials also complained of unreliable power supply to this health facility. 

The above inadequacies notwithstanding, the road that connects to the health centre is currently impassable, making it difficult for the community to access the health facility. In spite of the rigorous efforts by the district officials to remind H.E the President about his assurance on 18 January 2014, no action had been taken by the time we visited this site. 

You can see we wanted to account to this Parliament by also having pictorial presentations. You can see the picture of the delegation and in the background we have a grounded ambulance.

Recommendations

In view of the above observations and findings, the committee recommends as follows:

    i. Government expedites the process of upgrading this health centre IV into a referral hospital.

    ii. All health service provision challenges like staff recruitment, provision of an ambulance and the necessary equipment for the health facility, provision of reliable power supply with the prerequisite capacity and others should be addressed and a status report be provided to Parliament by the Minister for Health within three months.

    iii. Efforts should also be made by Government to renovate this health centre facility and a progress report on this rehabilitation should be provided to Parliament by the Minister for Health.

e) Construction of a market in Sironko Town Council was one of the Government assurances made. 
The committee noted that this particular assurance which was made in 2006. The market was to serve as a centre of trade for agricultural produce. Some of the produce from the area includes maize, cotton, sorghum, matooke, cassava, sunflower, coffee and rice. 

The district leadership informed the committee that to date, eight years down the road, no action on this government assurance had been taken.

The committee recommends that Government should avail the necessary funds this financial year 2014/2015 for the implementation of this project.

f) The other assurance that was fast-tracked was the establishment of Kata Barracks, pledged from Bulegeni Farm Institute. The committee learnt that the Government undertook this pledge to the people of Sironko in 2006 to set up a UPDF barracks in Kata to address the issue of insurgency resulting from cattle rustling by the Karimojong in the eastern region of Uganda. 

This Government assurance had been fulfilled and a barracks has been set up in Bulambuli - (Interruption)

MS LILY ADONG: Madam Speaker, I thank the chairman of the government assurances committee but we are not following because the copy which was uploaded is not opening -

THE SPEAKER: But you can listen. Hon Mwiru is holding it there now. I do not know what to do. Please, facilitate one another to access it.

MR WADRI: They said that security in the area had been enhanced and that there were no instances of insecurity recorded in the region since the establishment of this barracks. We commend Government for that. I know my brother, the former UPM, wants the credit to go to him; yes, Government, through the Ministry of Defence, is applauded.

g) Construction of district headquarters. The committee noted that this pledge was undertaken over 10 years ago, that is, in 2001 but up to date, it has never been fulfilled. No progress had been made, however. 

The district was scheduled to procure a consultant this financial year 2014-2015 to design the building. After the completion of the architectural designs, the district hopes to start mobilising for funding to construct the building.

h) The Sironko District leadership raised some unfulfilled presidential pledges previously unknown to the committee. Although the committee is cognisant of rule 168 (2) which states that, “...an assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise made by a minister, Prime Minister, President or Vice-President on the Floor of the House”, during their interaction with the district leadership, the committee noted the following additional unfulfilled presidential pledges which were hitherto unknown to the committee: 

    i. On 24 May 2005, His Excellency the President promised to construct Bulambuli Sub County headquarters. This pledge was made in Rwakitura.

    ii. His Excellency the President promised 200 heifers to the women of Bumalimba Sub County. The pledge was made in Rwakitura again.

    iii. His Excellency the President also promised to construct four teachers’ houses for Masaba Senior Secondary School. This was again made in Rwakitura.

    iv. His Excellency the President promised to support bee projects in Sironko District but nothing has been done. This pledge was made at the launch of the bee project.

    v. Resettlement and compensation of people displaced and affected by the creation of Mt Elgon National Park in the sub-counties of Masaba, Bugitimwa, Zesui and Bumasifwa.

    vi. His Excellency the President also promised to construct a technical institute at Mutufu Ssaza grounds.

    vii. H.E the President promised to create Busita Model Parish in Buhugu Sub-county.

Recommendation

Whereas the committee is bound by rule 168(2) as already mentioned above, the Minister in charge of the Presidency should update Parliament on the status of the implementation of the above pledges within two weeks, if there has been any progress towards implementation.

Sebei Sub Region
In Sebei sub-region, the committee toured projects and examined the status of the implementation of assurances, promises and undertaking in the districts of Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo.

Bukwo District 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, assessment of the implementation of government assurances made to the people of Bukwo showed the following:

a) Tarmacking the Kapchorwa-Suam Road

Despite the numerous references made to tarmacking of this road in Presidential addresses such as the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech since 2005/2006 financial year, this road has received no attention and continues to deteriorate. This road is an important connection for Uganda to the Republic of Kenya. Its construction would boost trade between the people of the two countries, given that this area produces a lot of grain and other agricultural produce.

It was also observed that Government was practicing maintenance methodologies which were not sustainable on this road.

The committee recommends that Government should expedite availability of funds for the tarmacking of Kapchorwa–Bukwo road to augment the social-economic benefits of the area. 

b) The other pledge that we pursued was the construction of a girls’ secondary school in Kortek Sub-county. 

The committee noted that the project was a commitment by Government meant to rescue girls from the harmful vice of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). Whereas the communities from the districts of Kween, Kapchorwa and Bukwo were in full support of this initiative, the Government had not yet fulfilled its obligation.

The committee further noted that in spite of the above, Government had not yet taken over the existing improvised school, which had been constructed by the community. While the school has a lot of land still available for development, the hygiene facilities were in a poor state.

On page 6, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you can see members of the committee holding a public hearing in Bukwo District at Kortek Girls Secondary School.

The committee recommends that since it was a presidential directive for affirmative action aimed at intervention against FGM, Government should take over this school as a Government aided school so as to preserve the girls of these areas from FGM.

c) Resettlement of the displaced Teriet Ndorobos of Bukwo District

The committee noted that this landless community, which lives in a camp on an approximately two-acre piece of land accommodating 65 families, owned by one of the Ndorobos, was unable to produce food or carry out any gainful economic activity and thus they have no source of livelihood. These 65 families on average have a family size of six to seven members. So, you can image the population that is living on this very restrictive two acres of land.

In the same way, their children were not going to school irrespective of universal primary education being available now today to a number of our communities. As a way of survival, these landless people offer their manual labour to neighbouring communities by working in their gardens both in Uganda and Kenya. This includes children being employed on farms as well and, therefore, the issue of child labour is very inevitable and high in this particular place.

The camp does not have adequate shelter to accommodate all the people. It also lacks shelter for all the displaced people. The tents provided by the Office of the Prime Minister become too cold at night for the elderly, making them susceptible to pneumonia, which has so far claimed at least six lives and is likely to claim more, especially during this rainy season. 

These people have no land to bury their dead relatives, prompting them to sneak to the forest reserve deep into the night to dispose of their dead. This is not what they would define as a decent send-off for their relatives but they have no choice. 

By the way, when we were having an interface with these people you could see misery on their faces, especially when they asked us as to whether this Government loves trees and animals more than the people who voted for them. They told us that they vote for NRM 90 per cent but that is what they get in return. So, the challenge to you, Government, is whether the people who vote 90 per cent for you should be treated that way.

Resultant from this land shortage and lack of space, the camp has poor hygiene facilities making it potentially vulnerable to disease such as dysentery, typhoid among others.

Observations

The committee observed that – 

    i. Borrowing from their assertion that, “no wonder, Government values forests and wild animals more than them”, these people are living a degrading and inhuman life. 

    ii. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, through the Speaker, can you treat your voters humanely? In one of those hotels in Kapchorwa, I found your generous signature as having come from that same area and I am cocksure you must have seen the suffering of these people when you visited them. 

    iii. Because they are crowded on a small piece of land with poor hygiene, their priorities for life have changed in-lieu of this environment. As they live day by day, their future is left to God. They are not sure of their next meal and with heavy hearts they reported that even on that day, they were not sure. The Members of Parliament had to contribute money, to the tune of Shs 600,000, to buy posho for the children who were not sure of the next meal.

    iv. This landless ethnic group with their siblings cannot appreciate formal education anymore since they have to do manual work in the neighbouring communities for survival. 

On page 14, you can see the chairperson of the committee addressing people with sticks. You would think that they wanted to attack us but this was a sign that in spite of their suffering, they still had to offer smiles on their faces.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Government urgently draws up emergency relief interventions and resettlement programmes for these landless Ugandans so that they can also regain their rights. The Minister for Disaster Preparedness should report to the House about Government’s intervention in this matter within three months. 

This was a recommendation made in September; I do not know what the situation is as of now. Although at that time I drew the attention of the then Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, to prevail on his ministers to urgently go and see for themselves the plight of these people on the ground, I do not know what the situation is.

d) The other pledge that the committee benchmarked in terms of seeing how it is being implemented was the upgrading of Amanang playground into a standard stadium.

The committee noted that in appreciation of the double gold medal win by Moses Kipsiro in the 2010 Commonwealth Games, H.E the President pledged to upgrade the Amanang playground into a standard stadium. The committee also established that the district had submitted proposed architectural designs to the sports desk in State House, but no action had so far been taken.

The committee further commended the athletes that participated and won medals for the country, who have their roots in this part of the country. The committee further noted that although nothing had so far been done, two pledges had been made in this respect: one at Amanang Stadium for Bukwo District pledged in 2012, and the other one for the National High Altitude Training Centre in Kapchorwa, again pledged in 2012.

Picture No. 4 shows the current state of Amanang playground that is supposed to be transformed into a standard stadium. The pictorial presentation is there for you to appreciate and see whether the necessary intervention has been made by Government. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that since land is adequately available, Government should provide the necessary budgetary allocation and that work should start immediately as a way of stimulating and supporting these sports talents in that region. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should report to the House within two weeks to tell us whether they have made the necessary arrangements for this intervention.

e) The committee gathered the following additional pledges which remain unfulfilled - I have already drawn your attention to rule 168(2), but these were additional pledges which we got from the district leadership when we held a meeting with them:

    i. Maintenance of the security road from Greek river to Riwo.
    ii. Completion of the district council hall.
    iii. Construction of a permanent UPDF barracks in Riwo Sub-county.
    iv. Construction of Bukwo Great Gravity Flow Scheme.
    v. Three combine harvesters for the farmers in Bukwo.
    vi. The pledge of Shs 65 million for a poultry and goat rearing project for the youth of Bukwo.
    vii. An ambulance for Bukwo General Hospital.
    viii. The pledge of a hydra-foam machine for the youth in Bukwo.
    ix. Completion of a health centre.
    x. Enhancement of UBC- TV 7 radio signals in that region.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Minister for the Presidency reassures the people of Bukwo District on the above apparent presidential pledges.

Kween District

Madam Speaker and honourable members, assessment of the implementation of government assurances made to the people of Kween District revealed he following:
    a) Provision of grants to two girls’ secondary schools

The committee noted that, like in other districts affected by the female genital mutilation vice, the commitment by Government during consultation on the Anti Female Genital Mutilation Bill in 2010 was occasioned with messages promising the establishment of government-funded girls’ secondary schools to educate the girl child. Subsequently, in line with the above, two girls’ secondary schools were receiving grants from the central Government in Kween District. The two are Sebei Girls (Kwosir) and St Michael Girls’ schools. The teachers in these schools were not on the Government payroll.

The district needs more support for schools in the area which have not received any funding from Government since they are in a hard-to-reach area and they also accommodate girls of internally displaced people living in Kisangani and Rwanda camps. These are local names for the camps in that part of the country. The two schools that require Government support are Kapkwata Secondary School and Kworus Secondary School.

On page 17, Madam Speaker, you see pictures or photos of girls attentively listening to the advice being given by the committee.

Recommendations

1. The committee recommends that Government should effectively take over these schools namely, Sebei Girl’s (Kwosir), St Michael Girls’ School, Kapkwata Secondary School and Kworus Secondary School as government-aided schools.

2. The teachers in these schools should be put on the Government payroll to enhance effectiveness and efficiency in these schools.

b) The other pledge made to these people was the establishment of a district hospital. 

Findings and Observations 

The committee noted that Kween, being a new district that was created in 2010, does not have a district hospital, except a health centre IV. The health centre did not have an ambulance or the facilities necessary to serve the people.

During the commissioning of the health centre IV, H.E the President assured the people of Kween that the health centre IV would soon be upgraded to hospital status.

Recommendation

The committee recommends expeditious implementation of the presidential assurance and renovation of the health centre facility.

c) The other pledge that we tracked was the resettlement of the landless Benet and people living in Kisangani and Rwanda camps of the displaced in Kween District.

Observations

The committee established that although the promise for their resettlement was given in 1993, the Benet people had lived in the settlement since 1962. All this time, they lived in harmony with their environment. They had a school and even had a police station. The committee further noted they had businesses which were flourishing and were well furnished with information about the country. 

Their troubles started in 2001 when Uganda Wildlife Authority evicted them with their livestock. They had been promised by H.E the President, during the campaigns in 2011, that they would be resettled after the presidential elections. However, the pledge has never been implemented. 

A copy of H.E the President’s letter on this matter is hereto attached as Annex 1. It contains the assurance that immediately he was voted President, he would bring the suffering of these people to an end and resettle them. The Office of the Prime Minister had also picked interest in this matter but had not yet offered the necessary assistance. 

Picture No. 6 shows the committee meeting the landless Benet community living in Kisangani and Rwanda camps in Kween District. Here are the people who voted 90 per cent NRM and have no land to settle and the animals are being more treasured than them. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Government, in collaboration with the local leadership, expedites the resettlement process for this community.

d) Additional unfulfilled pledges which were previously unknown to the committee, which were submitted by the Kween District leadership - I once again want to draw your attention to the fact that we are very cognisant of rule 168(2) but the following pledges, which were hitherto unknown to the committee, were brought to the knowledge of the committee:

a) Creation of town councils.
b) Creation of Soy County/Constituency.
c) Maintenance of the Chepsekunya-Bukwo security road.
d) Provision of water for production.
e) Procurement of a stone crasher for crashing stones for gravel.
f) A start-up fund of Shs 100 million for the construction of the district administration block.

Recommendation

The committee demands that the Minister for the Presidency reassures the people of Kween District on the above apparent presidential pledges.

Kapchorwa District

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the assessment of implementation of government assurances made to the people of Kapchorwa District established the following:

a) Tarmacking town council roads in Kapchorwa: Two out of 10 kilometres of town council roads had already been tarmacked.

b) Building a house for the parents of Stephen Kiprotich: The house for the parents of Stephen Kiprotich, who made history in 2012 at the London Olympics, had been completed, which in effect is about encouraging the young athletes. That is kudos for you there my brother, Dr Kiyonga, and my senior, the Prime Minister.

c) Construction of a storeyed dormitory at a girls’ school: A girls’ school supported by Government in the fight against illiteracy and FGM had received a storeyed dormitory and its construction had been completed. We appreciate this intervention by Government.

d) Tariet Sports Training Centre construction: The construction of this high altitude sports training centre was almost completed; kudos to Government for that work.

e) Construction of a house for Moses Kipsiro: The promise to Moses Kipsiro, who is a double gold medallist after winning the 5,000 and 10,000 metres race at the Commonwealth Games of 2010, was completed. We were told the house could not be occupied because it needed to be officially handed over to him by the President. 

The committee visited this unoccupied house and as I said, we were informed that it awaits commissioning by H.E the President. This is clear in picture No. 5 where we have members of the committee pose for a group photograph with the leadership of Kapchorwa, and in the background you can see the house constructed by Government.

f) Construction of a State lodge: The land had been identified and secured and the owner of this land had been compensated but construction is being awaited.

g) Creation of Kapchorwa Municipality: The process of elevating Kapchorwa Town Council to a municipality status had commenced. The committee was further informed that Cabinet had approved the municipality status for Kapchorwa Town Council. That is the information we got from there but this has not yet been brought to our attention as Parliament. 

Other unfulfilled pledges, which were made by H.E the President, included the following:

1. A girls’ secondary school has not yet been constructed as pledged in an effort to fight FGM.

2. Kawowa Senior Secondary School, which is a community secondary school, is yet to be grant aided.

    3. A technical school was supposed to be constructed in honour of Mama Susanna, an artist in Kapchorwa. This has not yet been done.

    4. An FGM desk was supposed to be created in the President’s office. This has not yet been done.

    5. Extending water to lower lying areas of Kapchorwa District has not also been done.

    6. Construction of a house for Stephen Kiprotich himself has not been done -(Interjection)-  The other one was different. (Laughter)

7. There is a lady who was disabled as a result of FGM and the President promised to build a house for her. This has not been done, although her children are being educated by Government.

8. Two hundred and fifty (250) goats were promised to the youth but they have never been delivered.

9. The Hydra-foam machine and a stone crusher have never been received.

10. People who were displaced by the Karimojong from Bulambuli District moved to Kapchorwa but have never been settled. The district proposed that these people be returned to Bulambuli District. This is where our attention was drawn to the Odwe report, which is with Government. The district leadership insists that this report should be implemented.

11. Education of the descendants of the historicals who liberated this country. This was also a pledge but it has not been fulfilled.

12. Compensation of property lost during the struggle by the historicals who fought under FRONASA. I do not know how many of you are members of FRONASA, but this again has not been fulfilled.

13. Construction of a shelter for the historicals. 

14. Restocking the Sebei Sub-region. I think this has been partially done -(Interjection)- Yes, that will be PRDP but that is up to Government to decide.

15. The creation of Soy County and creation of town councils are yet to be done.
 
16. Tractors for the youth to modernise agriculture. This has not yet been done.

Recommendation

The committee demands that the Minister for the Presidency reassures the people of Kween District on the above presidential pledges.

General Observations

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as already noted, the committee is cognisant of rule 168(2), which states as I have already read. However, it is unavoidable for the committee not to report on the additional pledges which were made by the President either in the course of the campaigns or when leaders of the district visited him in Rwakitura. 

The committee therefore recommends that this Parliament considers amending the Rules of Procedure, which govern the operation of the government assurances committee. This is because when you go to the field, there is much more in the office of the RDCs and the LCV chairpersons, who are regularly brought at the invitation of H.E the President and also from the visits that the President and ministers make to these districts. They go there and commit themselves as individuals and as Government but at the end of the day, these things do not reach the Floor of the House. When the committee goes out to the field, the committee’s attention is drawn to theses pledges, which have been made.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move and report. As I said earlier on, the supporting documents about the commitments are as attached to this report. 

We will be glad if Government responds to some of these pledges, especially the inhuman suffering of the landless people who are not sure of their next day. Children are not sure of the next meal. It is very appalling. If these are the people who cause us to come to this Parliament, it is only fair that we also care about their welfare, and they are not demanding much. All they demand for is to be resettled and that they will be able to use their energy to earn a living for themselves. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. I want to agree with the chairperson that we may have to amend our rules. 

After listening to this report, I want to say that I was part of the negotiations on the issue of FGM and finding a way forward. One of the things that has not been captured is what we agreed with the President about the surgeons, those women who have been cutting these girls. You know, they make money; for each girl they make Shs 50,000, and if one cuts 100 girls, they are okay financially. We had discussed with him the need for them to get alternative sources of income and I think that has neither been captured nor has it been fulfilled. 

The second one had to do with establishing another school in Amudat. This is one of the worst hit districts by FGM. All these were part of the same agreement.

Honourable members, I do not know whether we should not demand a respond first before we debate because this report was written in September and now this is December; maybe something has changed. Can we demand for an answer before we debate? Maybe you have done something; we might bash you when you have already done some of these things. So, can we ask that you respond not later the 16 December 2014, before we close?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, yesterday the CAO of Bukwo was in Kampala. He came to me in my office to ask what was coming up. He said they had put all their hope and trust in us that we would bring their suffering to the attention of Government but that nothing had happened. This was just yesterday.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I think this report should be submitted to the President’s office, to the Ministry in charge of the Presidency. There is a specific office for pledges there that can follow up these things with these officials. They will follow it up and he can also give them back. I think it will be possible. The Minister of the Presidency should take this report up because these are pledges. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we want him to come back here and answer to the pledges. If we debate now, we shall still call him to come and speak and then we will have two debates. Let us have one debate.

MR WILLIAM NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. You know very well that Gen. Moses Ali is actually here in the capacity of Leader of Government Business. I also understand very well that the Minister for the Presidency is actually answerable to him as Leader of Government Business. Therefore, it would be unfair for this House to actually resolve that the matter be sent to the Minister for the Presidency when the Leader of Government Business is here. Why don’t we have the Leader of Government Business take over this matter? He will be in position to direct within his jurisdiction which ministry should take it up at their level but not at this level.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, you are directing the Prime Minister to respond but there is a pertinent issue; 2000 members of a family wake up every day to go and dig in Kenya to survive. The tents they were given, when hon. Moses Ali went there, were given to them three years ago. They are torn and it is a rainy season. 

Those 2000 people have only two stanzas of the toilet. They are living on four plots of land without food. When it rains, this water moves down, and of the 2000 people around 1200 are over 60 years.  So,  Madam Speaker, we seek your intervention because these are old people. I think you have even heard what is in the report. If next week you were told that 200 people died, you will not wonder. Maybe as we organise for a report, can we have the Minister for Disaster Preparedness intervene and help these people who are Ugandans? I thank you.

MS TETE: Madam Speaker, like my colleagues have said, the situation is now worse as we talk. There is a team led by Prof Kabwegyere that went to Bukwo and verified. Among the 600 or 800 people who are in the camp as we talk, they verified only one person. Gen. Moses Ali went to Bukwo and found a team of very many people suffering but the report of Prof Kabwegyere has identified only one person who they say was living in the forest. It is very unfortunate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a presidential directive which was written on February 5th 2011. The President wrote to the Prime Minister on 5 February 2011 about the Benet sub-group of the Sabiny. Let me read it: 

“I am writing to you in connection with the need to resettle 400 families of the Benet sub-group of the Sabiny people of Sebei region. These families used to live in the Mt Elgon Forest National Park on the Sebei side. This was during the time when Amin and the subsequent unstable regimes were not caring about preserving the forests and river catchment areas, vital for the ecosystems of Uganda.

In 1986, we caused the enforcement of the order to leave the forest reserves. Since that time, those families have been displaced, apparently living in rocks. This is not acceptable at all.  I am, therefore, directing you to cause all concerned ministries to do the following:
1. De-gazette the London portion of the forest national park so that those families are settled permanently. This London portion is an intrusion of the forest national park into the settled area. This part should be cut off from the forest so that those families are settled. 

2. Building materials such as cement, mabaati and bricks should be availed to them so that they build permanent homes as a compensation for this prolonged suffering since their displacement.

3. NAADS should also avail them planting materials and improved livestock for their sustainable livelihood and economic emancipation from subsistence farming.

4. The national park authorities should examine the request of these families to be allowed to graze their cattle in the grasslands of the national park from a professional conservation point of view.  Alternatively, once they are settled, they should be taught intensive farming methods such as zero grazing using Guatemala grass. This grass and other animal fodder should be grown in the land in which they are settled.

5. The Inspector General of Police should investigate the allegations that some two people were killed by hoodlums of Uganda Wildlife Authority because they were collecting firewood or were grazing their few cattle in the national park. Why should these hoodlums shoot unarmed people collecting firewood in the park? Why not simply arrest them? These hoodlums, drunk with power, should be dealt with according to the law…” I do not know whether they have been dealt with.

“…6. This plan should be implemented in the next financial year. However, planning for de-gazetting the London portion should start now. 

7. Meanwhile, your office should give these families relief.

In the meantime, the power-drunk Ministry of Environment and UWA should employ themselves more usefully by educating the communities about the importance of the river catchment areas of the Elgon Mountain and the Rwenzori, so that they are immunised against the suicidal lies of political opportunists. When I explain to the community, they understand. Why should we continue having UWA staff or those in this Ministry of Environment who cannot preach this message to the people?” It is signed by YK Museveni. 

This is a directive which was given in 2011. At least there is an avenue. 

7.26
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairman of the committee for the elaborate report about what he has found on the ground. My contribution will be on the question of land, which is a very contentious issue. 

I did my research, a thesis for my Master’s programme from Moi University, on assessment of the causes of land conflict and the emergence of Sabaot Land Defence Forces in Mt Elgon, the opposite side of Kenya. What led to the emergence of this Sabaot Land Defence Forces was the question of land; why? Was it because some leaders interfered with the process? Is it because there was lack of stateism within that locality? Yes, those were tested and we found that it was true. 

We do not want the issue of land conflict to reach that level of 2006 and 2008. The same Benet you are talking about on this side of Uganda are the same Ndorobos who are again on the other side of Kenya. Prof. Kabwegyere was tasked by the President on 18 December last year to make sure that those people are resettled especially those ones in Bukwo, Kween and others around Kapchorwa. However, it is so dismaying that if you want to resettle people, you have to remove others from their own land. You know, this is how conflict begins.

Yesterday I tried to inform hon. Kiyonga about the same issue. I said I have never involved myself in any meeting in Sebei and I will never attend because I know the repercussions. If leaders are not ready to curve the London land the way the President directed - because he did direct that let us have London curved out and be given to these people. But when Prof. Kabwegyere goes and says, “No, let us remove these ones and resettle others there”, that is pure conflict. 

With the rest, I know that the government will handle them, but of course they will handle those when campaigns approach. That has been their approach ever since and we are waiting for that time. However, on the issue of land, that is the main reason that I am speaking about. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have moved around this area and you went to Sebei and you saw how those people in Kisangani and Rwanda and Bukwo are suffering. In fact, you have taken too long. When you talk to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and you tell him about relief, he tells you “we will handle it” but he has never handled it and we say there is no problem. 

He has been responding to issues of disaster in other areas so quickly, but when it comes to Sebei, we have been so polite but our politeness will cease with time. Even those who do not give votes to our government are appreciated so much; talk of many things in other areas. We will never wait for that time anymore. Thank you very much.

7.30
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this time to thank the committee so much for this detailed report. I would also want to appreciate what you have said, that the ministers come back to report on the different assurances that were given to Sebei region. 

The burning issue that I want to respond to is an addition to what hon. Chemaswet has said. Madam Speaker and colleagues, from the time that we joined Parliament, we have been following up that letter that the President wrote. Recently, as the honourable member has said, hon. Kabwegyere was instructed to resettle these people. 

The issue that is really burning now is that hon. Kabwegyere and his group are now going to redistribute land that was given out 30 years down the road; it was given out in 1983 and these people have documents to that effect. The land belongs to them but now they are saying that because there were some anomalies during the time when the land was given out, they want to go and redistribute it. That is why the hon. Chemaswet is referring to it as an issue that is related to what happened in Kenya. That is our cry. 

We really want to appeal to you, honourable colleagues and Madam Speaker; if we are going to redistribute land that was given out 32 years ago, we should know that the land has changed hands, there are children who are living there and some of the places are even centres now. The honourable minister and his members are now saying they want to go and redistribute it. That is what we are against.

As leaders of the region, we have actually approached him requesting that he even approach the President. We do not know what is going on. So, I really want to plead that honourable colleagues come to our rescue and support us so that we do not cause more problems when we want to resettle people. 

The area that the President cited, the London area, is an intrusion into where the people are resettling and it is the best area. We have given them these suggestions. We even suggested one part in Bukwo side, which is a bit flat, that could be used to settle these people but they have continued to insist that they want to redistribute land where people already have the documents. 

There was even a time that these people went to court. There is a consent judgment, that of course our Attorney-General must -(Member timed out.)

7.33
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the directive of the President is very clear. I would like to record appreciation to the President for such a clear directive to those I am sure he thought would have second thoughts and that is why the directive had to be clear. 

I think what we should do, Madam Speaker, is to require the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come and report to this House regarding the implementation of the directive of His Excellency the President. Our colleagues I think should not worry about the reports of hon. Kabwegyere. What we should require is implementation of the clear directive by His Excellency the President.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I do not even know what word to use; the fact that these people do not have a place to dig latrines or places of convenience does not only harm them but also harms so many communities along the path where the water washes the human waste into rivers and water sources. So, it is really a matter that should be regarded with utmost urgency. These people should be resettled. That directive should be implemented as a matter of urgency. 

Maybe we should give them only one week to respond regarding the resettlement of the people and then they can come back after two weeks with the report regarding the other assurances. I beg to submit.

7.35
MS TETE CHELANGAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support my colleagues and I thank the chairperson. 

Madam Speaker, the President has directed and to me that is final. What else do we want? He is the President of this country and he has said this should be done; who else can talk? (Laughter) When God says yes, nobody can say no.

Madam Speaker, in 2002 there was a team called Kapsegek - there are 28 villages and there is one village which was evicted in 2007. The President himself directed the then minister for tourism, that is, hon. Rukundo, to go and resettle the 49 families who were evicted from the forest because they lacked social services. These people were resettled. 

The President directed hon. Rukundo together with Members of Parliament and local government to identify land to re-settle the 49 families. We did the exercise successfully for three months and these 49 families were each given 12 acres. When we talk about families of people from the forest, they are about 50 people. You know, the cold causes them to produce so fast so each family has about 50 adults. 

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that today the Kabwegyere team is in Bukwo trying to redistribute and disorganise the 49 families, to give them one acre. Fifty adults to share two acres! I request the Prime Minister to talk to hon. Kabwegyere. About the Kapsegek, that was specifically for the Kapsegek. 

As we handle the Yatui – The Yatui were shifted and they came to Bukwo and they resettled in a health unit for three years until the General himself came to rescue them. He gave us tents and food. However, it is unfortunate that hon. Kabwegyere himself, this month, went back to Bukwo with his team and from the 68 families - about 800 people – they have identified only one person. Colleagues, from the other people you saw, they say it is only one person; can one person live in the forest, honestly? They say that it is only one person who lived in the forest. Talk to hon. Kabwegyere -(Laughter)-  because honestly, we are not happy.

Madam Speaker, our Government, the NRM, is in a position to do things to support these people. Like my colleague said, we give 98 per cent. As you talk, today people are running around and these people have gone measuring the land to redistribute. That is confusion of the highest order! ­-[Hon. Member: “Vote for us”]- No, we are not voting for you.

So, Madam Speaker, really the Yatui, the Teriet and the others should be resettled. We still have land. When our kids -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give you half a minute to conclude. 

MS TETE: When we identified the land with the UWA, we got land and there is some remaining land which can be given to the remaining Yatui who are in Bukwo. Bukwo has its own land where its people can be resettled; Kween has its own people and also Kapchorwa. We are districts now. For us in our culture when you have your own fire place, though we are one, we have separate saucepans. So, our issues should be handled separately - Kween separately, Kapchorwa separately. Do not mix us, honestly -(Member timed out.)

7.39
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM Bungokho County South, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for bringing out these critical issues, which have actually prompted the directive given by His Excellency the President to pop up.  

Madam Speaker, we really have serious challenges with regards to the settlement of our people in Mt. Elgon, especially Sebei sub region and of course Bugisu sub region.  Indeed, the directive is very clear; we need to expeditiously move to help these people. We are neighbours to Sebei and when you look at some of these people, they are helpless, living in a hopeless state of environment.

With this directive of de-gazettment, we should also ask our colleagues, the ministers, who were tasked to do this, what happened. Of course, much as we have the directive, we should also implement it within the context of the law. De-gazetting is a preserve of Parliament; we do not want tomorrow to be caught. So, Prof. Kabwegyere should give us a roadmap because we are here; we are actually the ones who can do that within a day or two once it is properly planned and brought to us.

Why not work with the relevant agencies - forestry department and the Ministry of Water and Environment? According to the Forestry and Tree Planting Act, once this comes here, and given the fact that our people are really living in a hopeless state of environment, we will move expeditiously. I blame our colleagues who were tasked by His Excellency the President. His Excellency the President has done his work and the colleagues who are supposed to help him are the ones letting him down. So we must challenge them. 

Madam Speaker, let us give a timeframe, maybe within a week or so we can have these plans presented to us as Parliament so that we can help our people. This directive is clear but we should implement it within the context of the law. Thank you.

7.42
MRS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, District Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very good report they have come out with. Indeed, the problems that were talked about in the report are true. 

Right now, the main problem at hand in my district of Kapchorwa is the land issue. As you have heard from the other Members of Parliament, we sat for a meeting with the President and the honourable Prof. Kabwegyere was directed to go and ascertain the number of acres in London – the area where the President directed the curving out of land to distribute to the landless people. Instead, he did not go there and I am sure he does not know even where that London area is. He did not go there and he decided to do different things together with Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

In fact, at one point the Uganda Wildlife Authority’s Executive Director swore that
“over my dead body can I give out that land”; he swore! I wondered whether this land was for his mother or it was his. (Laughter) So, the Executive Director of Uganda Wildlife Authority together with Prof. Kabwegyere are doing very wrong things and they are causing big problems in our districts.

Today, they have called us several times. I do not know even what has happened today because Prof. Kabwegyere has sent a team to go and redistribute the land which is already owned by other people. As we speak, I do not know what has happened, but I am sure something has happened because the people are very bitter about it. They were saying, if this is Government doing this to them -(Member timed out.)

7.44
MS ROSEMARY NAYAKIKONGORO (Independent, District Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it would have been better for Prof. Kabwegyere to be around because when the President gives a presidential directive - Like hon. Werikhe has said, some land that belongs to national parks or forestry authority is already gazetted; if that land is gazetted, the honourable minister who was directed to hand over that land should have consulted on how to go about it. But for him to go and destabilise the already settled community, it means a lot especially to the members of the community.

I think, honourable ministers, you need to help the President to effectively implement his directives. Sometimes when he gives directives, these directives go with financial attachments - when he is talking of cement and things like that - and then for you, you just say, “let us go and do this”. You should instead come back and consult on how you are going to handle that budget in order to support that goal, because he wants to support his people who are displaced and living in forests, but not just go and act out of your own wisdom. 

We beg the honourable ministers, therefore, that whenever you are given such an assignment and you find that you cannot manage that assignment within your own mandate, come back to the respective sector. We can then see how Parliament can support you in order to implement the presidential directive.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the report, I believe that all those promises are presidential directives. Most of them belong to certain sectors - they are talking of health, which is under Ministry of Health; there are schools, which fall under Ministry of Education. I believe those should be integrated within different ministries such that they can really solve those problems –(Member timed out.)

7.46
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they did in digging out all this. 

I am so touched because of the poor living conditions of the people in that region. When these ministers are given directives, I wonder whether they respect their boss, the appointing authority, and give priority to whatever he is directing them to do. 

Madam Speaker, I have never heard hon. Kabwegyere here saying that he has a problem in implementing what he was directed to do. I think this is insubordination of the highest order and I wonder whether a vote of no confidence cannot be moved against such an officer. If you are given a directive and the appointing officer is the one who is giving you that directive, if you respect him at least you give a report.

I have heard the cries of the Members of Parliament representing the people in the region. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether at one time we are going to receive a budget provision for all these pledges as they were made by the President, to incorporate them in the district budgets so that we plan together. I wonder whether the Prime Minister will give us the national plan to see whether these government pledges were fulfilled or whether they were incorporated in the national budget. I wish we could get that so that it helps us to make appropriate recommendations –(Member timed out.) 

7.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North Kampala): Thank you very, much Madam Speaker. The issue of land cannot be taken lightly. Unless we address it holistically, we may lose people. Right now, hon. Chemutai has informed us that people are in that gear of fighting. We have heard that this has been happening for some good time. Maybe we are waiting for people to kill each other so that we can come up. If that is not the case, then it goes back to the Executive for implementation. Madam Speaker, we would not have been debating this if the Executive had acted in time. The more we delay, the more confusion we are creating in that region.

Secondly, I do not know the timeframe we are giving. I am aware that on the 15th there is a very big conference and I believe that many people will be busy at Namboole. So unless we resolve this before we go for the conference - Otherwise, we say that for these people in this region, until this issue is resolved, we do not move, because we are seated on a time bomb. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, they have talked about presidential directives but presidential directives must be in conformity, must be within the legal framework. For any presidential directive, we must try our level best so that those who could assist -(Member timed out.)

7.51
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

I want to urge the government side, especially the Cabinet ministers, to sometimes advise the President, because such a sensitive issue and you allocate it to a minister like Kabwegyere - (Laughter) You know he has been here on the Floor and he is very highly insensitive to people’s needs. You have heard the sentiments of the area MPs about how he talks. I think that is where you need to guide the President, that in particular places he should send particular types of ministers that will be able to handle issues. 

Secondly, on the issue of directives and pledges, when you look at the previous report of government assurances, they had gone to Shs 11 trillion, when we collect around Shs 8.5 trillion. Therefore, as Cabinet, you should prioritise which one should be handled first. To me, this issue of people who do not have latrines, people who are staying in tents, I think should be urgent. 

As colleagues have said, let the minister come here and we try as much as possible, as Parliament, to de-gazette part of that place and we solve the problem, so that we help His Excellency the President. Madam Speaker, that is my contribution.

7.53
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First, I associate myself with the concern of Members but I am also at a loss because of the way we are running government. The report generally deals with many things but it seems the manner in which we are actually making these pledges is also very outrageous. I do not think they are even in line with the National Development Plan. 

When you look at the President’s letter, it is dated 5 February 2011. As to whether this was informed by the actual – You see, people are in dire need throughout the entire country and I believe the Prime Minister is aware that there is a National Development Plan. Ministries have strategic plans and a government must know what they want to do in what particular period of time. Where a head of state has said I have given you this, and you issue directives of this nature, where you know that there is a process - 

When you look at this letter, we are attacking hon. Kabwegyere but it was addressed to the Prime Minister and by then there was a Prime Minister. Hon. Kabwegyere might have just been copied in as a minister. So, Madam Speaker, the point I am making is that you can go and examine yourself as a government. This populism of moving around making pledges which are not even in line with your manifesto or with the National Development Plan or Vision 2040, because they must be understood. Wherever we move, the society is in dire need, but a government must plan and know where we are, what our capacity is in terms of resource envelope, and where actually we want to be. 

Hon. Cadet has just told you that as you talk now, those captured pledges are Shs 11 trillion, but the committee has showed you that even when they moved out, they found many more. So at the end of the end the day, really, what type of governance is this? (Member timed out.)
 	
7.55
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson, the presenter of this report, for presenting this report to us. 

When the President, who is the leader of the country and the entire government, directs and the Cabinet headed by the Prime Minister fails, should Parliament also fail? I thought the people are represented by us and if it is true that people are supreme, then we must be supreme because we represent them. So, we must take action on this issue. 

First and foremost, honourable members, it is not only the issues which have been listed in this report today about that area. When it goes to roads, communication, that place is suffering. Here in this Parliament, it has been captured in our Hansard that our colleagues, Members of Parliament, when they are going to their constituencies they use passports. Their passports have to be stamped eight times - crossing to Kenya, then crossing back to Uganda and then the same coming back to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, that area needs special attention. It is inhuman for us to say we are protecting a forest when there are human beings. It is inhuman for us to protect wildlife, when there are people to be protected. What kind of humanity do we have in our government?

Three, it starts here and today; what is the pledge that we make to the people of that region of Sebei? If we do not want them in Uganda, then we should tell them that they should be given to the East African Community and they find another country. Ugandans cannot be treated like that. Where is our patriotism? We preach without practising. I am very sorry.

Finally, my brother, hon. Chemaswet, go to the Quran, Sūrat āl ʿim'rān which is 3104, which talks of a people in a situation like this one. It says that let there arise out of you - out of you the people in problems - a group of people to channel, to tell the people the right path is this one, the wrong path is this one. You have seen hon. Wadri; this is the right path, come this way. (Laughter) Read that Quran. Thank you.

7.58
MS LILLY ADONG	(NRM, District Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the government pledges in the region have not been fulfilled and therefore it leaves the people in the region in a state of despair. 

Madam Speaker, I am just wondering whether the ministers normally take seriously the requests or the pledges that the President gives to the people in the region. I expect that after the President has pronounced himself on those pledges, they should try to put them within the plans. This is because some of the pledges require direct planning - putting them into the district plan or the ministry’s plan - and implementing, although some require direct presidential intervention. 

I really request the Prime Minister and the ministers present to work hard and make sure those pledges are compared with the National Development Plan and incorporated into the government plan. The challenge we have is that we have a high population amidst very little resources; that is why everyone is competing.

On the second issue, Uganda indeed is a very unique country; it is the only country where the President is disobeyed several times by his ministers whom he appoints and nothing is done about it. The President has given orders and I expect the office of the Prime Minister and others to come up with a motion in Parliament so that the area is de-gazetted. I know even if the President gives the orders, if the place is not de-gazetted people cannot occupy the place. The Uganda Wildlife Authority cannot act and allow people to settle there without the instruments of power, without Parliament’s approval of the area to be de-gazetted. 

Madam Speaker, I therefore want to move that we give - if it was not because of the recess, we would have given them a timeframe to bring a motion so that the area is de-gazetted and our people rest. We cannot afford to leave trees; these trees are meant for human beings. We cannot leave only the animals to live in the area where people are dying. Can we have it implemented? We need a motion here to de-gazette if Cabinet takes the President seriously. Thank you.

8.01
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the rest of my colleagues; the rest of the promises or government assurances can be discussed later, but this burning issue of land touches all of us and it would be very proper for us as Parliament to be able to get a very expeditious solution to this problem. 

As Prof. Kabwegyere is being talked about here, there is also another person or another factor that needs to be considered - the UWA director whom hon. Chemutai talked about. The UWA director said, “It is over my dead body that that land can be given out”; that is another factor we have to consider. Why don’t we find an opportunity where Prof. Kabwegyere and the UWA director will appear before the appropriate committee? 

I say this because first of all, the directive of the President has already been disobeyed, which really sends a bad signal. So, I do agree with my sister that as Parliament now, we should be able to look at how that land called London should be de-gazetted so that those people who are suffering now should be settled there. That is the most important motion that Parliament should be able to consider. That is the real point for Parliament; we should send a proper committee there, get all the details about that land, and de-gazette it so that the people can be put there. Thank you.

8.06
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the report and the comments of my colleagues and I have been thinking about Uganda in general in terms of land use. I imagine because we do not have a land-use plan, these conflicts will continue coming up. In some countries that I have visited recently, land belongs to Government and therefore Government dictates on who should be where or what activity should be where. Uganda is getting populated every day. We may need to look into our laws that govern and manage land to solve some of these problems. 

A critical observation I have made is that in Kasese we had such a scenario, where the Basongora - some of our brothers came from Congo - entered the national park and in no time, they were settled and given government land. Here, this is a period of four years and people are outside and I do not know how they are living. I keep wondering about this attention given to western Uganda that cannot be given to other parts of this country. (Applause) Where is the nationalism in us? 

Our colleagues went to Congo, they came back to the national park and the next day all government land in that district was given to resettle these people. What happened to our brothers? From what is being described, they are Ugandans; but four years down the road, Government is watching. Is Government for us all or it is exclusive? Is it inclusive for all of us? 

The other issue is about the roads and other issues like schools that have been raised. I look at my western Uganda, where I come from, and we have three leading roads tarmacked, passing through Hoima, Fort Portal or Mbarara. Even when you go deep there, roads from Kiruhura to Ibanda, Ibanda to Mbarara are all tarmacked, even from Ntungamo. But there is only one road leading to the whole of Eastern Uganda – the one that goes through Mbale-Soroti - and of course people have questioned. 

I would wish to interest Government to take Uganda seriously. Uganda is ours and we are all Ugandans. Nobody applied to be born here. (Applause) We are supposed to benefit as Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.06
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members present. In the first instance, I would like to thank His Excellency the President for having made such a directive to rescue Ugandans and have them settled. 

I want to inform members of this House that it is the same minister, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, during the previous term, who disobeyed the directives of His Excellency the President. He was directed on the same issue of land in Kamwenge District but up to today, nothing has been implemented. 

I would like to inform Members that the people of Kamwenge since that directive was given have never been given even a piece of land. They were chased from the land in Rwamanje and Members of Parliament went and visited the place. The directive from His Excellency the President is on record, but we are settling 50,000 people from Congo and each family was given an acre plus and the Ugandans are nowhere up to this day. 

I think this is very paramount. We should respect Ugandans and they should benefit from Uganda, not letting other people from outside this country benefit when the Ugandans are suffering. I thank you.

8.08
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I thank the leader of the committee and the committee for the report. I have three points to make.

We have to work together as one government in service of the people. We have a challenge; since the British gave us independence with borders since 1926, we cannot expand Uganda. What we have is what have and we have to live within it. 

Today, we have disputes over land and they begin with our neighbours; we have some disputes with Congo, South Sudan, I think we have sorted out the ones with Tanzania and we still have Migingo. We have those disputes and the Government is aware and has put a strategy in place to ensure that country by country, we sort this out. 

For this one, we call upon the Members - I see hon. Fungaroo calling either for war or scoring political points. This is not where you score political points; we can only solve this. You know about our people in Moyo and the problems that came after trying to handle it in another way. We have a problem with our neighbours but we cannot undermine the principle of integration by using other means other than peaceful means and other means of settling the disputes by using technical people to re-mark the borders. 

Madam Speaker, district by district, we have disputes over land; about 41 districts have disputes with others. Look at Yumbe and Arua; we are just still standing in between them, the honourable knows. The Ministry of Lands has been instructed to reinforce the President’s directives to go and lead others and sort this out. There is Adjumani and Amuru, - my senior is quiet here - the President’s directive that we sort out this border has been reinforced and it is going to be sorted out. 

I am talking about the disputes that have emerged because of the shortage of land. We did not know the value of land but now that the value of land has been known, people are at each other, district by district. Even sub counties are contesting pieces of land and parishes and now finally families. We have murders in homes because there are land disputes among families. 

I heard someone saying people are beginning to take pangas and machetes and whatever; we would rather not go that direction. Be patient until Government comes up and sorts out these problems with all of us. Attempts have also been made by political leaders to stand in the way of Government trying to solve some disputes, but I think violence is not the way to go. Let us stay calm. The challenge is known and I know the Ministry of Lands has been instructed to move faster and sort out some of these land issues. It will take a while and it will take cooperation and patriotism to sort this out, but we cannot expand Uganda because this is the land we have.

On the question of de-gazetting Mt Elgon, hon. Werihke I heard you talk - I come in late - but when I met your local leaders, the RDC and chairpersons, they talked as if implying that Mt Elgon is God-given and it is theirs and no one should dictate to them what to do about Mt Elgon. Mt Elgon is for all of us, for Uganda. The future of Uganda without Mt Elgon is almost not there because the replenishment of River Nile, of Lake Kyoga comes from that mountain. (Interruption) 

MR WERIHKE: Yes, there are those ecological sensitive areas which should not be touched, we all agree, but there are also some of the low lying areas of Mt Elgon. You remember there is a boundary of 1993 and in fact tentatively, we had agreed with Government that anything beyond the 1993 boundary should not be touched because we are aware. However, below people can actually occupy. That is an agreement between us - a gentleman’s or lady’s agreement – and Government. 

We agreed that that is the area that we can de-gazette and even His Excellency the President issued that directive knowing very well that there was that kind of arrangement. 

That is what we are talking about. The top should be protected. We are leaders and we cannot destroy ourselves. However, those areas which are not ecologically very sensitive should be given to some of these people. Otherwise, we are going to see them die and have a time bomb exploding in our faces. Honourable minister, that is what I am saying. We are mindful of the fact that the top ecologically sensitive areas are not touched. That is what I meant.

MR CHEMASWET: The information that I would like to give you, honourable minister, is on the question of the de-gazettement of London and the other areas of Kapsagei. These are bare lands without trees and they are suitable for de-gazettement. We do not have trees in those areas; why should we really de-gazette an area where we have trees and which helps in terms of getting rainfall? This area is bare. That is why during that meeting of 18th December, we agreed with the minister and we said this is an area that should be earmarked for resettlement. Thank you.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: The question of preserving the environment for the future generations is very important. Those who are neighbouring national parks countrywide are demanding extension of land for themselves at the expense of preservation of the environment. It can be in Amuru, in western parts of Uganda, our friends the Basongora and that is-     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you are diverting this debate. We are talking about the Benet people who were displaced by Government to create the national forest reserve. The President said that you should take a small portion and de-gazette it for them. We are not talking about Amuru and Adjumani; we are talking about the Benet people just in Sebei.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I am not in dispute with that directive. That directive will be carried out; it has been reinforced and I am aware of it. 

I was only commenting on the issue that if Government is not moving fast, people will go violent and take up arms or that there should be quick de-gazettement without a careful study of how far de-gazettement can go. The directive, Madam Speaker, will be undertaken and I am sure such implementation will have a timeline with a greater sense of urgency to meet the needs of the people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two issues: one is the general response to the report of the Committee on Government assurances, which we can have in the last week. However, I think the response to the President’s directives contained in the letter, which is four years old, is very urgent. Can we have an answer tomorrow? It is very urgent.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, as we ask Government for action to implement the presidential directives, I want to make an appeal to Government. 

One thing which I have seen is that these numerous pledges are made for majorly three reasons: First, for pleasure, to attract clapping of hands so that the audience claps until their hands develop blisters, then the politicians go away happily that they have been received. Secondly, the pledges are made to let the politicians off the hook. When they see themselves in a tight situation and they do not know how to say bye to the audience, how to wriggle themselves out, they pledge something so as to soothe the hearts of the already annoyed people. Thirdly, it is for political expedience - to get votes, support. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to Government that let us make pledges where we mean well for the people. Let us make pledges where we know that as a Government, as a country, we can fulfil them. These documents – bwino - do not rot; they will remain there. They will warn you one day when you again go to them and they will say, “the other time you pledged this and you have not done it”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made your case. We are waiting for the Government to respond now and you are just submitting further. Your case is very clear and the whole House has supported it. Let us hear from the Government.  

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, these pledges must be fulfilled and the office for all the pledges is the President’s office. So, this report, I advise, should be taken to the President’s office and followed up from there. 

I would also advise that at your level, you can also talk to the President on the same issue –(Interjections) – Yes, why not! This would show that it is serious. What is wrong with that? This is a report from the House and the Speaker can talk to the President about it; what is wrong with that? 

A double approach will work, instead of the normal route only. Do not discourage the Speaker. She should go and talk to the President. That is my advice. As a General, I know we can attack on two fronts. This is a serious problem, so we have to handle it that way. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what about the immediate one, the directive? We can handle the pledges and I can talk to him as well, but the letter of 2011 is more urgent.  

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, now I do not know from here what the report does - (Laughter)- No, do not laugh because from here we need a report to go to Cabinet. You see, Madam Speaker, my approach - For us to implement as the Executive, we need a report from this House to come to Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want us to adopt the report and give it to you?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Exactly.

THE SPEAKER: That means we do not wait for the response?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Give us the report and we shall take it for implementation.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that we adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: So, now it is over. The Clerk will transmit it to you formally.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, we have adopted the report, but there is that element of urgency; we need a timeframe. The Leader of Government Business should give us a timeframe. When does he get back to us given the gravity of the problem of settling some of our people in the Sebei sub-region?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the one of the presidential directive must be responded to tomorrow afternoon. The other one can come on 16th December. 

We have adopted the report; we shall transmit it to you and your sector minister. One of you must come on and respond on 16th December. As for the urgent one, we want an answer tomorrow because the directive was very clear.

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done up to this time. Thank you for supporting the suffering people in Sebei. Let us do our job so that they can also live like Ugandans. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 8.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)


