Wednesday, 12 December 2012  
  
Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr  Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
         
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that the Parliamentary Commission had organised an end of year party for the members, which had been proposed to take place on 14th December. However, because of circumstances that we could not avoid, this has now been postponed to Saturday, 22 December 2012 just before we break off for Christmas. 

The programme for the burial of the late George William Kadaga, the late father of the Rt Hon Speaker, remains as I communicated yesterday. On the 14th, the cortege will depart from Case Clinic for Namirembe Cathedral for a funeral service at 6.00 pm. The body will thereafter be taken to the Speaker’s residence on William Kalema Road, Muyenga, near the residence of the Pakistan Consul for a night vigil.

On Saturday, 15 December 2012, at 8.00 a.m. the cortege will depart from Muyenga for Balawoli Church of Uganda in Kamuli District for a church service at 10.00 am. After the service, the deceased will be taken to his home in Mbulamuti for a vigil on Saturday and Sunday. On Monday 17th, burial of the late George William Kadaga will take place at his home in Mbulamuti starting at 12.00 O’clock.

That is the programme; if there are any changes, you will be notified through other channels because I do not think we shall have this particular channel to deal with it. As I said yesterday, Members who wish to make some contributions towards the burial expenses and other expenses should contact hon. Jacob Wangolo, Bunyole West, and hon. Isabirye Idi, Bunya South. Those are the people who will be coordinating our contributions towards the funeral expenses. 

I had requested somebody from the Public Accounts Committee to give us a brief update of what is going on at the moment with the matter that is before them. I actually talked to the vice-chairperson. I do not see them here. I hope they will get an opportunity to brief us because very soon we are going on recess and there were matters that were sent to the committee, which needed some attention. We needed just to find out how far they have gone with the matters and what remains, and if they have some preliminary statements to make on that issue. I am sure if the chairman or the vice-chairman comes, they will be able to do that. 

PETITION BY THE STUDENT LEADERS OF THE UGANDA INSTITUTE OF ALLIED HEALTH AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCES (UIAHMS) - MULAGO AGAINST MISMANAGEMENT OF THE INSTITUTE

2.41
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move this petition under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. I am also privileged at this moment because the Minister of Health, hon. Christine Ondoa, is around and some of the students of the affected institution are also in the gallery. 

This petition is addressed to Parliament of Uganda, and the humble petitioners are the student leaders of Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago. 

The subject matter of this petition is the closure of the school, which happened on 20 November 2012, by the principal of the institute. The closure of the institute followed a sit-down demonstration by the students, which took place between 19 and 20 November 2012 as students were seeking that their concerns be addressed. They included, among others: 

1. 	Absence of hydroelectricity power from 8 September 2012, which was the beginning of the semester, until the day of the demonstration.

2.	 Inadequate accommodation space which led to students sleeping in common rooms, the warden’s office and a classroom, and others resorted to sharing beds or sleeping on the floor.
 
3. 	Poor quality meals.  

4. 	Poor health conditions including poor conditions of toilets, poor infrastructure, including structures in a state of dilapidation, for example windows and ceiling boards.

5. 	General poor administration of the institute. 

Wherefore by this petition your petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that: 

1. 	The institute be reopened as soon as possible and the official date of opening the institution be communicated using all existing media.
 
2. 	The electricity should be in place by the time of the opening of this institute. 

3. 	Being a resident should not be optional for private students.

4. 	Block A and B should be relocated to students.

5. 	A menu for the meals from the Ministry of Education be availed to students by pinning it on the notice board.

6. 	Students who had not registered by the time of the closure of the institution should be allowed to clear their dues and register accordingly.

7. 	A surcharge of 50 per cent for Uganda Allied Health Examinations Board registration fee be terminated for this semester and the deadline for registration be extended for two weeks after re-opening of the institute.

8. 	Administration should refund money spent by students on transport back home after closure of the institute since it was done by the principal without consulting the governing council.

9. 	The administration should stop intimidating the guild leadership and students should not be suspended by the school administration without reasonable grounds.

10. Further renovation of old structures be carried out.

11. Some of the administrators, like the principal, be investigated in terms of their performance. 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereby your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 
 
Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this petition from the students of Uganda Institute of Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago Hospital, about the mismanagement of the institute. It is dated 12 December 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The petition is duly received by Parliament. The days are 45 and it stands committed to the committee in charge of education to handle it expeditiously. In the circumstances, we will not be able to receive the report until we resume our sittings next year. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have received the petition today, 12th, and soon we are breaking off for Christmas recess and according to the parliamentary calendar, I think we are to resume in early February. Given that our rules talk of 45 days within which to handle petitions of this nature, and also considering that this is a matter which is affecting education, wouldn’t it be proper for Parliament to give express permission to the committee handling this to do so while we are still on recess in order not to affect the students’ academic calendar so much? To me, this is a very urgent matter that needs such expeditious attention so that when we resume, we should be coming to receive a report rather than waiting for the committee to start at that time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is normally what is done. The chairperson of the committee to which this matter has been referred would make a request for special leave to deal with this matter in the recess. I do not have to order it from the Chair here. That is the process through which it is normally done. 

So, it is referred to the Committee on Education. Let them handle it appropriately and report as soon as the House resumes. In the meantime, you can take whatever remedial steps you want to take to deal with the situation which is pertaining. 

PETITION OF WORKERS AGAINST THE PROPOSED LIBERALISATION OF THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR

2.50
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the workers of Uganda to present a petition to the Parliament of Uganda by workers against the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011. It is presented by hon. Ssentongo Theopista Nabulya, workers’ representative and it is moved under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the petition is by workers against the retirement benefits sector, because we do not have a Bill. That Bill was returned to the Executive. 

MS SSENTONGO: I am ready to amend that, but allow me to proceed, Mr Speaker. 

The humble petition of workers under the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) and the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU) states that:

In the year 2000, during the Eighth Parliament, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled before Parliament a Bill entitled, “Pensions and Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill.” The policy of which was to liberalise the retirement benefits sector, dismantle an alleged monopoly of handling mandatory contributions to the National Social Security Fund (NSSF), provide for mandatory contributions to other private operators and turn the existing public service pensions scheme into contributory pension scheme(s), provide for contributory mandatory pension schemes for private formal and informal sectors, and repeal the current Public Service Sector Scheme Act and the National Social Security Act respectively.

Earlier on, in 2008, a report on a study by the Inspectorate of Government on the management of members’ funds by NSSF revealed that contrary to the principles anchored in the ILO Convention No. 102, there is no participation of employees and employers, leaving members’ savings at the mercy of the executive. This report further proposed that a detailed study be conducted into the possible effects of the privatisation of NSSF and the liberalisation of the pensions sector.

This exclusion of workers in matters intricate to the welfare of workers as alluded to in the report of the Inspectorate of Government is against ILO Convention 144, which was ratified by the Government of Uganda. This convention provides for the tri-partism of Government, employers and employees, to work together on matters of representation especially where workers have a big stake such as social security and pensions’ contributions.

More still, Government has not yet provided for the globally acceptable and recommended ILO three social security tier schemes, which are determined basing on the levels of incomes of beneficiaries, yet the embracement of the three tier system would reduce government expenditure burden on pensions and health.

Therefore, your petitioners and the workers of Uganda pray that:

1. 	Government provides for majority representation of workers on all boards of pensions funds where workers own 100 per cent of the assets and liabilities, in line with Convention 102  of ILO and the report of the aforementioned study in 1998 by the Inspectorate of Government.

2. 	To avoid opening up workers funds to speculators, Government should conduct a detailed study of the existing in-house occupational retirement benefits and health care schemes as highlighted by the same report of the Inspectorate of Government to enable evidence-based decision making on this matter.

3. 	Government provides for a three tier system in the management of the pensions sector and NSSF should be saved, reformed and maintained as a national social security scheme.

4.	 Government should first enhance salaries of public servants before subjecting them to deductions of contributory pensions/retirement since the current pension arrangement is largely responsible for the reduction of the disposable income of workers.

5. 	Government should consider merging the contributory public service pensions’ scheme and the NSSF pension scheme to form one contributory defined benefits scheme to be known as the national pensions’ scheme.

6. 	Government should provide for social security and social protection to be under the same ministry.

7. 	Government should legally provide for the licensing, supervision and regulation of additional voluntary occupational in-house pension, retirement and health insurance schemes.

8. 	Government should appoint workers’ representatives on the Retirement Benefits Authority Board and the Act should also be amended to expressly provide for workers’ representation as is the best practice world over.

9. 	Government should both financially and legally provide for the extension of the currently piloted Expanding Social Protection (ESP) scheme and Social Assistance Grant for empowerment.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

The signatures are attached,  Mr Speaker. I would like to beg you to allow me lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you will see that the prayers in the petition are actually seeking to anticipate what is in a Bill that is not yet before this House. We had had a discussion and we thought the petition should have a single prayer of urging the government to urgently bring that Bill to the House so that we can handle it. I think we will refer this matter to the committee and the specific focus of the committee should be on pursuing the issue of the Bill being returned to Parliament so that all these issues outlined in the petition can be addressed within the context of the Bill. 

The petition will take its due course, 45 days, and they start running now. Chairperson of the finance committee, take charge within 45 days in the circumstances and report to Parliament as soon as we resume next year.

I will alter the Order Paper to allow one petition that has been with us for a long time, and that is the petition of the children living with HIV/AIDS. It is to be presented by the hon. Kahenda Flavia Rwabuhora, Woman Member of Parliament for Kyegegwa. 

PETITION OF THE CHILDREN LIVING WITH HIV/AIDS IN UGANDA AGAINST CHALLENGES FACED IN ACCESSING THE NECESSARY AND QUALITY HIV SERVICES OR FACILITIES

2.58
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition of the children living with HIV/AIDS in Uganda against challenges faced in accessing the necessary and quality HIV services or facilities states that:

1. 	The petitioners are the 150,000 children in Uganda who are living with HIV/AIDS but have been constrained by the fact that only 41 per cent of them are able to access anti-retroviral therapy compared to 61 per cent among the adults.

2. 	Pediatric HIV/AIDS services are only available in 21 per cent of the health facilities in Uganda and yet a majority of these health services for children are located in urban areas, leaving the children from rural areas with no option but to walk for very long distances in a bid to access medication.

3. 	According to the Ministry of Health, mother-to-child transmission of HIV accounts for 18 per cent of new HIV/AIDS infections in Uganda every year, which is equivalent to 90 per cent, that is 25,000, of HIV infections among children.

4. 	During the 2012 symposium held in preparation for the National Paediatrics HIV/AIDS Conference under the theme “Overcoming Paediatric HIV: an achievable challenge in partnership”, challenges that the petitioners face in homes, schools and communities were identified to include:

(a) Many of the petitioners have acquired HIV/AIDS through defilement meted on them by their parents, members of their community and relatives who have gone unpunished despite numerous reports from the victims.

(b) The petitioners have been discriminated against and stigmatised by their parents, relatives, teachers, health service providers and fellow children who are negative.

(c) Health facilities are inaccessible to most of the petitioners who stay in rural areas while some health centres lack the necessary equipment, drugs and counselling services.

(d) The petitioners are subjected to poor living conditions such as lack of food required to enable them to take the medication, mistreatment, forced labour and many others.

5. 	The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Objective XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, sets out the state’s duty to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy access to health services. Objective XX of the same Constitution also enjoins the state to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population. 

6. 	Under Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, your humble petitioners have a right to be protected and given all the basics of life by both the state and their parents.

7. 	The petitioners’ constitutional right is internationally recognised under Article 2(1) of the Convention on the Rights of the Children 1989 to which Uganda is a part, which imposes a duty on the state parties to respect and ensure observance of the rights of each child within their jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, your petitioners pray that Parliament urges Government to:

1.	Ensure that PMTCT services are provided at all health centres, strengthen the already available services and encourage the HIV positive living expectant mothers to use the services provided so that children are born free of HIV/AIDS;

2. 	Strengthen sensitisation programmes among the teachers, parents and the community about their role in protecting children living with HIV/AIDS;

3.	 Provide adequate drugs and equipment to health centres for CD4 count and safe male circumcision;

4. 	Arrest and punish those who defile, abuse and mistreat the children;

5. 	Mobilise more funds to support programmes that provide care and support for the children infected and affected by HIV/AIDS;

6. 	Start income-generating projects for the parents of the HIV/AIDS positive children to provide for and sustain these children.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will forever pray. 

The petition was signed on behalf of the 150,000 children by 10 children ranging from ages 12 to 20, and I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this petition was presented by the children themselves to the Deputy Speaker and I am glad it has come to the Floor today. The committee in charge of health should handle this matter within the timeframe provided in the rules and report appropriately.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a group of workers’ leaders from NOTU and COFTU. They have come to listen to the presentation of their petition. Kindly join me in welcoming them. You are welcome! (Applause)

In the public gallery this afternoon also, we have a team of councillors from Jinja District Local Government led by their speaker. They are represented by hon. Moses Balyeku, hon. Nabirye Agnes, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Mbagadhi Nkaayi. They have joined us to watch the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome! (Applause)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you were concluding on the petition which the hon. Kabahenda has presented, you did say that the matter is referred to the Committee on Health. As far as I know, there is also the Committee on HIV/AIDS. I do not know whether it would not be really pertinent that they work together or HIV/AIDS handles the issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a standing committee on HIV/AIDS?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that be the appropriate committee? So, can they handle it jointly? I think the two committees, HIV/AIDS and the health committee, should liaise in handling this petition. They can co-opt the other committees as soon as it becomes necessary.

Honourable members, one of our own has received a very prestigious award in a meeting in Dar es Salaam. I will not disclose it but I will ask the honourable chairperson of the Committee on Education to introduce the subject so that members can know who of us has given us this great pride as the Parliament of Uganda. Please.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION (Ms Sylvia Ssinabulya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here, with your permission, to introduce to this House an award, which was won by one of our own, hon. Oleru Huda. (Applause) This is an award from the Global Alliance for Vaccines Initiatives (GAVI) given to hon. Huda Oleru, Member of Parliament, in recognition of her demonstrated leadership in advocating for immunisation. (Applause)

I had the honour of being with hon. Huda Oleru in Dar es Salaam and also with the Minister of Health of the Republic of Uganda, and we were attending the GAVI partners’ forum. Hon. Oleru Huda was one of the 12 awardees but what is most striking about hon. Oleru’s award is that among the 12 awardees, there were only three individual awardees; the rest of the awards went to countries. So, hon. Oleru stood amongst people like the chairperson of the House of Common’s All Party Group of UK and the First Lady of Zambia. (Applause)

Hon. Oleru Huda was awarded under the category of the “Inspire Award” and this was because she has played an inspirational role here in the Parliament of Uganda, among all parliaments in Africa and globally. I want to single out some of the keys issues that were mentioned, which led to the award:

In the wake of the declining rate of immunisation in Uganda, hon. Oleru Huda moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to pay more attention to the declining rate of immunisation. This motion was debated here in Parliament and was given overwhelming support.

Hon. Huda Oleru went ahead to mobilise fellow Members of Parliament to sign a petition to His Excellency the President to inform him of this alarming decline of immunisation in the country. Hon. Huda Oleru also went ahead to seek leave of Parliament to move a Private Members Bill on immunisation. 

Also, hon. Oleru Huda, together with the Immunisation Forum, has traversed different parts of this country to campaign for immunisation. Of the key areas she has worked on is a group of believers - I call them believers - called the Gospel Church. This is a religious group that do not believe that they should immunise their children or take their children to school or health centres. However, hon. Huda Oleru together with the Immunisation Forum managed to gather 1,000 and more of such people in Mbale Stadium and did advocacy with these people to ensure that these people begin taking their children for immunisation. These are some of the issues that were considered before this award was given to hon. Oleru Huda.

As I conclude, I said that this award was given in the wake of declining trends of immunisation in this country. While we were in Dar es Salaam, the Ugandan team saw neighbouring countries being praised because of their achievements in immunisation - countries like Rwanda, DRC and Tanzania. Countries like DR Congo and Rwanda were far behind Uganda in the recent past as far as health and access to services were concerned. So, we appeal to Government to take this seriously and ensure that Uganda regains its glory in delivery of health services. 

This award also comes in the wake of the fact that in the last three or four weeks, Uganda does not have vaccines. This is alarming because it puts the lives of our children at risk and yet we know that vaccines are a cost-effective intervention that can guarantee the life and health of our children. I beg Government to take this seriously and ensure that our children have access to vaccines.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can somebody move that we congratulate the hon. Huda Oleru for the achievement she has made. It is not a motion but just a statement by this House. 

3.13
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing this award to be presented on the Floor of this Parliament. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for this feat. I would also like to thank our honourable colleagues who went to Dar es Salaam. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for raising extremely pertinent issues, especially the fact that many of us have raised on the Floor of this Parliament the dire need for the government to improve the delivery of the whole immunisation process. 

We have just concluded one against polio and I did stand on the Floor of this Parliament and raised exactly what she has said. Tororo Municipality, for example, has health centres and when those health centres were set up several years ago,  there were kerosene fridges provided to keep these vaccines. Today, those kerosene fridges are obsolete; they do not work. Therefore, we have a challenge in delivery of these vaccines to the children that require them. 

We are behind statistically. It has been presented in the various reports, and therefore, our request to the government is that they must put their machinery together to deliver this properly. However, hats off to our colleague; she has shown that where the government has failed and fallen short, individual effort can also come to bridge the gap and, therefore, hats off to her. On behalf of this Parliament, we would like to congratulate you and request that I and our colleagues emulate what you have just done. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.16
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the mover of this motion and also thank hon. Huda Oleru overwhelmingly for the greatest achievement we have this year. Congratulations! (Applause)

I would like to say this is the youngest forum in all the fora we have in Parliament. We have very many of them but this one started last year and because of her good leadership and clear vision, we came up with this achievement. We really thank her for that good leadership. You have taken our names high all over the world that in Uganda we have some people who really care for the children.

Mr Speaker, if children are not immunised, we know of the six killer diseases - polio, measles, typhoid, etcetera - that cause death to children. If we decline in immunising our children, that means we are causing our children to die, we are making more children to become disabled through polio and blind through measles. Surely, Government, I think prevention is better than cure and it is cheaper than looking for drugs for treating children. For the good of the future of our children and of Uganda, we need to put a lot of emphasis on immunisation. I was in my constituency and tried to tour some of the health centres II -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we keep ourselves to this subject.

MS BABA DIRI: I am just emphasising the absence of immunisation in my constituency, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) They are not immunising because the drugs are not there and even if the drugs are there, we do not have the electricity to keep the vaccines cool. So, we need to give more money for the children if we want healthy and bright children in future. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we, by acclamation, congratulate hon. Oleru Huda for the achievement she has received on behalf of this Parliament and on behalf of the country. By acclamation - Yes, Minister of Health.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank and congratulate hon. Huda Oleru for the award she has received. However, I would like to correct the statement that there are no vaccines in the country. We have adequate vaccines and recently in the meeting in Dar es Salaam, I was one of the ministers who were congratulated for having improved on immunisation coverage in the country. We also won GAVI support back and GAVI is supporting us to introduce a new vaccine in four months. We were also congratulated for introducing the vaccine for cervical cancer. 

Recently, we changed our mode of vaccine distribution. Previously, vaccines were being distributed by the Uganda Expanded Programme on Immunisation but now we changed that; all vaccines, medicines and essential supplies are distributed by the National Medical Stores. Because of that slight change, there were some hiccups but that has so far been corrected and I want to assure the public that we have more vaccines. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations, honourable member, for the achievement recorded. 

Honourable members, we need to move forward. I had asked for a status report from the Public Accounts Committee. Do it in about five minutes. Just give a summary of what has happened because these matters are burning and we need to know how far you have gone.

3.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure and that of the Public Accounts Committee to give you a synopsis of the work that the committee has done in as far as a special probe into the financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister is concerned.

This work was referred to us during the second week of November and more particularly under Article 163 (4) and (5) of the Constitution. The committee commenced work of interfacing with witnesses on the 13th November. As I talk, so far the committee has met and discussed with a total of 70 witnesses drawn from the Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Office of the Prime Minister.

From the onset, I want to say that this is a very unique probe. It is unlike other probes where a report of the Auditor-General is tabled in this House and referred to the appropriate committee, after which the committee, on completion of work, reports back to the House and makes in its report recommendations for the Executive to implement. It is unique, in the sense that by the time this work was referred to us two other arms of Government had already swung into action. The Police were already carrying out investigations. A few members of staff from the Office of the Prime Minister were already being arraigned in courts of law, being prosecuted for matters related to the same special probe, and then here comes Public Accounts Committee also doing the same work. That is the reason why I say it is very unique in itself.

The committee has held 14 meetings and as I said earlier on, in these 14 meetings we have interfaced with 70 witnesses. Technically, I think this is not the time for us as a committee to begin divulging the findings that have come to our attention so far. We will do that as we complete the work and come up with a comprehensive report for this House to consume.

We have lined up other witnesses to come and these majorly include witnesses from the business community and the chief executives of firms that have supplied goods and services to the Office of the Prime Minister for questionable amounts of money. Those are the witnesses that we have lined up and we will shortly have them appear before us. Once we finish with those firms and get back the accounting officer of the ministry to wind up our probe, we will then go and have an interface with the political leadership in that docket.

In the course of doing this work, our work would not be complete if we turned it into an armchair probe. There are funds, which are said to have been spent in the greater North for construction purposes and for procurement of technologies. We will need to get time to go to those project sites and ascertain for ourselves as to whether the activities were implemented, whether the houses, goats or cows were delivered and whether the beneficiaries are on the ground.

In the course of executing this probe, we have had a lot of challenges and the first challenge is about the time constraint. When this work was assigned to this committee, the Rt Hon. Speaker did direct that this work be accomplished within three weeks. However, looking at the volume of work, volume of resources and the number of people involved, even if we worked on Saturdays and Sundays we would not be able to complete it within three weeks. I did make that appeal to the Rt Hon. Speaker and she gave us the go-ahead as long as we can come up with reasonable work and get all the people we think played key roles in this scam to come and answer. So, time is of essence and a constraint to us. 

Mr Speaker, we also have the second major challenge. Without delving into the depth of our findings so far, we are caught between a rock and a hard place. Why do I say so? It is because of the technicalities. In all the investigations that we have carried out, more than 60 of the witnesses that we have interfaced with are pointing hands to one person, and without mincing words, this Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, the former Principal Accountant in the Office of the Prime Minister, who is right now on remand in Luzira Prison pending trial before courts of law.  

Our probe, therefore, will be incomplete if we do not have an opportunity for this person, to whom all this blame is being heaped, to also give his side of the story. To us that is very important because if we do not have that opportunity, all we shall be reporting will be more or less what is called “hearsay” since there will be no way we shall have corroborated the evidence adduced to us by also giving an opportunity to him, under the principle of natural justice, to be heard.  That is a technical issue in which we are caught up in. 

Of course, we have received, in the corridors, questions and challenges on the issue of the sub judice law. I did draw the attention of the Rt Hon. Speaker to this effect, that how does this committee carry out its work without offending rule 60 (5) of our Rules of Procedure. We sought legal counsel from the Director of Legal Services. The Rt Hon. Speaker, in her wisdom, said that for as long as nobody has petitioned her to say that the probe being carried out by the Public Accounts Committee may very unfairly affect the manner in which the matter in courts of law against a particular person will be jeopardised, there is nothing she can base on to tell us to do otherwise. So, based on that, we are continuing with our work.

Lastly, but not least, Mr Speaker, as I had told you we still have a number of witnesses that we need to interface with. We have the business community, there are still a few other officers from the Office of the Prime Minister and let alone our field visits to the project areas and the regions where this money is alleged to have been spent. On that note, therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to request that as I follow it up with a formal letter to you, that the committee be given permission to meet when Parliament goes on recess. That is where I will stop for the time being.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this update was necessary because in all the meetings that we go to around places, questions are being raised. 

I think it is important for us to also recognise that the red flag was raised by our own institution, the office of the Auditor-General. That is a plus for Uganda. It was not some foreign agency or some foreign person that pointed this out. It was an officer of this Parliament, the office of the Auditor-General, that raised the red flag and for that we should thank that office for being spot-on. I think this should be recognised and this activity should continue and our transparency issues will be brought to light once institutions start working like the office of the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, pertinent to the submission made by the chairperson of PAC is the issue of the appearance of Mr Kazinda before PAC. There is certainly a challenge in that particular respect, because advice was sought from the office of the Solicitor-General and advice was given to the effect that it is not legally tenable.

From the logical and legal point of view, if a suspect is already on remand, a suspect has already been charged, investigations are more or less complete,  the trial is about to begin, and then you take him to another forum for maybe adjudication, I do not know - Why don’t we give the courts of law a chance to do their work? 

The reasoning in the legal opinion that I read from the office of the Solicitor-General was that the matter would be sub judice. Now, when I interfaced with some colleagues of mine in Parliament, some of whom are lawyers, they were saying that the principle of sub judice is applicable at the discretion of the Speaker, which is okay. That is what actually the rule says. However, I think you need to read the principle of sub judice in its full terms. Here is a person who is on remand, who is ready for trial before a court of law, and you are bringing him under another a quasi judicial body. Now, how would the two work and feed into each other? This is quite a problem. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the learned Attorney-General. May I seek clarification from you whether this is the very first time that such a scenario is being faced both in Parliament and courts of law in this country? It was alleged that Mr Jamwa, who happens to be a Japadhola like me - (Laughter) - was one time arraigned before a committee of Parliament. Learned Attorney-General, unless application of the law is selective especially against the Japadhola - (Laughter) - I would benefit from you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us not generate this into a debate. Let us leave it at that. Please, make a response and we close. 

MR RUHINDI: Let me respond as follows: Certainly, I know that in the dispensation of justice, the justice system is not discriminative against certain tribes in this country or against anybody. 

Secondly, I am not yet fully briefed about issues pertaining to the indictment, charging and conviction of Jamwa. Now, as far as parliamentary proceedings are concerned, what I remember is that no legal opinion was sought from the Attorney-General’s Chambers on that matter. Two, to the best of my recollection, Jamwa had not yet been charged by the time he was brought to Parliament. But without prejudice to that, the position as stated by the office of the Attorney-General – (Interjections) – Look, hon. Tanna, that is the legal opinion from the office of the Attorney-General and I have nothing else to add on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as it relates to this House, the rule governing sub judice is very clear; it regards the proceedings of Parliament - discussions where the Speaker is in the Chair. That is when the issue of sub judice can be raised. Certainly, inquiries of the committee are not captured by the sub judice rule. No, they are not, because they are not going to debate but they are going to ask questions and inform themselves about things that are within their investigatory things. (Applause) So, for as long as the debate is going to come to the House, a Member can then rise and say that whatever you are discussing is substantially before a court of law. 

So, the rule on sub judice, rule 64, in as far as parliamentary procedure is concerned, is clear. It relates to the proceedings of this House. So, please let us close that. At an appropriate time, we will make the necessary clarifications and investigations. If they are necessary, they will be carried in accordance with the rules of this House and conducted in the spirit of finding truths about certain things that disturb us as countrymen and countrywomen. (Applause)  The Speaker has ruled on that subject. We will move to the next item, and that item will be – (Mr Ruhindi rose) - You will need a substantive motion now.

Before we go to the next item, there was a matter which was referred to the Minister of Finance, the matter of the pensions, that the pensioners need money for Christmas. Hon. Minister of Finance, you were consulting and coming back then we go immediately to our Bill.  

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the statement from the ministry responsible for pensions, the October and November pensions have all been paid and they are now in the process of paying the ones for December, and hopefully they will come before Christmas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is the status report. Honourable member for Serere, you raised this question and a response has been made in terms of what is from the ministry. Any matter again?

3.39
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the minister for providing this update, and as I called it yesterday this assurance to the pensioners. 

It is of course evident that the October and the November pension payments had delayed substantively and with this assurance, I believe that the pensioners will be happy. I hope that it just does not stay here as being in process. I hope that there will be actual payments by hopefully 24th or 23rd so that the pensioners can have - It is in my view that that is something that Government should continue working on to ensure that these old people do not beg for their pension. It is a right. They already worked for it. I heard this morning, actually in the media, about a pensioner who died when he was trying to get treatment begging in a clinic. That is not the best we can do for people who served us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, certainly it is more than 14 days to Christmas; if these monies are not released then you know that the statement you have made here will not augur well with this House in terms of the assurance you have given to the House that they are being processed. They cannot be processed for two weeks. I am sure they will be done earlier than Christmas so that these pensioners can get their dues.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT AND OTHER KEY PLAYERS TO TAKE STRINGENT MEASURES IN THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF HIV/AIDS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is not sufficient to handle this motion. I think let us deal with the Bill and if we finish the Bill quickly, we come back to this motion. Please bear with me. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall we passed clause 7, stood over clauses 8, 9 and 10, and we were supposed to have consulted and come back with some positions on this. Do we have this now? Mr Chairman.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As you directed yesterday, immediately after, we convened with hon. Nandala-Mafabi the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Princess Kabakumba plus other colleagues who are interested and we came up with a harmonised position. I think the copies are being circulated. Mr Chairman, you will guide me on whether I should lay them on the Table to that effect. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we had already passed clause 7, hadn’t we?

MR KYOOMA: Yes, Mr Chairman, we had already passed clause 7 but the issue that we harmonised in clause 8 affected clause 7. So, Mr Chairman, I think it is for recommittal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will be for recommittal. So, call Clause 8.

Clause 8

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am presenting based on the harmonised position. We propose to substitute sub clause (1) with the following: 

“The council is composed of-
(a) 	Seven members elected by full members, at least five of which shall be practising accountants;
(b) 	One member appointed by the minister from a recognised professional or regulatory body established by an Act of Parliament;
(c)	Three ex-officio members who are the Accountant-General, the Auditor-General and the officer responsible for higher education in the Ministry of Education.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They propose to replace the existing sub-clause (1) with what the chairman has just read. Okay?

MR KYOOMA: May I go ahead, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, can I deal with this first? This first part is an amendment to clause 8 sub-clause (1). Is that the agreed position? Honourable minister, can we put the question to this? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we are in agreement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you already aware that it reduces the number from 13 to 11?

MR OMACH: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you in agreement? 

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay I put the question to this particular amendment on sub-clause(1). 

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday we had agreed that we separate the composition from the appointment. It looks like the consultative meeting is coming up with something else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we had not agreed on that. What we pointed out was that the two clauses had been drafted separately. The one on composition was different from the one on appointment but then, the committee had come in their own amendment with the deletion of the existing clause 9 and incorporation of the provisions of clause 9 under clause 8. I think that is what they have enhanced now. So, I think the next proposal would be that they do away with the existing clause 9 if this is approved. Is that the position? I think that is the position, so we are still okay. So, I put the question to the first amendment on sub-clause (1).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to insert a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “At least three of the members referred to in subsection (a) shall be women.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we agree to that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we had talked about that but issues are coming up. These are professional bodies and even women who qualify are really strong women. The moment you try to create another category of people, it becomes bad. You are saying a professional accountant – the qualified accountant - who is a woman is weaker in the profession and yet this is professionalism. 

Why am I trying to bring this up? Having considered and checked with other professions, the issue of women does not arise - (Interjections) - Yes!  They are equal competitors because they are all professionals. They are only weaker in marginalised areas but in accounting or engineering, these are intelligent persons of equal wavelength. So, after consideration, we are saying that this is not necessary.
    
MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, chairperson. The issue of gender cuts across, whether a woman is well-educated, uneducated, rural or urban they are marginalised. Even in this profession of accountants, women may be marginalised. That is why we want to make sure that women are there by law so that nobody marginalises them. Therefore, I insist that at least the three must be women.

Also, I would like to add persons with disability. I would like to inform you that the best accountants are people with disabilities; at least one also should be a person with disability. (Interjections) We cannot argue about this one because disability and gender cut across. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I take this opportunity to thank the chair for having reported exactly what we agreed on and the added clause of at least three must be women. I do not want to disagree with my LOP, I support what he is saying, but the three must be women. Thank you very much. 

MR KAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to also support the position of the committee. Really, we should have this enshrined in the law. Even if we do not have accountants who are women now, I believe we are having them trained; actually, we have women who are already very strong professionals. Therefore, it would be very unfair and unconstitutional for us to disregard this provision. Let us have this provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, it might affect your rating in future.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to oppose the proposal by the committee. I wish to make a small adjustment to what is proposed. If women are to have equal share in this body of accountants, then we should not be asking for just three; we should be asking for an equal share. Therefore, I would like to see a 50/50 share of this position - (Interjections) - and propose an amendment accordingly, that instead of saying at least three we raise the bar to five. Mr Chairman, I beg to move. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am surprised that hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who will certainly run to lead Uganda, hesitates to recognise the emphasis we are putting on uplifting the position of women in every profession, in every endeavour and even in politics. As you know, one-third of the Members of Parliament and one-third of the members of councils are women. We do this just because we recognise that there is a contribution they could have made earlier on but they have not been able to make it. I am surprised that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is hesitant. 

We also know that in professions like accountancy, law, there is a tendency to think that the softer sex is not quite as sharp as could be the case. So, really, this is something to recognise and I am surprised. Surely, I would like him to stand up and say he withdraws.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to thank Prof. Kabwegyere. He tried to run and he lost now he is coming to tell me I have run – (Interjection) – Yes, I won; I am a Member of Parliament. 

Mr Chairman, I agree with my brother, Oboi, because these are professionals and they are equal. In this case, I am saying the women who qualify as accountants are strong women. Since they are strong, I believe they can compete for anything equally. (Interjections) I have been there, I have seen them. Those are professionals. I am not referring to my rural mother in the council, that one needs special interest. I am not talking about that one; I am talking about professionalism. 

Mr Chairman, there are 11 members. Of these, four will be appointed and that leaves seven. Now, elections will take place for only the seven. If it is out of these seven and you are looking at one-third of everything as you have mentioned, then we are talking about two members. In that scenario, we will have a lot of problems. You will bring in the disabled, you will bring in the youth, the elderly like Prof. Kabwegyere, and this thing will become real Katogo. I think we must think about it in a more professional way. I am not saying that because of the women, but I would like this to be done in a professional way. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do we agree on sub clause (2) just after (1) - “At least, three of the members referred to in sub clause (1) shall be women? In (a) it is elected; (b) is appointed by the minister; (c) ex-officio members whose positions are already designated. So, the Accountant-General, whether female or male, will be the Accountant-General. Therefore, which ones do we mean in saying “at least three”. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Three refers to the entire membership. I need to explain this. Three is just the minimum. We are saying, “at least” meaning that even the eleven could be women. According to what is happening now, the Auditor- General is represented by his deputy who is a lady. Even the one representing the ministry is also a lady and even the council member. So, in the current structure, they are already three, meaning that actually, this empowers the women. They could even be eleven and I think this would be good enough. 

I need also to inform the House that after agreeing on this position, when we moved out we got pressure from the professional representatives. Perhaps that is why hon. Nandala-Mafabi is bringing this up. We agreed with him but immediately we got out, we met many representatives saying, “Why do you cater for gender issues?” However, we sacrificed and said, since we have got terms of references, let us go by this position. So, Mr Chairman, I beg the indulgence of the members to support the position of three and we move on. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I want to move that we do away with (b) but cater for gender in (a). In fact, the numbering was also problematic. I am talking of (a) under sub section (1), where we have elections. We say, “seven members elected” and at the end, middle or at the beginning we shall say, “at least one-third of these should be a women”. The ex-officio members are there in their right as heads of those institutions. For the Accountant-General, whether a woman or a man, it does not apply here. We are talking about those to be elected and one third of them should be women. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why do you say one-third when the number is known and the number cannot give one-third? If you have one-third and it cannot come to a whole number, why do you put one-third when the number is known?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, one-third is known as a culture or the norm in all electable positions in Uganda. 

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Part (b) as it stands would contravene the Constitution. According to the clarification that the chairman has given us, if it is three members out of eleven, clearly it would not be 30 per cent. So, I would like to support the position by hon. Ssempijja that the three should be out of seven who are elected. Otherwise, if we do not do that and maintain (b), then it should be a third of all the members of the council.

MR OKUONZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am looking at the scenario where all the people there will be women. The chairman has already alluded to the fact that that possibility is very high. It is possible that all these members could be women. I would like to know whether that scenario is acceptable to us or we can also make it balanced by suggesting that (b) states that at least three or whatever number we agree on here, of the members referred to in sub section (1) shall be women or men, because it is possible that the entire team could be women. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no constitutional provision relating to “or men”. (Laughter)  You would need to amend the Constitution. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is good to stretch our minds beyond the current. What will happen when women and men are equal? What will happen one time?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then the law will be amended. 

MR OBOTH: We would start thinking about it now, though. Mr Chairman, I want to supplement hon. Ssempijja, and with a lot of difficulty, in regard to the number. I support strongly that women should be represented in this professional body. We have had much fewer of them being paraded as thieves compared to we, the men. However, the implementation of this proposal would be quite hard. If we take it away from sub section (1)(a) - the seven elected - we have to tag it to somebody to ensure that either the three or the number that this House will agree on should be tagged to somebody. 

If we are saying the member appointed by the minister should be a woman, then we have to put it here. We cannot just leave it hanging because it would be very difficult to ensure that at least three of the members referred to in sub section (1) are women without tagging it to the enforcement agency. If it is the electorate of the board to the council, we need to go against the seven and take the three women out of the seven members. Otherwise, it would be quite difficult to try to enforce it. I hope the chairman sees that. If it is seven, then one-third of seven would be two. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to also concur with the amendment which hon. Ssempijja brought but also emphasise that we do not tag it to a third but specify the real figure, and we say “two”. This is because for (b) and (c), it is at the discretion of the appointing authority or the one who will be nominating to choose either a man or a woman. So, by inserting a new sub clause to read as suggested here, I think we will be losing the point. However, we would substitute it at (a) and say, “two of whom shall be women”. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Why can’t we be fair to women? You talk about seven and you cannot accept just three! We should talk about three and not two. Women are even more than men in Uganda. (Laughter) So, why can’t we just give three, and say, “at least three”. Thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you. Considering the command by the Constitution and the urge by this House to meet the Constitutional provision, I think if we are looking at members that have to be elected, we might have to revert to our former position of 13 instead of 11. By doing that, it would be possible for the body to elect nine members –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have already passed that. 

MR AMURIAT: Well, can’t we recommit? I see ourselves in a little bit of a problem here. If we are to go round that problem, I do not know whether it takes much to recommit what we have already pronounced ourselves on. After all, this has happened in this House before. I do not think this is going to be the last time it will happen in this House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This particular one will not even require recommittal but this business of dancing forward and backwards –

MR AMURIAT: But we then land into problems, like in the oil Bill it happened here and we granted 100 per cent, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is that this one will not even require recommittal. It is just the way we are going forwards and backwards that I am against because we have already passed this. It is on the basis of this that they are trying to build and they went to the committee, they consulted and agreed on the number seven. They spent time on it.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I see us faced with a problem. My argument is not coming from nowhere. My argument is coming from the issues being raised that are raised in the Constitution and also what is being articulated by women activists. I tend to support them, Mr Chairman. Now that we seem to be in a tight corner, what is the harm in increasing the number from seven, which is specified in (a), to nine and effectively going back to the initial position that was held within the Bill of having 13 members instead of 11 that the chairpersons of the committee sought to amend. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Accountants look at minimising costs and maximising profit. We do not want to add up to 13, and that is why we brought up that proposal of moving from 13 to 11. 

Secondly, under (b) sub section (1), one-third of seven is two and a third. So, you cannot have a third of a person. Therefore, the next number is three. You cannot have half a person, even if it is a baby that has been born that day. So, the number is three. I plead with you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the proposal seems to be that at least three of the members referred to should be in sub section (1)(a) and not generally sub section (1). So, the improvement is that it should be (1)(a), which I am sure the chairman agrees to, and the number should be three. Is it okay? So, can we take a decision on this and we move forward, Members.

I put the question to the amendment that we insert a new sub clause (2) to read: “At least three of the members referred to in sub section (1)(a) shall be women.”  Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other amendment on this clause, Mr Chairman?

MR KYOOMA: Yes, Mr Chairman. Having inserted sub clause (2), the following sub clause is adjusted accordingly, so what was (2) is now (3). 

Further, we propose to insert a new sub clause (4) to read as follows: “The president and vice-president shall be persons with qualifications and at least seven years’ experience in professional accountancy.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the improvement. Can you read with the improvement now?

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub clause (4) to read as follows: “The president and vice-president shall be persons with qualifications and at least seven years’ experience in professional accountancy.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that was what was intended. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR KYOOMA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, having incorporated some of the contents in clause 8, clause 9 now becomes redundant. We propose to delete it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for deletion of clause 9. I put the question that clause 9 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to substitute clause 10 with the following: “A member of the council, other than an ex-officio member, shall hold office for two years and is eligible for re-election or re-appointment for a further term of two years.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, members? I now put the question – 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, it is stated “A member of the council other than an ex-office member...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it was corrected to read “ex-officio”.

MR OBOTH: It was corrected, okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question –

MR AMURIAT: The exception, Mr Chairman, in this case is the two ex-officio members. We do not define how long these people will hold office. I do not know whether somewhere in the Bill this issue has been catered for. If they cannot hold office for two years with an eligibility of reappointment for a further two years, then what happens to them? What is going to be the nature of their appointment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean the ex-officio members?

MR AMURIAT: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The ex-officio members become members by virtue of their offices, the Auditor-General, the Accountant-General -

MR AMURIAT: So, this is going to be permanent in any case.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, for as long as you are the Auditor-General or Accountant-General, you have that slot.

MR AMURIAT: Additionally, Mr Chairman, I find two terms of two years each short. I would propose that we pass two terms of three years each. I think that would suffice in giving experience to the professionals who will serve in those offices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had a discussion on this yesterday. What is in the Bill is actually three years, but from our agreement in the House, it was supposed to be two years. That is why it is reflected that way. Yes, it is three years that are indicated in the Bill, but based on the discussions we had yesterday we departed from that position in the Bill. In fact, it had been proposed that we reduce it to just one year. So, can I put the question to this - (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) -  No, no, let me put the question so we can move on. 
MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I am looking at the preferential treatment that the ex-officio members are getting at the expense of the council members –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable member, the ex-officio holds that office by virtue of their offices. If the person is the Auditor-General or Accountant-General, they become members. He might be female or male, but as long as you are the Auditor-General, you are a member. It does not matter for how long.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you are aware that we are in court over the interpretation of the expression “for a further term of a certain period” and then a full stop. To the best of my recollection, that has not been resolved. So, to be on the safer side, in these legislations that we pass, we should always add the expression “only”. In this case, it would read “…for reappointment for only a further term of two years”. We could actually put the word “only” at the end.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, the proposed amendment is that we insert the word “only” to make the provision clear for only two terms. In other words, that proposal will now read thus: “A member of the council, other than an ex-officio member, shall hold office for two years and is eligible for re-election or reappointment for a further term of two years only.” I now put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose that in paragraph (i), we insert, after the word “issue”, the words “and adopt”. It should now read as follows: “…issue and adopt internationally accepted accounting and audit standards and promote their usage in Uganda and make suitable adaptation where necessary.”

Mr Chairman, this proposal is based on the fact that the Council of ICPAU adopted International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and international standards on auditing for preparation of financial statements in Uganda. This is helpful in international trade for comparison and better understanding. It also minimises costs of financial reporting for multinational companies operating in Uganda whose parent companies use IFRS. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is clear. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, we also propose that in paragraph (k) we insert, after the word “secure”, the words “and promote”. So it would read as follows: “Secure and promote international recognition of the institute.”

The justification is that the institute is already a member of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), the world apex body for the accountancy profession.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new paragraph, immediately after paragraph (p), to read as follows: “(r) advise regulators of educational institutions on the curricula of study in accountancy related courses”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why after (p), because the Bill stops at paragraph (r)? 

MY KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, that means paragraph (r) will come after this one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, (r) in the general clause? Okay. That makes sense. Honourable members, I now put the question. 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I was still moving the amendment. We further propose the insertion of paragraph (s) to read as follows: “advise Government on matters of financial accountability and management in all sectors of the economy.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there is a proposal to introduce two sub clauses before the general clause, which is now contained in the existing sub clause (13) (r). They propose to introduce new paragraphs (r) and (s) so that the existing paragraph (r) becomes the subsequent sub clause.  

MR KWEMARA: Mr Chairman, I am of the view that the proposed (r) could be ignored altogether simply because what is taught at professional level is very different from what is taught in other institutions. I will give an example. At professional level, the emphasis is on international reporting and interpretation but when you come to other institutions like universities, the emphasis is on fundamental principles. By trying to regulate what is happening in other institutions, you are diluting the profession. I would suggest that we leave it out altogether because even when somebody has got B.com, BBA or a PhD in Commerce, you are not a professional accountant. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that make sense, Mr Chairman? Would you like to review?

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I thank you and I thank the member for his contribution. I appreciate that in institutions what was being taught some time back was basic, the fundamentals, but right now we are moving away from the fundamentals to reporting standards. I am a lecturer and I will inform Members that when you consider what is being done by B.com accounting now, we even have published accounts following international accounting standards. So, in this case, I think it is very important.

Also, when you look at what is being done at Masters’ level, for example F7, which is actually done in ACCA, it is also being done. So in this case, there is a very strong relationship and I would beg the indulgence of Members that we maintain it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Kyaka, what damage would it do for them to advise? Because it is saying, “advise regulators of educational institutions on the curricula of study in accountancy related courses”. What harm would it do?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before you ask hon. Kyooma, I would like to ask the chairperson what he wants to achieve here by saying they should advise institutions of learning. Institutions of learning do basic foundations, like when you start in accountancy. Even when you advance to professionalism, there are standards which apply to local circumstances and there are standards which apply to international standards. So, here, what are you trying to achieve? I want to understand before I can support you.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The whole essence is, while these institutions are concentrating on the fundamentals, these fundamentals should not defer greatly from what is internationally acceptable. I will give an example. When you ask someone who did B.com or BBA some ten years back and did not do any other professional course to show the financial position of an entity, that person will tell you that he shows it by using a balance sheet. But if you ask a B.com student now, he will tell you it must be a statement of financial position and not a balance sheet. 

Actually, we are copying. This is being copied from international standards. So, the essence of this is to advise the regulators of these institutions to remain close to what is recognised and accepted internationally. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, can you look at (n)?

MR KWEMARA: Mr Chairman, I understand the concern of the committee chairperson. In curriculum development, it is everybody’s interest for curricula to be talking to each other and possibly, I think, that is what he intends to bring out. However, if the intention is for curricula to talk to each other, then you do not need to advise the regulatory bodies, and in this case, the National Council of Higher Education. You do not need to advise it because it does not originate the curriculum. The best thing you can do is to liaise with the educational institutions so that the curricula talk to each other. Actually, the right wording should be “liaise directly with the institution” but not “advise the regulatory bodies”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, do you take the word “liaise”?

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I think that is a matter of terminology. If “liaise” is the best word then I will go for that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that take care of the Leader of the Opposition’s concern as well? Okay, can you now restate it with the new word “liaise” instead of “advise”.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Now the statement reads, “Liaise with -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, there is still a matter from hon. Bahati and hon. Mutende.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, recently, in the oil Bill, we had difficulty in understanding what “liaise” meant. Many legal professionals here said it is very confusing. I would advise that we maintain “advise educational institutions on the curricula of study in accountancy and related courses”. What we need is to prepare people who are interested in accounting, wherever they are, to know how the profession is moving forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee has made proposals to insert new sub-clauses (r) and (s) before the existing (r). I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KWEMARA: Still on clause 13, paragraph (d) reads, “supervise and regulate the practical training and education carried out by the institute.” I would like clarification from the committee chairperson. I wonder if the institute, as a regulatory body, will be carrying out the role of educating because at the moment and in practice, it is not playing that role. Instead, it has affiliated institutions. So, I do not know. Was the intention to regulate the affiliated institutions or regulate itself, because that would be a conflict? The council is an arm of the institute and there is no way it can supervise and regulate itself.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that goes to the minister as it is in the original Bill. Honourable minister, 13 (d) -

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the council will supervise and also regulate; we do not see any offence in this regarding what the Member is raising. We also agreed on this position with the committee, that it stays as it is. So, we would like to maintain this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Members, it is clear. I put the question to clause 13 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.


Clause 15

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to replace sub clauses (1), (2) and (3) as follows:
“(1) The council - 
(a) shall establish a committee on quality assurance to monitor compliance with professional standards published by the council; and 

(b) may establish any other committee to deal with specific matters of the institute.

(2)The council shall determine the composition of its committee s.

Mr Chairman, the justification is that the council shall be mandated to constitute a quality assurance committee to monitor compliance with professional quality assurance and other standards published by the council for observance by the members of the institute.

Two, there is also need for flexibility on the composition of committees and the chairpersons. Some committees will have non accountants and may be chaired by non accountants; for example, the disciplinary committee.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete the existing sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) and replace them with what the chairman has just read. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know what the committee is trying to do; they are trying to ensure that there is quality in the profession within the firms and these other places. There are some committees which can be run by the institute. I want to request the chairperson, if he is agreeable, that instead of having a committee we can put in place something else. The work done by audit firms, for example in Government, is very vital and if there is no quality assurance at any particular time, we could easily run into problems. That is why we should put in place a strong body to take care of this. 

I propose that we leave the committees as they are - they can establish their committees – but we put in place an accountancy oversight board, like we have the examinations board. We can have an oversight board or a quality assurance board, whatever the case, so that it has specific functions which we should detail in the law.  

I will bring this up at an appropriate time, but maybe I could share with you; I would like to propose that we could put in place an accountancy oversight board or assurance board to handle the issues of monitoring compliance to professional quality and other standards published by the council for observance by the members of the institute, enforcing the regulations established under this Act, taking disciplinary action against practicing members if a member has made a mistake, and also recommending for disciplinary action and advising on matters of professionalism. I would suggest that if you agree, we could move it as a separate entity and maintain this as it is and the examination board to oversee the firms.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you share this with the chairperson?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I did and I gave him a printout yesterday and also shared with the minister but I am ready to share more because I have more printouts.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, is this acceptable? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, the idea is okay only that perhaps in this case, we may be faced with duplication of functions. In the circumstance that we have a quality assurance committee and then we have a quality assurance board or call it an oversight board or whatever, you will find that at the end of it all, the functions will overlap. I think we should harmonise and call it either a committee or board. There is no problem with that. You will find that the functions are almost similar whether it is called a board or a committee.  All in all, it is a body concerned with compliance of standards in as far as the accountancy practice is concerned. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Chairman, I have no objection on the name. We can call it any name but the purpose is to deal with assurance. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. So, would that come in this particular clause, Minister? 

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Chairman. We consulted on this and agreed and we had requested the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to draft something to come under this clause.
 
MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the idea of having a quality assurance board to look into the quality of the audit firms and that of the profession. I would suggest that instead of putting it under 15, we could put it as a separate clause the way we have provided for the examinations board. In that case, I think it will serve the purpose for which it is intended rather than putting it under 15, because 15 looks at committees of the council.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, would that mean that we do not amend clause 15? You made a proposal that a new clause be inserted after 15. Would that be the position, Mr Chairman and honourable minister? The proposal is that we leave clause 15 as it is and then we propose another clause to deal with this particular matter so that clause 15 stays.
 
MR OMACH: In that case, Mr Chairman, the proposal by the committee under (1) (a) and (b) would have to be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In which case, we would approve clause 15 as it is now?  

MR OMACH: We agreed to have this quality assurance separately. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, would that be proper?
 
MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I think it is in order and I concede to that.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know, the word “in order” is very complicated. (Laughter)
 
MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the Minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I will put the question to clause 15.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When is this particular proposal coming in; is it immediately after clause 15? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, it would come immediately after the Accountants Examination Board.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then we would bring it under clause 17? 

MR KYOOMA: Precisely, Mr Chairman.

Clause 16

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under clause 16, we propose to substitute paragraph (e) with the words, “one representative of the National Council for Higher Education.” 
The justification is: 
1. 	The institute has been conducting examinations since December 1997 and has gained experience in the process. This provision was necessary when the institute was just established.

2. 	The institute benefits more than representation of the Uganda National Examinations Board. The institute is able to benchmark other professional accountancy bodies through training and systems reviews. The institute also uses IFAC educational benchmarks.
 
3. 	The institute would derive better benefits at a reasonable cost from representation of the National Council for Higher Education, a regulatory body for higher education in Uganda, on its examinations board and continue benchmarking foreign accountancy bodies through training and systems reviews. 

4. 	The institute is now at par with internationally recognised standards. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is very clear. The proposal is that you replace what is in 16 (1) (e) with what the chairman has proposed and the justification has been outlined. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 17 is about functions of the board and they are spelt out. I was imagining that after the board has determined the syllabi and curricula and also conducted the examinations for the institute, for the students who pass those examinations some certificates should be issued. 

When we look at clause 13, we have functions of the council and (g) says, “issue certificate of practice in accordance with this Act.” I was wondering whether this certificate of practice is the same as the academic documents to be awarded. If that is not the case, then I would imagine that we insert, as one of the functions of the examinations board, “issue certificates”. That should come immediately after (d) so that it would be (e), and then the current (e) becomes (f). I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should this board, the Public Accounts Examinations Board, award certificates? That is the concern of the honourable member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the institute is the one which awards certificates because when you qualify, you have done the institute exams. It is the institute which awards, not the examinations board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Is that clear? I put the question that clause 17 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that we insert a clause to cater for the quality assurance board, but I would beg that you give us some time so that we can consult and come up with a proper function for this. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought there was a draft.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is it. What we are now trying to consult on should be the name. We can take the name of the committee which you had proposed - the quality assurance board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Quality assurance board would be the title and then the specific functions you have already drafted. Can you state it for the record?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we want to establish a quality assurance board. I think we should call it Part V because this part is on the public accountancy examinations board. We should insert it as Part V, quality assurance board, and that would be clause 18.

The proposal is: “The institute shall have a quality assurance board consisting of seven members as below- 
(a) the chairperson, appointed by the minister responsible for finance on the advice of the council; 
(b) one person to represent the ministry responsible for finance; 
(c) one person to represent the office of the Auditor-General; 
(d) two persons nominated by the council to represent the institute; 
(e) one person of good repute from a professional body other than accountancy.”

2) 	The council shall appoint a secretary to the quality assurance board.

3) 	The functions of the quality assurance board shall be: 
a) Monitor compliance with professional quality assurance and standards published by the council. This is for observance by the members of the institute;

b) Enforce the regulations established under this Act to govern quality assurance programmes; 

c) Refer practitioners’ conduct to the disciplinary committee where appropriate and based on the results of the audit quality review;

d) Advise council on matters pertaining to professionalism and other standards necessary for achievement of quality assurance; 

(e) Perform any other incidental functions related to quality assurance.

(4) 	In the exercise of these functions under this Act, the quality assurance board shall regulate its own procedure and shall not work under the direction of any person or persons.

(5) 	A member of the quality assurance board shall hold office for two years and shall be eligible for reappointment once.” He is there for two years but eligible for reappointment for one more term only. 

Mr Chairman, I beg to move and I believe the Minister of Finance will agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you agree with this proposal?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposal. 

MS CHEMUTAI: I suggest that out of the seven members comprising the board, three should be women.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, three should be women. I think that is a principle we have adopted. We should be consistent. So, can we get a provision that can take care of this?

MR OMACH: I did not hear well, Mr Chairman; did she say three women from Kapchorwa?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, she did not say three women from Kapchorwa but three women. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Okay, three women, accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, how would that be captured? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since we have passed the issue of the council, I think we can say “…of which a third will be...” Supposing one time it changes, we could say “at least a third”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, laws have got to be consistent. We already started putting figures; we cannot change to fractions now. So, where do we put it? Can somebody put it, please? Chairperson, can you see where it can come? Just along the lines of what was proposed in the-

MR OMACH: We can state that, “The institute shall have a quality assurance board consisting of seven members, at least three of whom shall be women as below.” That is under subsection (1).  The narration then says, “The chairperson appointed by the minister responsible for finance; (b) one person to represent the ministry responsible for finance; (c) one person to represent the office of the Auditor-General” and it continues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? It is comprehensive now. I put the question to the amendment as enhanced by the Member from Kapchorwa? 

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, I just want to know the qualifications of these board members. I just remembered because I do not have a copy of the proposed amendments. Have they attached qualifications? This is a very important function, to reassure the profession. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Professionalism?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are professionals, Mr Chairman. You cannot be able to work in somebody’s audit firm unless you know how an audit firm should be arranged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, where would that come? Let us draft it. “The institute shall have a quality assurance board consisting of professional accountants, seven” – Please, somebody draft it. 

MR OMACH: Under clause (1), we would say, “The quality assurance board shall consist of seven professional accountants, three of whom shall be women.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that captures it. So, I put the question to that comprehensive amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Before we go to clause 18, Mr Chairman, if you read (e), it says, “One person of good repute from a professional body other than accountancy...” That means the remaining are accountants but this only one –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the exception. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is the exception. So, if the honourable minister says seven members of the profession, then you are removing this one. So, the others are seven members of which six will be professional accountants. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the (e) would be the exception now. So, the rule is that the people appointed will be professional accountants except the person in (e). That will be the drafting improvement which has got to be done.

Clause 18

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that one, we have already passed. This was new. The insertion was adopted already. So now, we are going to the provisions in the Bill. I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to insert a new paragraph immediately after (a) to read as follows: “registration fees, annual renewal fees, examinations fees and exemptions fees from students of the institute.” The justification is that studentship and conducting examinations are a major component of the institute’s operations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is a clear proposed amendment from the committee.

MR MULONGO: I just want to get clarification from the chairman. What about enrolment fees? How is it different from the other fees you are talking about of the students? (Interjections) Enrolments are in (a).

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, it is not automatic that when a person qualifies as an accountant, he becomes a member. This person must register and enrol, so these enrolment fees apply to that person who is able to be a member. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the chairperson as to whether this insertion is meant to replace 21(b) of the Bill.

MR KYOOMA: No, 21(b) still stands. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: These are different fees. They are not the same. I put the question to the amendment –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is a lot of contradiction. If you look at (b), it says, “fees and other monies paid for services rendered by the institute.” What are the services? We have examinations, we have registration of students and we have exemptions. I do not see any reason why this one will run away. Maybe I need the chairman to brief me if these are two different.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: These fees are not specific. Can we give them a general term, which captures all the other fees which you want to capture in this proposal? These are fees, fees, fees and they are –

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the members because (b) would still cater for this. So, I withdraw the insertion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any other amendment on 21?

MR KYOOMA: Yes, Mr Chairman. We propose to replace sub clause (2) with the following: “All monies of the institute shall be managed by the council in accordance with the laws of Uganda.”

Justification: establishment of funds may constrain the operations of the institute because certain obligations have to be met for the establishment of the fund. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, members? There is a provision in the Bill- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all monies of the institute shall be managed through funds to be established by the council for a purpose. There will be a purpose. If the purpose is there, which must have been approved by the members, that is how the money will be spent. Now, the law of Uganda comes in if they are going to steal the money. There is no way you can say if they stole the money, the laws of Uganda will not be applicable to them. So, I want you to help me justify the laws you are talking about here because there will be an agreed budget framework of what is to be done and the money is there to be spent. That is the purpose. Now, which laws are we referring to which will be applied here? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, would you like to reconsider?

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, what is provided in the Bill is that all monies of the institute shall be managed through funds to be established by council for a purpose. When we talk about the funds, we mean trust funds and whatever. I would not think that surely, under the operations of the council, there is need to again have other funds where you would find members and the like because it would imply that different funds will be managed differently. 

Mr Chairman, the language may be a bit complex but I hope hon. Nandala-Mafabi understands me. Where we have funds as provided for under (2), it would mean that we would put different bodies for different funds which would not be called for. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Is that clearer? 

MR BAHATI: I agree with the chairman. I do not think we need to subject the council to manage its finances through establishment of funds neither do we need this amendment by the chairman, which suggests that the monies will be managed in accordance with the laws of Uganda. We can have it but I think it is just stating the obvious because if you do not manage the funds of the council in accordance with the laws of Uganda, you know what happens. I find the amendment by the chairman redundant and the one in the Bill also unnecessary. So, I move that we do without the two.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think what we want to cure here is that maybe the council should not spend money without the approval of the members because the members are the owners of the money. So, I think we should state that all monies of the institute shall be managed as agreed upon by members. Otherwise, the eleven members can take the money of the council and spend it in any way they want. Mr Chairman, if we agree, we should state that all the monies of the institute shall be managed by the council in accordance with the agreement reached with the members. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, in that case I would suggest that the council shall have regulations regarding the management of funds. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But don’t the regulations have to be passed by the minister? What does the provision relating to regulations have to say? Regulations are in 52 - meetings of the council, management of property and funds of the institute, elections. We could put it under management of property and funds of the institute and the council. In which case, it would be captured under this, if it is the wish of the committee. 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Bahati that these two, both the proposal and the provision in the Bill, are actually redundant. However, I think the proposal came as a reaction of the provision in the Bill. Again, I also see that what he is suggesting seems to be redundant because it is obvious that in the management of funds, regulations must come up. Those are internal controls. 

When you look at these provisions under clause 21 - “Money borrowed by the institute for the performance of functions” - and further clauses that talk about borrowing powers, all those refer to management of funds. So, I would propose that we do away with sub clause (2) and the proposed amendment because in the management of these funds, it is obvious and it is determined in the operationalization by the council. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you look at 52(b), it says: “The management of property and funds of the institute will be subjected to regulation by the minister”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, cooperatives died because of the minister - in fact this time because of the commissioner – (Interjections) – I am saying this from experience. This issue of bringing Government into these things is dangerous. This is an institution which belongs to members and the rules have been set; in fact, I agree with the proposal to draft in the law that all monies of the institute shall be managed through funds to be established by the council for the purpose. If there are examination fees, they must be for the purpose of examination. Now, the surplus is what goes to a surplus account. 

So, this statement is right; there is already a purpose for all the money which comes into the institute. You cannot regulate them at a workshop. The money they collect for a workshop is for the workshop. After the workshop, the balance goes to the surplus account. I think this is right; it should remain, but we should amend 52. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the concern of the committee is that there are provisions of the law that kick in when you talk of establishing a fund. You do not just establish a fund; there are laws that regulate the establishment of funds. That is why they wanted to move away from the establishment of this fund; unless you want to say that all monies of the institute shall be managed through decisions of the council or whatever. 

MS TAAKA: Mr Chairman, I would propose that at the beginning of each financial year or before, the eleven members sit and look at the activities they have to carry out and present them in an annual general meeting, which the council has to approve before they use the money. 

MS KAMATEKA: Mr Chairman, there is a tendency of professional bodies to think they can collect funds and use them anyhow. I think that is why it would be important for us to carry the amendment that all the monies of the institute shall be managed by the council in accordance with the rules of Uganda. The minister can give regulations, but it is important that the institute knows that all the funds should be managed according to the established laws of the land. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, if there are going to be work plans and resolutions required they should do so in order to spend the money. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, to me a fund is when there is some money which is not due for use at a particular – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the source of the funds is in clause 21 itself. “The funds of the institute shall consist of:
a)	Enrolment fees... 
b)	Fees and other monies;
c)	Grants, gifts, donations to the institute;
d)	Monies borrowed by the institute…”

So it is a huge thing; even borrowed money constitutes the fund. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is true, but once they have the money - for example, Shs 1 billion - and it is not needed in the next one month, they might want to apply it so that it is not redundant on the account because it can be invested somewhere to bring a return. I think there we should allow the institute or the council the leverage to decide where to invest but taking into cognisance the fact that this money should not be for speculative purposes. 

I will give the example of Dutch International which came here and they said that if you brought Shs 10,000 you would get Shs 20,000 in two days. That is speculative and the council money can get lost in such schemes. But we should allow the council to invest the money. So I propose that we delete, “all monies of the institute shall be managed by the council” but not for speculative purposes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, we could say, “All monies of the institute shall be managed by the council in accordance with the laws of Uganda”. I think that captures it very well, because if you state “speculation” there are laws against those kinds of practices. I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is on sub clause (2); is that correct? Is there any other amendment on this clause 21? 

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Clause 24 says that the financial year of the institute shall be the calendar year, beginning from the first day of January to 31st of December. I am not quite comfortable with this. When you look at the sources of funds, it talks about grants, which I believe could be from government. You find that many times it becomes too hard for an institution like this to access money if its financial timing does not rhyme with the government’s financial year. So, I would rather suggest that the financial year of the institute should run in tandem with the government financial year. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to support my colleague who spoke formerly. We already tied the fund’s management to the laws and our financial year runs from 1st July to 30th June. So it     would be more appropriate to have it run that way.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, why were you thinking of this different definition of financial year? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, this is an autonomous body and the financial year does not have to run in concurrence with that of Government. This was done in consultation with the professional bodies. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, I think we pass it as it is. I put the question that clause 24 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under clause 25, we propose that in sub clause (2) we insert immediately after the words, “accounting firm”, the words, “not having a council member in the accounting firm.”

Justification: There is need to guard against conflict of interest. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have a further amendment. Accounts can be audited by practising accountants. Assuming I have a firm with Bahati and Bahati is a member of the council and I go to audit, there will be a conflict of interest because my colleague is a council member. I think we should make sure that even in the firm which is auditing there should be no member of the council. 

So, I want to propose an amendment:  “Financial statements shall be audited by practising accountants not being a member of council or an accounting firm not having a member of the firm serving on council and this is appointed by the members of the institute at the annual general meeting.” We want to make sure that no one auditing has a connection with the institute at any particular time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how different is it from what they have proposed? They are saying, “not having a council member in the accounting firm.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reasoning here is that even one accountant can audit. What I am trying to say, Mr Chairman, is that if we have a firm, it can audit the institute but also an individual partner or a member, even a junior officer who is a qualified accountant, can be appointed as a person to audit the firm. Now, supposing you have appointed an accountant in the firm but in that firm there is a member of council, there would be a problem. We want to block that completely.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, how would you block it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The first one is okay - the accounts shall not be audited by a practicing accountant not being a member of council; that is fine. The second one should be, “an accounting firm not having a member of the firm serving on the council.” Those are the ones we are referring to - an accounting firm. One, the practicing accountant should not be a serving council member. Two, the firm should not have any member of theirs serving in the council

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The second one is captured here - “not having a council member in the accounting firm.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, but the other one is, a practicing accountant not being a member of council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the one that is not captured but the second one is captured. So, Mr Chairman, would you like to incorporate that.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you. I would like to propose a further amendment, maybe between (2) and (4) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we clear with this so that we do not overload it. Mr Chairman, he is referring to a single accountant, the one who is auditing, because it can be a person who does not belong to a firm; unless the law says only firms can audit.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I get the concerns raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. It is actually in line with international standards on auditing, to safeguard against the conflict of interest. What I see here is a circumstance where hon. Nandala is a partner with hon. Bahati and hon. Bahati is a member of the council and their auditing firm, AB, gets the job to audit the books of the council. In this case, it cannot be possible for hon. Nandala to come and audit because the firm is blocked. However, what is not catered for in this case is where the council has decided to give the job to hon. Nandala as an individual –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And yet he is a member of council –

MR KYOOMA: No, he is not a member but he has a partner, hon. Bahati, who is a member of the council. This means that there will definitely be conflict of interest because whereas hon. Nandala has come in his individual capacity, he is a partner with hon. Bahati.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Capture it.

MR KYOOMA: He was proposing some good amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is my problem. It is not coming out in the context of the amendment. So, can you bring it out? The principle is clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me try again. The financial statements shall be audited by a practicing accountant not being a member of council or an accounting firm not having a member serving on the council or a practicing accountant not being in a firm which has one of its members as a council member. Now, this is a firm; I can come from firm AB, I am a member of the firm, but one of our members is a council member but we are taking our firm there. I can go there as an individual because I am an accountant. That is why we are saying, a practising accountant not being a member of council, or a firm having a member of council, or a practising accountant who has a relationship with a member of council in the firm.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, who has a firm in which a council member belongs.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, is it clear. I hope the engineer is not just going to throw a spanner in the works. (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the proposal because if you are now going to extend it to friends – (Interjections) – No, I am just giving an example. Suppose I am a member of the council but I also have a friend(s) who is a registered accountant, does it mean that they are not going to do the audit?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what they are saying is that if you, Engineer Ajedra, have been awarded the job of performing this particular function but it is noticed that you belong to a firm where you partner with a council member -

MR AJEDRA: I think that is okay. I thought you were talking about friendship by extension.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is about you getting the work as an individual accountant but you have an accounting firm in which a member of the council is a partner. That is what they are trying to cure, except that the drafting is not coming out properly.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The new position should read as follows: “The financial statements shall be audited by a practising accountant not being a member of council or by an accounting firm not having a council member in the accounting firm or any relationship with a council member.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, not like that. It could be easier to make it another sub clause. You could create sub clause (3) to say that that notwithstanding sub clause (2), a practising accountant belonging to a firm - You could deal with the firm and the individual separately; would that capture it? You can make the issue of the accounting firm different from the individual. In other words, you could say, “The financial statements shall be audited by -”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We could then continue and say, “(a) a practising accountant not being a member of council” and then we continue to (b) - (Interjections) – No, no, we want to first deal with the issue of the accountant. So, we can draft it to read thus: “The financial statements shall be audited by (a) a practising accountant not being a member of council; or (b) a firm not for a council member; or (c) a practising accountant who is not from a firm which has a council member.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that captures the picture better.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. What the Leader of Opposition is saying in paragraph (c) is not different from what is in paragraph (b). I am saying this because in paragraph (b), he is saying that in this accounting firm, there should be no member on the council. I think it is the same thing being repeated in paragraph (c). Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let me say it again. It says that the financial statements shall be audited by (a) a practising accountant not being a member of council; (b) by an accounting firm not having a council member in their accounting firm; and (c) by a practising accountant who is not from a firm where a council belongs. Maybe can we say a practising accountant who is not a partner in a firm –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, even if you are a junior, so long as you are a member of the institute you can audit or you can be a member of council. You could a get a firm with people like I and hon. David Bahati who are senior accountants and then our junior becomes a member of the council. That junior accountant can lobby for a job and then we ask hon. David Bahati to do the job. That is what we are trying to cure. So, we do not have to just talk about a partner. It has to be a practising accountant in a firm. You will recall all members of the firm, whether juniors or partners, must have practising certificates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it is paragraph (c) that we need to capture properly. Maybe it should read thus: “a practising accountant belonging to a firm from which a council member comes.”

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, I am a paralegal because I did law throughout first year. I think what we are trying to capture is that the financial statements shall not be audited by a practising accountant who is a council member or by a practising accountant who is a business associate of a council member. I think it works both ways. If for example –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about if they are selling hardware? This is professional conflict of interest, but supposing they are selling hardware together?

MR AJEDRA: Both of them cover that relationship, which the Leader of Opposition is talking about, that the financial statements shall be audited by a practising accountant who is not a council member. That deals with somebody who is a member of the council, with that relationship. Then there is a person who is a business associate of a council member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Business associate” would be too wide.

MR AJEDRA: We can then narrow it to any accounting firm where a member is an associate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we had got (a) and (b) and what is remaining is (c). In (c), the idea is that the person you are appointing should not come from a firm where a member of council comes from or belongs. That is what they are saying, and that is in leg (c) now. Do not tamper with (a) or (b). The problem is in the last one, (c) - a practising accountant coming from a firm where a council member belongs or is a member.

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, we then need to break it up as we cannot have three options unless we-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are three and not two. If you haven’t seen the third one then please go and resume - Chairman, have you got it?

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, maybe I can read what I have captured as (c): “An individual practising accountant who is not from a firm with a council member as a partner.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Just stop at “council member”.

MR KYOOMA: Okay, (c): “An individual practising accountant who is not from a firm with a council member.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You do not even have to say “an individual”. Just say, “a practising accountant”.

MR KYOOMA: Okay. It says, “A practising accountant who is not from a firm with a council member.”

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that for (c) we say, “or a practising accountant who does not come from a firm which is associated with a council member.” You can be an owner or a partner in the firm.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, I think it should read, “The financial statements shall be audited by - (a) a practising accountant not being a member of council; (b) not having a council member in the accounting firm; (c) not being a member in an accounting firm of a council member.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear? You are the experts here.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, the only problem is that he tampered with (b) which we had settled. He should not go to (b). I want the honourable member to read (c) and then we see how we-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read that one, which relates to the subject matter.

MR MULONGO: I prefer looking at the hardest thing, which is okay. It says, “not having a member in an accounting firm of a council member.”

MR SSEMPIJJA: What happens if we say, “where a council member belongs”?

MR MULONGO: We are trying to cure the fact that the first situation is about a practising accountant who is not a council member. The second one is about the accounting firm not having a council member and the last one is about a practising member in a firm of a council member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I have something: “(c) A practising accountant who is not from an accounting firm with a member on council.” Do we take that? Okay, I think we have got somewhere now. All the issues have been taken care of.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is okay but we should not forget the appointment because it is under that same clause. We have added sub clauses but at which clause should we put appointment of the-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we resolved this? Let us get the final text of sub clause (2) now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But if you read the law, it has the appointment at the end. It says, “appointed by members of the institute at an annual general meeting”. Since we have put (a), (b) and (c), where do we put the appointment of members of the institute at the annual general meeting? Should we put it as (d)? We must take care of that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I get your point. We need to split the sub clause and the appointing role should come first there. “The financial statements shall be audited by a practising accountant appointed by the members of the institute at an annual general meeting. The practising accountant referred to in sub clause (2) shall not...” and then we insert (a), (b) and (c) again.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, I had an issue to raise on the appointment and that is why I was trying to bring out some other amendment. We know that the auditing firm or the accountant may be appointed perennially until the accountant almost becomes an internal auditor. So, can we find a way of regulating the number of times this accountant will be appointed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we can qualify that. We can have this general one and then put that as an exception. Can we agree on the formulation for this one first? This will now be (2) - “The financial statement shall be audited by a practising accountant appointed by the members of the institute at an annual general meeting.” You will then have a new (3) to say, “The practising accountant appointed under sub clause (2) shall not be - (a) a member of council; (b)...” – No, this will not come out because a firm can also be appointed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, after talking about “shall be audited by a practicing financial accountant” what they mean here is an auditor. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now let us create (3) to say, “The practising accountant/auditor will be appointed by members of the institute at an annual general meeting.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay. It will be, “The practising accountant or firm shall be appointed by members of the institute at an annual general meeting.” Is that okay? That takes care of that. It will be the new (3).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In fact, here it should have been “the financial statement shall be audited by...” No, it is the practising accountant.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is okay now. It says, “The financial statement shall be audited by - (a) a practising accountant who is not a member of council; (b) an accounting firm that does not have a member of council; (c) a practising accountant who is not from an accounting firm with a member on the council.” That takes care of (2). 

In (3) you say, “The practicing accountant or firm shall be appointed by the members of the institute at an annual general meeting.” That will now be the new sub-clause (3). Okay? I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Chairman, there are times when the council will appoint the same accounting firm or the same accountant almost perennially that it may even cause compromise, and the accountant almost becomes part of the firm and we may doubt the audit that is made. So, I wanted us to regulate the number of times. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Propose. 

MS KABAHENDA: I propose that the accounting firm or the accountant should be only appointed for not more than three times.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think under the Companies Act, it is very clear. We cannot do it here because it is catered for under the Companies Act. It says that the auditors are supposed to cover a specific period. So, we do not have to do it again. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, if it is taken care of then your concern is taken care of in another law. So, I think then that is okay. We are through with 25. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. How about sub clause (4)? 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose that under sub clause (4) we replace the word “determine” with the word “approve”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that clear? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose that we add the words “and membership” to the heading in clause 27 so that it reads, “Disqualification from enrolment and membership.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that on the head note? 

MR KYOOMA: Yes, Mr Chairman. We also propose to insert new paragraphs to read as follows: “(d) has been struck off the roll of accountants under section 42(f) of this Act”, and then “(d) has not renewed his or her membership for two consecutive years without reasonable cause communicated to council.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, supposing I got work in DRC and I spent more than two years there, will you say I am disqualified? The head note says, “Disqualification from enrolment and membership”. Why do you strike me off? There must be another provision for that. Here they are saying the people to be disqualified are those declared bankrupt, convicted of criminal offences; a person who has just gone to DRC to work should not be put under the same heading with these. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you agree with (d), “has been struck off the roll”? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is okay. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay. So, Mr Chairman, would you like to reconsider your second (d)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Another thing that I wanted to ask the chairman is about cases of people who have been declared bankrupt, for example in the UK, and then they come here and they are professional accountants with ACCA and they request to be registered under the Ugandan laws. How are you handling such cases? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I think that is where we need some legal minds. However, I would think that we are still using Cap 266 of the Laws of Uganda. So, with such a case like bankruptcy, I would think that we are referring to the laws of Uganda. But we are really blessed with a Chairman who is a great legal mind; we could be advised. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If these bodies are internationally recognised and you have been declared bankrupt in UK and you come here, you should not allow them unless you do not know. This is an international body and so you should either be declared bankrupt or not be a member of this body. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think if you say, “an undischarged bankrupt”, it simply means that; it is extra territorial. That is why we have these issues in the Judiciary. That is why they are asking how they are going to handle this when somebody has problems the other side. It is coming up because the information finally came. 

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, first of all, all these reputable institutions are supposed to maintain an annual roll of members and the catch here is the practising certificate. So, if you came here, you must give us credentials to confirm that you are current and if you are not, you should state the gaps and then we can go ahead and consult. So, there is publication usually either in the Gazette or journals stating those who have been struck off from the roll. That is how we can get the information about such persons. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have experience and whoever has been in this profession knows about it. There is a Ugandan accountant of Indian origin who went to the UK but he is currently in Uganda. He did work and he was declared bankrupt in the UK and when he came here, he applied and was registered. 

There was a case, after getting that information, that they should disqualify him but he asked them, “Under what law; the British law is not applicable in Uganda?” So this time when we are making the law, we must be able to take care of such issues. You have been declared bankrupt in Indonesia, what happens when you come to Uganda? What should we do?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This small Bill is becoming- it is coming to 6 o’clock. Can we stop here for now? We have passed clause 26 and now we are coming to clause 27. Can we conclude on clause 27? I think there are still gaps on the issues of bankruptcy. Can we ponder over this and come back for this tomorrow. So, can we stop here for now, honourable minister, because the progress is becoming very- 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to ask the minister, how would you treat bankruptcy in another country? When a person comes here, will you allow him to be registered? If you resolve that we can move on.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I know my ministry does not encourage bankruptcy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So the question is: if somebody was declared bankrupt in the US, Indonesia or some other places, would this law register that person?

MR OMACH: I think we need to stand over this. We need to consult. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is small but it is not that small.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Accountants Bill, 2012” and passed clauses 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,16, 17,18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 with some amendments to some of the clauses, adopted a new clause 18 and stood over clause 28. Clause 9 was deleted. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, there is the pending address by His Excellency the President tomorrow. We are waiting for final confirmation on this matter. So, the House is adjourned to 2 o’clock for that purpose or any other purpose when the House resumes tomorrow at 2 o’clock. House adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 December 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

