Wednesday, 10 December 2014

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, presiding.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, there are Christmas carols for the Anglican Chaplaincy; you are requested to be there at the time scheduled this evening. That is the announcement, but I will give the details towards the end of the sitting when more Members are present. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
2.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (General Duties) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to kindly beg that I bring the statement in response to the report of the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, with respect to the various councils of the Ministry of Health on Tuesday. The report needed very comprehensive responses and the registrars of two of the councils are out of the country, together with the permanent secretary. And the other staff is busy compiling the responses, so we are not ready to present today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Tuesday 2 p.m. Can we have the statement on blood transfusion? 

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (General Duties) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you Mr Speaker. I also would like to beg that I bring the statements on Tuesday -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, why? There are no registrars in this one?

MR TUMWESIGYE: Actually, to be sincere, we were not aware that we were to make that report today –(Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order because you were very clear yesterday. You enumerated about nine statements that were to be made today. And there was a Chief Whip here yesterday; and you are telling us that you were not aware?  Are you in order to come and tell this House that you were not aware when the Speaker yesterday repeatedly emphasised that you must make those presentations today? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that the honourable minister is not in order because it was very clear. And even by the time I was making the statement yesterday, it was already on the order paper as business to follow. So I have said that they should be brought forward so that they are done with, to pave way for how we close the meeting of Parliament. You are not really in order, honourable minister.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your communication yesterday, you did list a number of items which should be on the order paper today. And one of which is the Mubuku Youth Institute. When I peruse through the order paper of today, it is nowhere to be seen. It is neither in the business to follow nor the main agenda, and yet on the statements by the ministers, (i) and (v) are a repetition. So I do not know whether (v) should be the one on Mubuku Youth Institute, because it is repeated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister was supposed to handle that?

MR NZOGHU: The Minister for Gender.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we will handle it appropriately.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One important thing that we get on the ground is that we Members of Parliament are not serious. And yet it is the ministers who are not serious. There are a lot of things that should be responded to by the ministers, but now I only see the Minster of Health and the Minister of State for Health, who has not even done his work. Are there not other ministers; we have other things for the Minister of Energy who is not here and many others. Are we really helping our people? When we go down to the grassroots, they are on our necks that we are not performing, yet it is the ministers letting us down.

So, honourable minister, you should know that you people are really letting us down on things to do with Parliament. You keep on postponing things and yet we are about to break off. When are we going to handle the issues that are being raised here which you should respond to? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we get a clear guidance on what you want to do with the things we want?

DR TUMWESIGYE: I really want to apologise to Members on the statement on blood transfusion. Actually, I think that when you made a statement that it needed to be presented today, I had gone out. But I must admit that, ideally we have a system that should let us know what we need to present today.

But allow me to say that on blood transfusion, we do not yet have a policy. We are busy compiling a policy; it is going through the technical committees. Once it is ready, it will be taken to Cabinet and then brought here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that is what you wanted to come and tell us on Tuesday? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: No, I just wanted to write a detailed statement as to where we have reached and other issues for Members’ information. Because there were reasons as to why Members asked for the policy on blood transfusion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So honourable members, we now have to wait for Tuesday. But we need to do something about these honourable ministers.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can now imagine, the ministers are here, the Leader of Government Business is not here, how do we move on when the Leader of Government Business is not here? And he cannot actually impress upon his ministers to come and deliberate here. The failure here, Ugandans should know, is due to the ministers failing us and not the Members of Parliament failing the people of Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have had situations where the honourable Leader of the Opposition is not there but immediately there are people. I wanted to hear that there is no Leader of Government Business from this side first.

2.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of Government Business is here –(Laughter)– absolutely, yes and business will proceed as normal. Thank you.

2.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, it is good to know that there is a Leader of Government Business in the House. The government is supposed to be moving things in this House largely. Outside there, as hon. Aol said, we are blamed as MPs as not serious.

The Speakers have talked over and over about government ministers not doing their work. I had a conversation with one of the prime ministers complaining about this and he said, that he lied that every Wednesday, ministers are reminded of what they are supposed to be doing in Parliament but actually they do not do it.

It would appear that the ministers are sabotaging government work. We sit down and make business to discuss in the House at the beginning of the session, we make an order paper and ministers do not respond to that order paper. So we just come here to waste our time.

I think, Mr Speaker, the government should be telling you what they are ready to present on the order paper based on what they want because it looks like they cannot fit in the one Parliament draws as the agenda for the day. Mr Speaker, please help us so that we can be a serious group of people and show to the country that we are serious. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, Leader of the Opposition, there are issues that cannot wait because there are people who are suffering. We have to bring these back to the House so that one way or the other we get answers to them. So please I see the minister in charge of disaster preparedness and refugees. And there are two items, one of which was called before. Can you call item three.


STATEMENT ON THE ARRESTS OF REFUGEES 
ON THE KYANGWALO-BUKIGA LAND

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I hope my statement is already in the iPads that my colleagues are carrying and if that is the case, please allow me to proceed. Mr Speaker, this statement is on the removal of encroachers from Kyangwali Refugee Settlement and sub-county headquarters in Hoima District. 

Background
Uganda is a signatory to both the Geneva and AU Conventions governing refugees and has been hosting refugees first in 1945 to 1946, the police refugees in Mukono and Masindi. During the post-independence period, Uganda hosted a large number of refugees from Rwanda, Sudan and Congo. Currently, there are over 400,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Sudan.  

The majority of the refugees, that is, 48 percent are from the Democratic Republic of Congo, while 38 percent are from South Sudan. Uganda continues to be a sanctuary of asylum seekers in the region because of the relative peace and stability against the persistent insecurity among a number of neighbouring countries such as DRC and South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, the Land of Kyangwali Refugees Settlement was offered by Bunyoro kingdom in 1964 to settle refugees. At the time of the offer, the settlement boundaries were described in the offer as Lake Albert on the western side, River Nkuse on the south and Bugoma Forest to the east and the road to Baker’s view to the north. That land was estimated to be 55 square miles.

After the repatriation of most of the Rwandese refugees in 1995, much of the settlement land remained vacant and with the residual population of Rwandese, Congolese and Sudanese refugees.

The ADF insurgency in the late 1990 until 2002 pushed this residual case log to the base camp leaving the entire settlement vacant and prone to encroachment. Most of those who encroached were from the neighbouring villages. I want to emphasise this; they were from the neighbouring villages of Kibale District namely, Rugaashari, Mpefu and Kagadi.

The objective of this statement is to inform Parliament about the removal of the encroachers from Kyangwali Refugee Settlement and sub-county and the measures Government has put in place to resolve the matter and ensuring that land is protected from further encroachment.

As earlier indicated, the land of Kyangwali Refugee Settlement as described in the offer entirely belongs to the Government. And at no point has Government given or ceded any part of that land to any individual or group of individuals.

It is not true therefore that Government allowed part of the land to be owned privately including free hold ownership of any part of the land. I want to emphasise that any such freehold titles on that land are illegal and Government has already started the processes to have such titles cancelled.

The decision to resettle 

There is a small background again why we decided to bring refugees from DRC to that place. Given the overwhelming numbers of the refugees that is about 40,000 at Bukukwanga in Bundibugyo in July 2013, and the fear of the likely outbreak of diseases in the area, Government decided to settle the refugees at Kyangwali government land. At the time, more than half of Kyangwali settlement was being occupied by encroachers right from River Nkuse as I have indicated to Kasonga village which is a half of the settlement.

Further to note by this honourable House is that the encroachers had been consistently told to vacate the settlement landing but in vain. And before the decision was made to relocate the Congolese to this place from Bundibugyo, that directive was given again.

It should also be noted that Government had in 2011 given 10 square miles of land to establish a Defence facility and it is currently being utilised by the UPDF given the oil interest that we have in that region. But I also want to make it clear to you honourable colleagues that even as we talk now, that is a challenge because of encroachment.

As Government started settling Congolese refugees on the land, those who had encroached on the land were forced to get off government land, the majority returning to their land in the neighbouring Kibale District and others to the villages of Kyangwali sub-county. 

In two weeks of the settlement exercise, the chairman of Kyangwali Sub-County started mobilising encroachers to confront the Kyangwali Sub-county so that Government provides them, in his thinking, with alternative land and relief supply. The same chairman led a team that met with the former Prime Minister and I was privileged to attend that meeting; who instituted an inter-ministerial team that visited the area that was led by hon. Hilary Onek, my senior colleague. In the team, there was hon. Daudi Migereko, the Minister for Lands, hon. James Baba represented Internal Affairs, my brother Ernest Kiiza, who is the minister overseeing the region and my humble self - (Laughter). After the visit, a technical team was constituted, which was headed by hon. Gen. Julius Oketa, to conduct an exclusive inquiry into the various allegations and make a report to the then Prime Minister. The team came up with a report that recommended among others the closure of the IDP Camp at Kyangwali Sub-County as displaced people there were found to have no legitimate claim and living in squalid conditions and extremely deplorable camp situations. 

At Office of the Prime Minister level, it was decided that the displaced be properly documented including their places of origin, food lasting three months be given to each individual household and also transport to the nearest district, town or sub-county, county of origin be given to each of the people found staying at the sub-county. 

The relocation exercise was delayed since 2014 with the report that first came out in November 2014, when the Office of the prime Minister secured food and transport for the affected persons. The relocation was conducted on November 22 2014 by a team of officers from the Office of the Prime Minister, Hoima leadership including the police, the RDC, the office of the DISO and some local leaders in Hoima. 

The people were given three months food, that is, 8,505 kilogrammes of beans and then some posho and transported to the nearest town or sub-county of their origin after the critical assessment - from the sub-county a person came from, so you would be transported to that area.

Guarantee 

Issues that we would like Parliament to note: the issues of Kyangwali Sub-County displacement are being politicised by some leaders including the Kyangwali LC III Chairperson, Mr Mazirane, who is alleged to have been the brain behind the land give away to encroachers. Mr Mazirane - and Mr Speaker, I also want it to be captured on record although it is not my report, that Mr Mazirane himself confesses that he is an immigrant who came into the place just as recent as 2003 and now he is the LC III Chairman of that area. 

Mr Mazirane with a group of self-styled local council leaders are alleged to have extorted a lot of money from  encroachers to settle them on government land and his fight to have them remain on the land is a form of payback. 

I want also to make it abundantly clear that there was no brutality during the removal and the closure of the camp as being alleged. On the contrary, people moved on their volition, majority were happy for the government to support them in their relocation saying that they had been mobilised and left there to suffer by the LC III chairperson and others in the sub-county. 

Other very critical issues to note

Mr Speaker, during the relocation exercise, 40 percent of the displaced persons who had claimed to come from Kabale, from Kisoro and elsewhere, on their way requested to be dropped along the way on Kyangwali, claiming they had already some land outside the camp and were staying at the sub-county as a way of getting relief support from the government. Another 30 percent of the IDPs were from Rugashari, a neighbouring sub-county in Kibale District across River Nkuze. Those individuals had earlier benefitted from the Kagadi government resettlement scheme. And 15 percent came from Kyenjojo and Kamwenge districts and had been resettled by Government on the government land at Kahunge. Some of the people camped at the sub-county were foreigners from Congo and Rwanda, disguising as if they came from Kisoro and Nebbi respectively. Those have been handed to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to deal with as illegal immigrants. 

Way forward

The government has through the General Oketa report recognised that there were some indigenous people who were on the land before the resettlement was established, a majority of these are living in a place called Katikara Village and have not been disturbed by the Government activities on the land. 

Government has also surveyed the entire settlement and whoever is seen illegally on the land will be required to leave voluntarily and if they do not, other measures shall be used to safeguard the land. All the tittles acquired on the land by individuals shall be cancelled and the Ministry of Lands has been notified of the presence of such illegal titles in order to take appropriate action. 

Mr Speaker, the relevant departments of Government, that is, Police, Internal Security and ESO, are being requested to investigate the activities of some of the leaders especially the LC III chairperson because his conduct can cause problems in the district. 

My ministry appeals to the leaders in the area and I want to emphasize this - my ministry appeals to the leaders, not only in the area but also in the House here, not to tribalise this exercise. The eviction was not anything tribal but on encroachers.

In conclusion, I wish to request you, colleagues, to know that Uganda is continuing to receive a new influx of refugees from DRC and South Sudan. I want you also to note that we need to retain Kyangwali Refugee Settlement land for the purpose of settling refugees and any other activity of Government in future when the problem of refugees is eliminated. 

Finally, support the Office of the Prime Minister and other affected departments of Government in securing, protecting and removing encroachers, illegally settling in any piece of land of Government. I thank you.

Mr Speaker, maybe before I sit down, I beg to lay the Oketa Report on Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is Oketa Report? (Laughter)

MR MUSA ECWERU: As I indicated in this report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, state it, state what is in that report.

MR MUSA ECWERU: In this report, Oketa captures the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a report about –(HON MEMBERS: “The Title - read for us the title.”)

MR MUSA ECWERU: Oh! Report -(Interjections)- I thought I am audible enough, Mr Speaker. “Report by the inter-ministerial verification committee for Kyangwali refugee settlement land in Hoima District dated October 25 2013 to January 2014.” This is the report, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture a copy of that report. Thank you. Honourable members, we have a limited debate on this subject. I will start from Kinkizi, then the honourable member who raised the issue and then I come this side to Obongi and then I go to Sembabule. Let us start like that; three minutes.

3.35
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I want to thank my friend, the minister, for bringing the report to the House. But Mr Speaker, hon. Junjura raised this issue the other day and I had an opportunity of meeting some of the people who were evicted by Government and some of them are from western Uganda while others are from West Nile. It was a mixture of people and the account which they give is fundamentally different from what the minister is telling the House. Therefore, listening to the account, you are tempted to believe that the minister is a liar on most of the issues. But for now, we shall need more investigation. What you get is actually the fight for resources especially oil in the area and there are even allegations being made that the ministers have actually taken that land and have even previously burnt houses of some of the people. So the picture seems to be much graver than what the minister is presenting to us. 
They even say the area has not been adequately surveyed and so forth. I think it will be inadequate for us to listen to the honourable minister’s account without getting the full facts on the ground and these people are actually running around Parliament. I am sure they could even be within the precincts of Parliament. 

My proposal is that this matter should be sent to the relevant committee - (Applause) - to listen to the people who have been evicted and also listen to the minister and maybe by getting on the ground so that Parliament is adequately informed and we get a comprehensive report. Otherwise, listening to the minister alone is part of the story and I think this Parliament in due fairness needs to listen to all sides. 

The honourable minister is accusing the LC III chairman who cannot defend himself in this House and the only opportunity we can give him is to have a committee of this House which will listen to all the stakeholders so that we can get a comprehensive report and be able to address this issue.

Also, what I think is not true is that these people were evicted very peacefully. Families were separated, some men who had gone to work came back and found the rest of the family members taken away and they are still looking for them. I think it was unfair. Even if you have to evict people, you must do it in a humane way because these are human beings.

My proposal, therefore, is that we refer this matter to the committee to do a more comprehensive job so that we can take a decision after getting full information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it the opinion of the House that the committee first looks at this matter? If it is the opinion of the House that this matter goes to the committee, we cannot lose time now to debate it and then wait again and debate when the committee comes back. 

So we agree that we refer this matter to the relevant committee to handle expeditiously and come back and we debate it exhaustively. That would be the proper way to go. So this matter stands -

3.39
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely agree with the proposal raised by my colleague with your support and that of the entire House. But there is a big challenge because right now, those people who were evicted need some assistance in form of relief. You remember last time I was here, I raised the issue to do with the whereabouts of some of the people because as we talk now, there are some families who are claiming they cannot see their people since the eviction took place two weeks ago. From the sub-county, the trucks just carried these people and dropped them everywhere. I thought I would debate but the ruling is moving on so I think I will restrict myself to that point of the committee. But I was suggesting that right now, we need an explanation of the whereabouts of those people because I need to really go back to my area and be able to explain where they are.

And then secondly, the relief, because you must realise these people were not evicted in peace. These are the people whose houses and crops were burnt, so the whole situation was difficult. We need to provide some relief to these people. I thought the minister would also be asked to look into that because we know the practice of a committee, Mr Speaker, and we are going into recess. I am not very sure that giving this matter to a committee, in one or two weeks’ time, the committee will have come to a conclusion. I have been here, I have seen the practice, and it might even go for three weeks or for a month. So what are the interim measures that the ministry must look into if we are to sort out this problem?

One, the whereabouts of our people, the survival and then, because you must realise that even the inter-ministerial committee, we had resolved that these people go back to their land as the study is being done. That was the resolution but now if we allow one year’s discussion of the committee without addressing those immediate issues, we are more in a difficult situation to express ourselves in this regard, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are two issues that remain outstanding; the bulk of the other structural issues would be referred to the Committee. Now one, what is the relief status of the people who have been affected by this resettlement as it is called - some people are calling it an eviction? Do you have a catalogue or a list of people and where they were relocated? Can we have access to that so that the citizens can know where their people are?

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, first of all, it is true after the eviction, a team came and met the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. And we discussed a number of these issues that are being raised by the honourable colleagues now. We agreed that while we are looking for lasting solutions to the residual consequences of the eviction, one of the things that must be done was to mobilise, particularly to identify some of the individuals who may have overstayed in Hoima. For instance, there are some who are said to be living in one of the church compounds because according to them, they came some 20 – 25 years ago to the district and therefore they do not think they can find where to return to. 

So, I was directed that we could mobilise and get something that can keep those ones at least like in form of food and some shelter until we resolve this but they should return to the camp as we look for a permanent solution -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am a human being -(Laughter)- I spent most of my maiden time struggling to save lives and I have done that up to now. Here is a scenario where people have been removed from, let us call it actually a refuge settlement camp and you are Ugandans you have gone into a place where these people have been staying for over 10 years, for example. You have removed and dumped them somewhere and you have given them five kilogrammes of sugar or posho. 

Mr Speaker, right now the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness is telling us that he knows there are some people who are staying near the church - is the Minister in order to tell Ugandans that he has gone with his group of the so called inter-ministerial group, who have become very heartless and removed Ugandans from Ugandan land in favour of refugees and dumped them in the compound of a church without food and shelter as if they are thieves? Is the minister in order surely to tell us these things? Is the minister in charge of disaster preparedness in order to cause more disaster by putting people in the open? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the only issue I can rule on, is whether what he has stated is false or true. But what you are saying is confirming that what you have stated is actually true. So telling the truth is very much in order in this House -(Laughter)

MR ECWERU: Thank you so much for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. What we are going to do, we are in touch with one of the religious leaders, a priest, who is working with us as directed by the Prime Minister to see to it that we take care of the welfare of those who have not been able to return to their areas of origin. We are going to do that until we finally conclude this exercise. 

I want to emphasise to you that this land is certainly going to be secured by Government and it is not only going to be this land. We are also going to secure all the other pieces of land that belong to Government. That is going to happen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. So there are issues that need review that this House needs to be updated on. The conditions of the people some of who are in church compounds and possibly in other places. We need an update on that next week on Tuesday. Please come back - no deferring this matter.On Tuesday come back and update the House on the conditions of the people who have been homeless so that the House knows what is happening, especially to this category of people. 

As for your overall operations and securing of the land, that will be done in consultation with the committee on the substantive matter that is referred to the committee. Is that okay, honourable members?

Can we have the undertakings from the minister and then we wait for Tuesday and we deal with this issue.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I commit to bring a comprehensive statement on that Tuesday on what we will have done and the number of people who are affected, who have not been able to reach their places and what will be done until this is finally concluded. I commit the ministry to undertake that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we expect a statement on Tuesday on this category of people and also the substantive matters referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs since the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees holds in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

So, we will put this to the Committee on Presidential Affairs to handle this matter expeditiously – this is on the bigger structural issues, but the specific issues of the people affected right now, we will hear again from the Minister on Tuesday afternoon. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON POWER OUTAGE IN GULU TOWN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not see any piece of paper in your hands - (Laughter) 

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, I have a mouth. Mr Speaker and colleagues the paper is being prepared, allow me to respond tomorrow. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow at 2 p.m.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FLOODS IN MOYO DISTRICT
2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, allow me to come with a comprehensive report tomorrow that will capture the floods, how we have responded and also how we have handled the displaced people who were displaced by the Kukus in the same district so that I do not come back again. So, we will combine the report of the floods and that of the people who were displaced and how we have handled these tomorrow.

2.50
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (NRM, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was the person who raised this issue and it touched both on the issue of responding to the disaster due to the floods and addressing the cause of the floods because this is a perennial issue that occurs every year. 

So, the issue of addressing the root cause was much more in the docket of the Minister of Works because we talked about dikes and mobilizing the people on which we have done our part and we needed the Minister of Works to come up with a response to our request on the way of constructing dikes to stop the flooding due to rivers bringing water from Yumbe, Koboko and even from DRC. We are not going to rely on relief every year. The Minister of Works is here, can he tell us something – (Interruption)

MS ANNE AURU: Thank you for giving way, hon. Fungaroo. The information I would like to give is that I think it is very important for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness also to bring a report because since the floods happened towards the end of October, no relief has been taken to the people. Nothing has been done. So, I even do not know what kind of report he is going to bring tomorrow, although it is important he gives it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you liaise with the Minister of Works and come to cover this subject on how to deal with the root cause of the floods and all those incidental matters tomorrow?

MR CHWERU: Mr Speaker, I wanted to beg that you request the Prime Minister to direct works because we are colleagues, me and works. I may not be able to summon him like the Prime Minister can. I just wanted to beg that I handle the relief element but the Prime Minister directs works to work with me so that it -
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of works, you are now directed by the Speaker to coordinate with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and come out with a statement tomorrow on how we can deal with this matter of floods in Moyo District.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to disobey your directive but we have different responsibilities. This is management of water which squarely falls in the hands of Ministry of Water and Environment. So, I will be interfering with my colleague’s docket – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works is speaking in a way to distance himself from the problem, yet it is on record, we informed the officers working under the Ministry of Works for example the district engineering department of Moyo District and even Uganda National Roads Authority that the cause of the floods in Waka Parish was due to construction of a road; Borokonyo – Waka Road and attempted construction of a bridge on River Kochi by a company called Ambitious Construction Company and they broke the banks of the river during the construction.

Actually, the Ministry of Works is the cause of the problem because road construction is not from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. Now, is the Minister of Works in order to run away from the problem which originated from his ministry?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those are factual matters I cannot rule on. Now you are informed. Can you come and restate that you are not responsible for this.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, after the clarification by my brother, hon. Fungaroo, I and my technical people are going to look at this very seriously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. So, please incorporate that in the response you will give to the House tomorrow so that it is captured properly. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OPERATIONS OF 
THE  NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 3 p.m. and the rules say this time should be Prime Minister’s question time which will take 45 minutes. So, we will defer the response from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and we will resume from there immediately after we have finished with the Prime Minister’s question time. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, this is the moment for the Prime Minister to take 45 minutes. 

2.57
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, a good government must feel for its people by not only planning or thinking about themselves. In the economic trend of the world now, the oil prices have gone down for the last three months. A barrel, which was $110, by today morning, it was $62 per barrel. And, we have not reflected this on our pump price and it is the duty and responsibility of the ministry and Government. We want the Prime Minister to tell us, who is reaping this abnormal profit? Is it going to be realised in our increased revenue because, revenue on oil or petroleum products is tagged on the import we get?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable member. The question is clear. The questions will take no more than one minute.

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very legitimate point raised by Ndugu Kwizera. The substantive Minister of Energy will make a specific statement to this House next Tuesday so that the House and the country are fully briefed on this important matter. I thank you.


2.58
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the Government of Uganda taking steps towards the ratification of the Kampala Amendment to the Rome Statute of the ICC? If yes, which state; if no, why not?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as you very well know, Uganda is a very strong member of the ICC. I am extremely happy, Mr Speaker, you were some few years ago championing the case of incorporating the ICC Statute in our own legal system. So, Government is pursuing its obligations to the ICC. As to the specific details, I do not have them at the moment, but they can be made available. Nevertheless, Government is living up to its obligations.

2.59
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question is about Hepatitis B. It is one of the leading causes of death in Agago and northern Uganda per se. But, currently, there is no hospital in Agago that can handle or treat such cases. Last week, we lost one person called Onyok Cyprian from Kalongo. Now, the question is: Wat plans does the government have and when can they come out with the programme for vaccinating the masses against Hepatitis B? Thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, this is a very important issue. As colleagues know, in this very House, we have discussed matters of Hepatitis B a number of times, and it is actually true the various forms of Hepatitis have been affecting many parts of Uganda: Adjumani, Teso and many other areas. There is one major problem with Hepatitis B, and that has been the cost of the vaccine. However, it is now part of the routine childhood immunisations that are given to our people. The problem is that many of us were too old to receive those vaccines at that material time. So, Government is doing what it can to negotiate with international agencies and manufacturers to see whether the cost of the vaccines can be affordable. I do believe that in the foreseeable future, there will be a breakthrough because the information we have is that prices of vaccines in general and that of Hepatitis B, are going down. So, we do expect that there will be vaccines. 

But, the most important thing for us to do now is health education. Because, Hepatitis B essentially spreads in similar ways that HIV/AIDS is spread. And, the best medicine we have now for it is prevention by avoiding all the ways and means through which the spread of Hepatitis B takes place; and other forms of Hepatitis, it is hygiene.

3.02
MS OLERU HUDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister tell us why the shortage of vaccines, especially BCG, is always a problem in Uganda compared to other East African countries?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, actually, there is a global problem of BCG; there is a shortage. And, the reason why there is shortage is because one batch from the manufacturers of BCG vaccines was found not to meet the absolute minimum standards required, and therefore, that batch was removed from the market, and that created a shortage. But, as I speak, we have information that normal releases of the BCG vaccines have resumed and I expect the country will be awash with BCG vaccines soon.

3.03
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that Hima Tibet, the company which won the tender for rejuvenating Kilembe Mines, has done nothing up to date and yet they have spent more than one year pretending that they are doing work? And, that they are instead involved in scrap selling, which scrap originally belonged to Kilembe Mines Limited?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have researched information as the honourable Member of Parliament. Nevertheless, if what he is saying is correct, then it is of concern and the ministry responsible will be able to follow it up, get the details and give information to this House.

3.04
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the government, together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, embarked on training crime preventers countrywide. And, some of these crime preventers were trained in the hope of reducing on the crimes in our communities. Up to now, they do not have instruments of work; they can no longer do their work because they are de-motivated and they think that they wasted their time training. They need things like uniforms, identity cards, torches, gumboots and whistles. What plans do you have for them so that they can help the police since the community policing cannot reach everywhere so that these crime preventers do not lose the morale they got when they were training?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the innovation of crime preventers was aimed to supplement, as you rightly said, the work of the police to ensure that the people of Uganda are as secure as possible. It is true there may be shortages of supplies of some essential equipment, but in due course, the police force, which is handling this area, will meet those shortages and ensure that the crime preventers are enabled to effectively perform their duties.

3.06
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are grateful to Government for ratifying the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and also, the two optional protocols on the Rights of the Child for protection of particularly, vulnerable children. On 28 February 2012, a third protocol on the Convention of the Rights of the Child was opened for signature, and this deals with the communication procedure which sets up individual complaint mechanisms, especially for children. What is Uganda’s position on this optional Protocol number three?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am extremely happy to see the interest by the honourable member, and indeed, by our august House on the rights of children. With good children, we are sure we will have a good country tomorrow. In principle, the Government of Uganda will support every positive thing to promote the wellbeing of children locally, regionally and internationally. 

So, I do not have the details of the protocol but I expect it will be in the interest of promoting the cause of children. It will go through the normal channels that Government uses for ratification of international documents and when those channels are exhausted, then we will ratify it. So, I expect that the protocol will be ratified.

3.08
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, there seems to be limited discoveries of information about gas as a resource. Usually, we talk about oil and gas but we have not separated gas from oil. Can we be updated on the status of gas as a resource? Thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I basically share the expression of hon. Mawanda about the importance of gas. It is true that although we normally refer to the sector as oil and gas, the two are different substances in a way. They are variables in their ways and actually the Government of Uganda is endeavouring to ensure that we optimally benefit from both. Unlike some of the areas that one hears of burn off gas, we expect gas to be of great benefit to us especially in provision of power and energy.

3.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On 16 July 2014, in very certain terms and in an explainable response to my long standing failure to be paid over the Supreme Court’s case, your predecessor, hon. Amama Mbabazi, made an international promise to the whole world that my cost will be paid very soon. I have never been paid. When am I being paid? Tell this House if Government is insolvent so that I take appropriate action. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Rubaga South is representing himself now.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am concerned that my brother Ken-Lukyamuzi has not been paid but he will be paid like any other Ugandan when resources are available and that will be the case. (Laughter)

3.10
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is well known and it has always been said that water is life and that especially women have a right to water. (Laughter) Is the Prime Minister aware that some parts of the country have less than 20 percent of safe water coverage especially Isingiro District? What is the Government doing to ensure that people living in such circumstances have water accessibility? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, access to water is a fundamental right of every Ugandan citizen, including women -(Laughter)- Government is fully aware that there are some areas of Uganda that are water stressed. The government is making extra efforts to ensure that those areas are particularly given resources to improve their access to water. The area she is talking about would be one of those to benefit from this affirmative action.

3.13
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been attending very many graduations in universities of Uganda. Can the Prime Minister assure this country that our youth will be skilled so that when they graduate from the secondary schools and the universities, they are very productive instead of engaging in sports betting? When are we going to have a review of our curriculum -(Laughter)– so that education in this country skills the youth other than them expecting white collar jobs?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with my sister that skills are critical for the individual, country, Africa and the world. That is why Government has put focus on more resources and stronger legislation to support skilling and reskilling our people. More budgetary provisions are being made to ensure that the question of skilling our young people is indeed accelerated.

3.15
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Mr Prime Minister, we have had about four budget speeches and overtime, we have heard of Alala Bridge in my constituency where I come from. It has always appeared in all the budget speeches but as we talk, there is no sign that the bridge will be worked on. There is even no sign that there is money found for it. How long will the people of Nebbi and Padyere constituency wait for Alala Bridge? Thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if the bridge has been appearing in speeches and documentations, it means it is planned for. For specific details as to when work will commence, the Minister for Works can give them to you. I advise that you get in touch with him.
3.16
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Kibaale in fact has a lot of impassable roads. Can the Prime Minister give us hope especially on the road from Kakumiro to Mukooko? Mr Speaker, you can be a witness to that because it is that UNRA road that you have been passing on. No vehicles are going through there and you know roads are very necessary for any part of the country to develop. Can you give us assurance that the Kakumiro-Mukooko-Kyehurura Road will be worked on? 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government has prioritised not only infrastructure but specifically roads and the capacity of UNRA in terms of resources has been enhanced. I do expect that the Kakumiro Road that my sister is talking about will be a beneficiary from this enhanced budgetary provision.

3.17
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bungangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to medical ethics, doctors and health practitioners are not supposed to advertise themselves. However, there is a recent trend on TV and radio stations where people calling themselves doctors keep advertising themselves. 

Is the hon. Prime Minister, who is also a medical person, aware of this? Is it not impacting on the ethics of the medical and health practitioners?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Kasirivu is raising a very valid and serious point. In addition, some of these radio advertisements quite often are full of distortions and inaccuracies. 

This is a matter that should be specifically addressed by the Uganda Medical and Dental Council. I will ask the Minister of Health who is here to take it up so that the council can consider it and take the necessary legally permissible measures.

3.19
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of late, we have seen the former Prime Minister of this country being dehumanised and treated in a humiliating way. The latest incident was in Mbarara when the DPC confronted him not to address any public meeting. May the Prime Minister explain why?

DR RUGUNDA: It is the right of every Ugandan to be treated both humanely and in accordance with the law. If there has been an exception to this involving hon. Amama Mbabazi, then the issue will be looked at and the necessary measures taken. However, the matter needs to be understood first instead of just depending on media reports.

3.20
MR TAYEBWA ODOO (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the extension workers of NAADS were laid off in the sub-counties and districts and they were promised a total package of three months because their contracts were terminated, but up to now they have not been paid. Can you clarify on that issue?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if Government promised that, it will be done. So, wait; it will be done.

3.21
MS SARAH NYIRABASHTSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a Government policy that every sub-county in this country will have a secondary school. As we speak now, there are very many sub-counties which have not got a secondary school. What plans does Government have to ensure that every sub-county has a secondary school so that we can reduce on the girl-child dropouts and early pregnancies? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Education, Mr Speaker, is important for all of us. I have been informed by the minister responsible for higher education that at the moment, we have 126 sub-counties without government secondary schools. Government is gradually reducing this number and we expect that in due course, all sub-counties will be covered by government secondary schools. 

3.22
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, I would like to know from you the status of formulating a procurement policy in this country. Honourable members, a number of investigations being carried out by select committees are related to contracts and the PPDA Act but as we talk, there is no procurement law in this country. So, may we know the status of the policy formulation? Two -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of procurement is of concern. It is true a number of Government programmes have been delayed because of procrastination and shortcomings in procurement. Actually, that is why Government brought this issue to this House and we agreed to amend the procurement law which is in place. If there is no procurement policy, this is a matter to look into. 

I am being reliably informed that actually, a policy is in place. Perhaps what my sister is talking about is the need to bring a new edition of this policy.

3.24
MR GODFFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My worry is about UNRA. It has taken over all the roads in the districts that have been centralised. However, during the rainy season, we have a problem. Unless there is an alternative, UNRA cannot serve the whole country during the rainy season. Do we have an alternative so that we can have help or have anybody who can assist UNRA to increase capacity in that case?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, because of good performance of the central government on roads, many districts demanded that their roads be taken over from the districts and be placed under UNRA. However, it appears that UNRA may have been over burdened by taking on too many roads that it cannot easily handle. Government is now reviewing that position and a new policy will come up with regard to more work being made available to be done by the local authorities.

3.26
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In this House on several occasions in the past couple of years, we have raised the issue of sports betting. I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Prime Minister: what is Government doing about regulating the sports betting shops that are opening up in each and every small town and are not following the rules and the law that provides that somebody below 18 years old shall not be involved in activities of gambling? 

It is spreading like wildfire and it affects the local economies. The children run away from schools to go and bet and the situation is really pathetic. I would like to ask you what the Executive or Government is doing about licensing these shops or governing the manner in which they are operated, and about regulating their operation in the country. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that is a very legitimate point. Government shares the same view and it intends to have tighter regulation and greater enforcement in this area.

3.27
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the Prime Minster is aware that the Governor of the Bank of Uganda, Mr Mutebile, has been in the media and other fora claiming that he was misled to print extra money during the last elections. He has now assured Ugandans that come the next elections he will not bring more money into circulation. 

However, Mr Speaker, Dr Kiiza Besigye has already informed the country that Government has already printed this money –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, protect me; I hope we have one Prime Minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, ask the question.

MS NAMBOOZE: Can the Prime Minster clarify on this?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this House made the necessary provisions in the current budget and it is going to soon consider the new budget; there are no plans of printing any money. Government will strictly abide by the budget passed by this august House.

3.29
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our local markets are flooded with fake seeds, fertilisers and chemicals. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minster: what is Government doing to protect our farmers against these counterfeit agricultural inputs?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister has raised a very serious matter about protecting Uganda and many developing countries from being dumping grounds for all sorts of substandard imports from many different sectors. It is a very serious matter. 

Nevertheless, Government has already taken measures and has embarked on strengthening the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to ensure that those who bring into the country goods of poor standards are dealt with. Even those who manufacture substandard goods within the country will be dealt with. So, the answer is firm regulation and enforcement by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. 

3.30
MR ROBERT MIGGADE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) terminated the contract for the Katosi-Kyetume Road last month and in the same vein, court issued an injunction stopping emergency procurement for the same. Is the Prime Minster aware that UNRA has actually continued with emergency procurement and awarding of the contract to the best bidders next week, which will actually lead to the loss of more government funds?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the primary interest of Government is to ensure that the people in the area get their road as soon as possible, in an open and transparent manner as possible in terms of procurement. I do not have specific details but nevertheless, those will be the guiding principles of making sure that the road is done well and as quickly as possible so that the wanainchi can benefit from that facility.

3.32
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is government policy that all health centres IV have a provision of an ambulance but there are a number of them, especially in my district, that do not have. All the health centres IV in Serere District do not have ambulances. May I know from the Prime Minister when the Government will supply the ambulances for Serere Health Centre IV and Kasilo Health Centre IV?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that health centres IV should have ambulances because of the work they do, especially with the referrals of patients and the like. However, there is no provision in this year’s budget to buy those ambulances. The 	Ministry of Health is endeavouring to have some ambulances procured but this will be in the next financial year, if the resources are available.

3.33
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that Uganda has signed a number of agreements to allow for the quick movement of goods through Uganda? Is the Prime Minister aware that these days to move from Mukono to Kampala takes two hours? Furthermore, is the Prime Minster aware that if the Mukono University-Namanve-Jokers road is done and the Seeta-Namugongo Bypass is done, it would reduce the traffic congestion on this road? Are you aware? Can you tell this country what Government is doing about it? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, very few people are not aware of the critical importance of the Kampala-Jinja Road. That is why Government has embarked on plans to get a new modern road constructed between Kampala and Jinja. This was because of the realisation that we need that road, and urgently, to allow movement of goods and services. 

3.35
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a fraction of the total industries established, what fraction of the industries established in Northern Uganda from 1986 are functional today? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if there have been those problems in Northern Uganda, it is true there have been similar problems in many other rural areas. Government is doing all that it can to stimulate the growth of industries in rural areas. That is why special advantages and incentives are being given to investors so that they can go to the north, east, west and to different rural areas of Uganda.

3.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Agago District does not have any form of government hospital, it does not have any form of health centre IV in the district and some sub-counties also do not have any form of health centre, not even health centres II. What plans does Government have to have this district benefit from the most basic government provisions like health centres?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is government policy to ensure that every sub-county in the country has a health centre III and every constituency has a health centre IV. We are aware that in some sub-counties and constituencies, these facilities are not available. Nevertheless, it is the determination of Government to gradually make them available so that the population can get easy access to essential healthcare.

3.37
Ms MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a fact that agriculture forms the backbone of Uganda’s economy and it employs over 70 per cent of Ugandans. In the National Development Plan and Vision 2040, emphasis is placed on agriculture, tourism and oil and gas. The Maputo Protocol over a long time has a recommendation that at least 10 per cent of the budget should be put on agriculture as a sector. Currently, the budget for agriculture has been ranging between three and four per cent. For how long do Ugandans have to wait to witness the increase in the budget for the agricultural sector? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the fact of the matter is that the budgetary provision for agriculture has been on the increase both in terms of the total amount and percentagewise. We expect that this trend will continue because of the importance of agriculture. 

3.39
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government of Uganda constructed a power line in Kooki three years ago and commissioned it one year ago under a prepaid arrangement. Up to now, however, the Government has failed to provide a server and people have been illegally tapping this power. What arrangement does the Government have to provide a server so that people can stop illegal connections and ensure that Government gets revenue? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the aim of Government is to ensure that as many Ugandans as possible have access to power. Where transformers are not available, Government will endeavour through the responsible agencies to ensure that transformers are availed and the wanainchi have access to power, including in Kooki.

3.40
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sure the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is aware that having bad roads is bad enough, but having impassable roads is totally unacceptable. (Laughter) In Oyam North, we have a stretch that has been taken over by the central government between Atapara and Otwal. There is a bridge at Dogapio which is completely over flooded and we can no longer pass and Olony and again Obongpoka. 

Can the Prime Minister assure the people of Oyam North that when their crops are ready, he will provide for an arrangement for airlifting their produce because it is not easy for them to transport them on road?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, airlifting will not be called for because Government, through its agency UNRA, will have already come to the support of the people concerned and the road will be very passable.

3.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the Prime Minister what the fate of construction of a bridge at Okokor is? This bridge has taken four years now. A contractor came on site, started work and he abandoned the site two years ago. The Government has continued feeding us on promises and people are getting tired of those promises. I would like a straight answer from the Prime Minister because this is a matter that is serious. I have brought this for the second or third time to this House and I have no more answers for the local people who are demanding for this service.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the straight answer is as follows: the honourable Minister of Works and Transport will make a specific statement in the House on the matter.

MR AMURIAT: I would like a commitment from Government, Mr Speaker. Now that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has asked the minister to bring a statement here, when is that statement coming?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that is not a problem; the minister will be able to make the statement on Tuesday because information is available.

3.44
Mr STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime minister. The road from Pakwach to Nebbi was done recently but of late, the road has become so bad. Are we waiting for the road to become impassable so that it can be worked on? What is the Government’s plan for that road?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, several questions have been asked and they are related to the question of poor roads. Actually, this brings up a very important point about road maintenance. 

Road maintenance was greatly underfunded. However, in the last couple of years, road maintenance has received substantial funds. In fact, I think this financial year, there was about Shs 400 billion for road maintenance. This is because if you make a road and you have no provision for maintaining it, you are literary destroying that investment. So, the concerns are well taken and the Government is already responding by increasing financial provision so that our roads can be better maintained.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for your very precise questions. We have been able to make a lot of inroads into this particular provision of our rules. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister; I will give the time to the Leader of the Opposition and then you conclude.

3.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for your answers but I think we are not satisfied with the answers we receive when we ask these questions. 

The Prime Minister - even the previous one - just answered questions to get off the hook. People ask questions because they have issues bothering them in their constituencies and therefore they need relief, something concrete that is going to be done. The Prime Minister’s answers do not show commitment and there is no question of accountability or assurance. We would like answers, hon. Prime Minister, which we can take or accept as an assurance from you that something is going to be done. It would be a good way of using our time here and, therefore, it would encourage people to ask questions. 

Earlier, it had been proposed that the Prime Minister would need questions asked and then answers are brought. Maybe that format would be preferred, so that we get concrete answers to concrete questions about issues which are affecting the people of Uganda. 

Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to ask a question about what the government policy is on health centres II because they are now almost abandoned. In some places there is no medicine and there are no staff. I know that in 2012 during the State of the Nation Address, the President said he did not know about them and he did not want them and it stopped at that. We would like to know what the policy of Government is on health centres II.

Lastly, almost eight years ago, a law was made on funding of political parties by Government. We would like to know why the Government has refused to operationalise that law to fund parties. We are well aware that the ruling party funds itself illegally from government coffers, e.g. holding your NEC meetings in State House, and this country pays for that including us in the Opposition. We pay for your meetings in State House. We would like to know why you continue to do that. Thank you very much. (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable Leader of the Opposition is not extremely fair to suggest that Government, by answering these important issues being raised in the House, is taking them lightly and trying to just get off the hook. Government takes this session and the issues raised very seriously, and indeed there are serious issues being raised by the honourable members. We believe it improves the work of this House and also puts Government on alert to ensure it responds to the different wishes and legitimate demands of the population. So, Government takes this period very seriously. It is not a joking matter; it is very serious work. 

Secondly, on the question of health centres II, this matter has also been raised in this House actually many times. Health centres II are useful, and there is no doubt about this, because they are closer to the population. Initially, that was the intention and that is why they were encouraged. However, it became obvious that if there were health centres II built all over the country, we would need an additional labour force in the health sector of more than 60,000 health workers and there was no budgetary provision for this purpose. 

Therefore, instead of putting structures and giving an impression to the population that you are going to serve them without staff, - it would be really deceiving the people -Government came out openly and told the people of Uganda -(Interjections)- if I may complete this point, please. I thought, Mr Speaker, you had guided that the Leader of the Opposition would make a comment and I would respond and I therefore do not have the authority – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Members, let the Prime Minister wind up. After all, clarification is his prerogative; it is not mine. So, please wind up.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the health centres II are not – By the way, there are many that are operational because the policy of Government again was, let those that are already in place be functional but stop the expansion because of the fact that Government will not have the resources to pay the manpower required. However, as time goes on and we generate more resources, I do believe that this moratorium will be reviewed by Government. 

The last point that the Leader of the Opposition raised is about funding of political parties. Yes, Government fully agrees with this position. The laws of the land already stipulate this point. Actually, it is the issue of operationalization. We have already had discussions on this matter; the principle is accepted and I would like to invite the Leader of the Opposition to closely work with the Government so that in the next budget, there is an item and some money available for funding political parties. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we go back to the other item on the Benet people.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.53
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I last appeared in this House, and that was on Wednesday, I promised that the matter would be discussed in Cabinet, cleared and I would present a comprehensive statement on Thursday this week. So, I will be ready tomorrow, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, tomorrow will be the issue of the Benet people. Next item

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OPERATIONS 
OF THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES 

3.54
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker, I have the pleasure to present a statement on agricultural extension services. This statement should be available on your iPads because it was deposited with the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. 

The Government, under Cabinet minute No. 186 (CT 2014), reviewed the position of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) within the overall agricultural extension system in Uganda. Government directed that NAADS be restructured in order to meet the objective of ensuring that all rural homesteads with any amount of land, big or small, should engage in agricultural commercial farming for food security, and a component for peri-urban agriculture was also included. 

Mr Speaker, the implementation of a single spine agricultural extension system commenced on 1 July 2014. The single spine extension system was initiated and is being implemented, beginning with the district level. At the district headquarters, the role of the District Production Coordinator was strengthened to supervise the existing staff - the District Agricultural Officer, District Veterinary Officer and District Forestry Officers. 

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) has identified and costed all vacant positions in the district local governments and at sub-county level. A total of 1,443 posts at district level and 3,236 at sub-county level were approved and costed and they would take Shs 49.3 billion. 

It was also recommended that the NAADS Secretariat be reduced to a lean staff and this has been done. The staff have been reduced from 78 to only 33. These will carry out specific interventions like issuing of coffee, tea, cocoa seedlings and others. That process is underway; it is happening. 

The provision of inputs has also been streamlined. I would like Members to note that when we offer these strategic interventions like coffee, Government is depositing; it is not subsidising the farmers. I could explain this little further. When you offer a farmer coffee seedlings, for example, costing about Shs 500, the farmer plants this coffee and he will reap three to four years later. When he sells, that farmer will make money from that coffee and Government will also make money because according to our taxation index, 30 to 35 per cent of any money you earn goes back to Government. I wanted to explain this to members in this House so that we appreciate that when Government is making these kinds of specific interventions, Government is actually investing because both the farmer and Government will benefit in the long run. 

Having said that, in order to ensure that there is impact at farm level, Government decided to post some UPDF officers in order to help extension officers to supervise and ensure that the materials delivered have actually reached the farmers and they have impact. Again, I want to explain this point a little further. It is one thing to deliver to a certain point but it is not enough to assume that because you have delivered inputs, they have necessarily arrived and have had an impact. This is where the UPDF come in, to reinforce extension workers but not to replace them. 

What I am saying is that the implementation of the single spine extension services is in place and is going on reasonably well. We have already communicated to our colleagues in the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that those vacant positions are filled so that come next financial year, every sub county and district get its vacant positions filled.

In the process, of course we have a few challenges and I want to point out in particular two challenges. One is that a total budget of Shs 49 billion is required to enable local governments recruit and fill those critical positions that I just mentioned. The second point is that there is urgent need to recruit the frontline extension officers at sub-county level so that they can relate to these army officers who are posted to handle those inputs. 

Mr Speaker, that is the brief statement that I wanted to make on the operations of NAADS. I want to assure the House that the system is on course and it is for the betterment of service delivery within the agricultural system. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this attracts only a short debate. We could give some comments on the minister’s statement.

4.01
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. 

The minister is an agriculturist himself. He knows that the extension staff existed in Uganda many years back and the system was very efficient. Later, Government opted for NAADS which did not work. I remember we used to share this information in the Committee on Agriculture before you were appointed minister. We advised Government – I do not know whether you still recall this - that NAADS was very ineffective in many of the cases, but Government kept on being adamant.
At this point when you say that NAADS has done nothing for so many years and yet we have invested money as a country, it is so disturbing. Really, when the President or Minister stand and say that all these years we have got nothing from NAADS, do you think Ugandans will be happy? 

To make things worse, you now involve the army. With due respect, we have had problems with the army before. Talk about corruption; there have been instances where the army has been involved in corruption. So, how can we be sure that the army is going to work? On top of that, most of these officers have no knowledge at all in the agricultural sector. 

Honourable minister, I think you are doing a disservice to this country and we may not do much. Actually, replacing NAADS with the army is taking us back to square one. You cannot tell the country that we have moved on with NAADS for all these years without the knowledge that they are not doing anything. This is a disservice, honourable minister, and I think you owe a lot of explanation to this country. Thank you very much.

4.03
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I request the minister to inform us about the criteria used for getting these seeds. I requested for seeds, especially beans and others, for Adjumani District but two years down the road, we have not got them. So, can he tell us the criteria? Can he also tell us what those challenges are because distribution of many of these seeds is not spread widely based on the demand? 

Secondly, I want to know from the minister whether they have initiatives as NAADS to follow up on their earlier interventions. In Adjumani District, for example, we got cassava tubers and we were informed that we would get some training for the farmers who had benefited. However, when I made a follow up, I was told that the money is not there. Can I know whether the promise made by NAADS has failed to be implemented by the NAADS Secretariat and they have now left these assets to be wasted, because people cannot use them as expected?

4.05
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know if these officers who are taking over NAADS are extension workers. At the moment, we already have a big problem with extension work. 

Those seedlings which are distributed - Right now banana wilt is actually even in Northern Uganda yet extension workers are not there to address those issues. When it comes to animals, we need veterinary assistants to help but they are nowhere. 
Are you going to get for us those technical people in the army to come and help us with extension work so that our farmers do not work in vain?

4.06
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for delivering the statement.  

I think we really have a problem. Many times the committee of Parliament that is in charge of overseeing the Ministry of Agriculture has raised many concerns but many of these have not been taken into account. I would have been happier if the minister had discussed with the committee some of the issues before he came to Parliament. This is because some of the things he has reported on have been queried and no answers have been given. 

He says the NAADS Secretariat now has lean staff but members should know that in this budget, the amount of money that we allocated to the NAADS Secretariat is more than three times what was provided in the previous years. Imagine, you give an agency more than three times the money they have been getting but the agency reduces the number of staff it has and you expect those few staff to handle that money. Some of the departments, which we were supposed to sensitise the public about what is happening have been removed. So, what exactly are we doing? Are we trying to go forward or go backwards? I do not understand.

Mr Speaker, the minister says that recruitment is going on. Colleagues, you come from your constituencies, I do not know which district is now actively recruiting extension staff. I do not know of any; at least not Kibaale. 

Mr Speaker, we are even lucky that the NAADS co-ordinators with running contracts, who were summarily terminated, have not been wise enough to sue Government. They could have sued because the minister wrote and said, “Consider yourselves terminated. We shall recruit afresh.” I think we have management problems in that ministry and yet this is a crucial sector which we should be guarding jealously to ensure things do not go wrong. I am very unhappy that we are moving on with this type of situation.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am told the army officers who are going to be actively involved in the distribution of inputs were recently advised to get in touch with leaders of the district. 
I think that is good because they had been working on their own and we did not know what they were doing. This will guide them in the process of the distribution of the inputs. On their own, they would face challenges. I beg to submit.
4.10
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Agriculture for the presentation he has made. 

I come from Kamwenge, a district that has embarked on coffee growing as a cash crop to increase on household incomes, but we have a challenge with the quality of coffee seedlings that we get. Different people were given contracts to supply these seedlings but at the end of the day, the farmers are suffering with the Catimor type of coffee. The UCDA people have even told us that this type of coffee is of poor quality and it is not recommended. 

The problem is that these poor quality seedlings are now being mixed with the good quality seedlings. The farmers, as we advocate for the increase of household incomes, are not able to cut these Catimor coffee seedlings that were given to them because they were being supplied by the Government. We do not even have extension workers to help our farmers down there, to give them seedlings of good quality so that they cut the Catimor and they continue with the good ones. What are we going to do? I request the minister to give clarification on this for the betterment of our coffee quality on the world market. Thank you.

4.11
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance and clarification on the aspect of accountability and responsibility when it comes to the involvement of the army in NAADS. In principle, I have no problem with the involvement of soldiers; they are our brothers and sisters and it is okay for them to contribute to any development of the country. However, these soldiers are officially employed by the Ministry of Defence under the control of the army, but now we are told they are working for NAADS. Has the Minister of Agriculture assumed responsibility for these officers? Are they now reporting to you? Are you now their commander-in-chief? 

Based on the contract the minister has with these officers – assuming they are all officers - will the minister accept accountability and responsibility for their actions, whether positive or negative? Also, under which ministry do they fall - the Ministry of Defence or the Ministry of Agriculture? Assuming they are earning an allowance, what will you tell PAC in the future? These are soldiers; is the responsibility shared between the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Agriculture?  Please, let us know. Thank you so much. 

4.13
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, District Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Agriculture for his presentation. 

I just want to ask the minister about what happened to the agricultural financing scheme or loan. I am asking this because we have farmers’ groups in the district and we hear that there are agricultural loans, which are given at 12 per cent interest. However, when our farmers go to the banks that are supposed to give these loans, they are told that the interest charged on these loans is 25 or 27 per cent or even more. So, is there something called an agricultural loan? If yes, how can our farmers access it? Thank you.

4.14
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, recently I was part of a benchmarking trip to Ethiopia with the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. While there, some of us were persuaded to accept the fact that the army in peaceful times can be deployed for development purposes. However, the policy has to be clear-cut. 

In Ethiopia, the army is doing an enviably good job. The Minister of Works has been there and he will tell you that they are doing tremendous work in motor vehicle engineering, road construction, pharmaceutical companies - in everything you can talk about. However, it is structured and founded on a sound policy, which is first debated and adopted by Parliament. 

The problem and crisis we have in Uganda is that at every turn of a crisis, we go ad hoc. That is the problem affecting NAADS. So, it is high time that Government becomes bold and brave and brings a policy on engagement of the army in peaceful times elsewhere in the country – (Interruption)

MS KATAIKE: I thank you, colleague, for allowing me to give some information. What you are sharing with the House is true, and I want to confirm that the idea of the army being deployed in development activities started with my ministry, the Ministry in charge of Luweero Triangle. In my ministry, it is well structured. We have a structure that allows the army to participate through the civilian veterans and it is has been successful. 

It is because of the success we attained that His Excellency the President and the Cabinet saw it fit to inculcate the army into the extension work, to bring in their skill and efficiency in terms of mobilization and reaching out to the farmers. When we started, the soldiers were deployed and they did not receive any penny for the first three months but they supervised the work which civil servants of today would not do. That is the information I wanted to give.


MR MUWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think you can see the crisis; it is epitomised by my good friend, the honourable minister. People working for free without allowances because they are soldiers - that is what I am talking about. Why don’t you get on top of your game and work in modern times. 

We are not asking you for too much. This is what has been done elsewhere, for example in China. By the way, most of the technology we enjoy, from telephones to aeroplane technology, is developed by the military, but the system is well structured. That is the big debate we can have in this country, not the way you use them. In Ethiopia, for example, you are not going to get veterans without any skill to go and man agriculture. You look for people with clear professions within the army structure –(Interruptions)

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my brother, hon. Kivumbi, because I travelled with him to Ethiopia and there were other members of the committee, and we compiled a report, which will be brought to the House. Is it procedurally right for hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to table the report of the committee so informally when it is actually coming before the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter before the House is about restructuring NAADS and it happens that the UPDF is involved and the honourable member has an experience where the army has been involved in many of these things. So, he is proceeding properly.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, all that we request of Government is to come up with a clear policy and guidelines; that is not asking for too much. 

In peaceful times, an army of about 10,000 or 100,000 men and women, well trained, can be an anchor onto which we can build a country. However, they cannot be deployed in a makeshift manner, in a kind of quasi manner which the honourable minister is presiding over. Actually, she is presiding over a disaster in the nation. Although in the short term you can see benefits like seeds being given out, you are not building an institution. 

Remember, this is only being done based on the goodwill of the President because there is no budgetary support. I know that there are accountability problems already: Where do you get the money; on whose budget do you depend? We do not want to take you there, but all we want you to do is to bring a clear policy on the Floor of Parliament for debate and adoption. I beg to move.

4.21
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Aleptong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely agree with my colleague from Butambala. However, I hasten to add that what is happening is a tacit admission of failure by Government to run affairs so dear to the hearts of Ugandans. The problem at NAADS is a well-known one, but it is also not a problem of NAADS. It is the way NAADS was formed and structured, and NAADS has been doing precisely what it was designed to do. Therefore, for Government to now turn round and blame NAADS is another failure. 

I would rather that the NAADS Act is brought here and we re-examine it because NAADS is a creation of an Act of Parliament; you cannot turn up arbitrarily and declare that the army should take over. It is also not fair for the President - I read it in the media - to declare that anybody who criticises this move by Government is a saboteur and must be arrested. What democracy is that? 

Mr Speaker, we can fight poverty in this country, but we cannot use AK-47s. Prof. Ogenga Latigo one time stood in the last Parliament and said that you cannot shoot poverty with an AK-47. Let these military men do what they are supposed to do. Do you want us to wish for war so that they are all engaged in war? 

I would submit that if they are to do this, let it be done properly. You cannot give soldiers two weeks of training and think they are going to dislodge professionals who have done this for a long time. If you are failing to check corruption, that is another matter. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to also seek clarification from the Minister of Agriculture and the Attorney-General, if he is here. On 25th August, we read in the newspapers that a concerned citizen called Daniel Byaruhanga, through his lawyers Tumwesigye, Baingana and Co. Advocates, filed a suit in court petitioning that this unilateral declaration should be revisited and stopped. What is the status of that case, if any? Thank you.

4.24
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would wish to thank the minister for the statement but seek clarification from him in relation to the statement. 

The minister has talked about the strengthening of the office of the District Production Officer. I am kind of wondering how we shall achieve the agribusiness extension and services from NAADS if the District Commercial Officer is left out of the conceptualisation of the programme. Would you please clarify on that?

4.24
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement and my colleagues for their contributions, especially hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Benson Obua. 

We really would like to support the move by Government. Although some of us were very skeptical at the beginning, the discussions coming from the Floor seem to indicate that there have been successes everywhere and that the army can be used to cause improvement in our agricultural sector. However, what we all want, indeed, is a policy and guidelines. 

Let me also talk about the training. If these people are to do good work, equip them with the skills and knowledge necessary to do the work. As hon. Benson Obua has said, you cannot just train people for two weeks and you send them to go and work and you think they are going to provide extension services. That is not possible.

Let me also seek clarification from the honourable minister. Are these people really expected to provide extension services or they are just distributing the coffee seedlings and all the other agricultural supplies but relying on the agricultural extension service providers in the district to do the technical work? Is it the army men providing the extension services or the officers in the districts? 

Also, when should we expect these people to come to our districts? We hear they are already engaged and they are already distributing here and there, but some of us have not seen them. When should we expect this exercise to begin in our districts? Thank you.

4.26
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know agriculture is the backbone of Uganda and His Excellency the President is looking for a way of using agriculture to push lonyi – as he calls it in our language – into the pockets of the farmers. I think that is why the army is being brought in. However, when the Minister of Agriculture was submitting, he talked about coffee seedlings but I doubt whether coffee is the right crop for all the soils in this country. Coffee cannot grow in every part of Maracha for example, but he did not talk about any substitutes for areas like Maracha. The army has been brought in but the question is: Is there a way of first understanding the soil fertility of the area? Will these people do it? Will it be the agricultural extension workers to do that? What is the relationship between the army and the agriculturists? I know somebody with knowledge can frustrate the one who does not have the knowledge. How are we going to take care of that? Thank you very much.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, having listened to my brother, hon. Benson Obua-Ogwal and of course having read the law that establishes NAADS, is it not procedurally correct that we assure ourselves that we are moving on the same page, in terms of both the legal and ideological orientation. We need to understand whether the ministry understands the statutory mandates of NAADS. This will save us from debating the same things where we need to clarify the technical aspects which are important; that the statute does not talk about this distribution we are talking about.

Secondly, we also have statutory procedures for recruitment of employees in the public service, among which include non-discrimination. So, establishing the standards to know who qualifies for which job in the public service structure is more important rather than to look at person X as a major in the army as the qualification. 

Isn’t procedurally correct that we first get that clarified before we move into the substance of what they are doing, and whether the President was right or wrong to change the orientation from a civilian to the military one?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement was requested for by the members of Parliament. I am now being informed that there is a matter in court relating to the operation of this particular sector. We will, therefore, restrict ourselves to the minister’s statement on this issue and debate just that. We will not exceed that limit because I need to verify that issue since it is in court. 

Please, I am now going to ask the shadow and the cabinet ministers of local government to make their remarks; there are two other statements that we need to receive.

4.31
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Nambooze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When Parliament came out with the NAADS Act, one of the principles of the Act was that the activities of NAADS shall be decentralised. And Government entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the districts that would be responsible for the supervision and co-funding of NAADS’ programmes. Over 5,000 NAADS officers have been serving under the districts. 

Mr Speaker, the UPDF is not one of the decentralised sectors of government. Besides, you do not expect an army officer, Major X - for example, in Mukono, my constituency where NAADS is now headed by Maj. Ssebujja, you do not expect him to appear before the municipal council sitting at Mukono to give accountability and explanation about the issues of agriculture. 

NAADS is not about the distribution of seedlings only; it is also about giving information, educating our farmers, and organising them to make sure whatever they produce at the end of the day can be at a commercial basis. So, issues like the ones we are handling now would not have risen if we were a free and democratic society.
 
But, Parliament sat and came up with a law. If you want to change the law, you come back to Parliament. You do not conduct a coup against your legislative institution. This issue must be investigated further by this House because the minister who has given a statement has written to the districts instructing them to terminate the contracts of all NAADS’ officers. 

But you can see that while appearing before this House this afternoon, he told us that UPDF is only there to reinforce the extension workers, which makes this statement untrue. These people have been rendered jobless already and they are no longer in offices. 

But the crucial issue is: What happens to the components of giving farmers information and educating them? I do not think UPDF can do it better. I have personally seen it in Mukono where UPDF officers come with seedlings, make announcements over the loud speakers and then when people gather, they start distributing them anyhow no matter whether those receiving own gardens anywhere or not. NAADS had farmers’ groups which are now stranded. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want the minister to tell us what happened to the Act Parliament passed in this House? What happened to the funds that are supposed to be contributed by the districts in co-funding NAADS? What happens in this situation now that UPDF is not a decentralised institution but handling work which is supposed to be handled by districts and other officers under decentralisation? Can we now start calling upon UPDF to appear before the local council sittings in Mukono and other local councils elsewhere?

MS KATAIKE: Mr Speaker, with due respect, hon. Nambooze is my member of Parliament because I sleep in her constituency. But is it in order for her to come here and lie to this august House that it is the army heading NAADS in Mukono yet the district production officer, Dr Mukulu, including other technical people like Sarah Namisi and one entomology officer are there? 

I was even there yesterday. Is it in order for my MP to come here and lie to this Parliament that the army uses bells  to call people to pick up the seedlings well knowing I reside there - (Laughter) -and I have witnessed this?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, now you know that we know. (Laughter)
 
MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, that is why the constituency remains behind while we come here and deliberate on its behalf. I am one of those very special MPs who happen to represent people who sit in the same House with me. At times they want to overthrow me and represent the people of Mukono. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I know for sure that the officers as named by the Minister for Luweero Triangle - definitely the workers are there but what I am telling you is that they have been rendered jobless. They have come to me as their MP. If there is need I can prove that they have been at my place several times, asking about what they should do now that their work is being done by a group led by one Maj. Harbert Ssebujja –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for giving way. The information I would like to give is that in Amuru District, we had farmers’ groups that were being trained by people from the NAADS’ Secretariat. But as I speak, those farmers’ groups and the ones who were trained to train the farmers were stopped never to continue with their work. 

Therefore, our farmers’ groups are now stranded since those ones who are giving them technical knowledge on how to handle their agricultural activities have been stopped from work. That is the information I would like to give to colleagues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable, wind up.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I want to also inform this House that the minister of agriculture has now already communicated to the district with instructions to terminate the contracts of the various NAADS extension officers previously serving in various districts. For those people whose contracts have expired, they should not be renewed.
This is very clear that government is planning a takeover by the army of the agricultural sector.

Mr Speaker, I want to rest my case by requesting government to come out to explain what happened to the NAADS Act.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable members for their contributions. I want to progress with the move from one point to another. First of all, to allay fears that what is happening today is abnormal.

Extension services have been evolving for a long time. Those of you who have been around for some time will remember that we moved away from introduction of perennial crops to the progressive farmer’s idea; we moved on to circulation projects; to the CNVs system and now to NAADS. 

If NAADS is not performing very well, we should not be afraid of moving on to the next stage within the context of evolution. What I am saying is that, the changes you are seeing are not abnormal; they are for the betterment of extension services.

We looked at the performance of NAADS and what went wrong within the context of form and content. We realised that we were implementing a parallel extension system despite resource allocations between the traditional extension workers and NAADS and we needed to cure this.

We observed that some of the officers recruited by NAADS were not necessarily extension workers. Many of them did not have the right qualifications to work as extension workers. We looked at the output. Since NAADS was conceived in 2001, agricultural production was coming down to – (Interruption)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify on the matter to do with the recruitment of staff. We have just passed the budget and we are now six months into the new financial year. From then the NAADS coordinators’ contracts have been terminated. You have brought in new persons - we raised this matter in one of the committee meetings. We asked them when are they to recruit the extension staff, and they told us that they are doing it very soon. However, up now no recruitment has taken place! The money that has been appropriated in the wage bill - shall we have that money brought back here or it will just be accounted for?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, a clarification is your prerogative. You can accept or refuse it.
 
MR BUCHANAYANDI: As guided by the Deputy Speaker, I will go ahead to make my point. (Laughter)

So, I was just explaining that there were issues to cure within the present NAADS arrangements. One of them, as I had mentioned, was parallelism, extension qualifications and the demand by the 70 per cent of the rural setting. To assume that those poor farmers who constitute 70 per cent of the system would come and demand service was definitely not correct. What was required was for us extension workers to move to them, teach and give them the latest technology. That is what we are now trying to put in place.

Having said that, there was experience gained in recent past where hon. Sarah Kataike came and explained that using the army officers to supplement the effort of extension workers had produced significant results. We were also trying to extend that kind of experience to other areas and I want to first explain –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, Parliament is examining the performance of the law it passed. The question that has been put to the minister is to explain all that good material the ministry is doing under what legal frame work. 
By the minister moving in circles without answering that question on the legal framework, is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue we are looking at is not specifically a review of the NAADS Act. These questions are very specific to the operations of the national agricultural advisory services. That is what the response is on.

MR BUCHANAYANDI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that guidance, assistance and protection - (Laughter)
So, having said that, I was moving on to relate to other questions that were raised especially on the criteria used in distributing seeds and seedlings. 

The criterion is based on zone performance. This country has been zoned into 10 agricultural zones. We have the highlands for instance and Buganda, which is suitable for Robusta Coffee in particular. We also have the highlands responsible for Arabica Coffee and many others. The seedlings given or distributed are based on zone performance.
There were also other questions raised on control of pests and diseases in bananas, in animals and others. Again, I want to say that our research system is doing an extremely good job in coming up with practical answers to the questions the farmers are experiencing.  For instance, I made it clear that our research was making a break through with the banana research by incorporating genes from the sweet pepper in the bananas to create something resistant to the banana bacteria wilt. I made this clear.

As you are aware –(Interjections)- do not divert me with those tricky questions - but they have come with breakthroughs on coffee and banana, cassava, sweet potatoes and many other crops.

Someone also raised a question on the financial loan lending of 12 per cent. On this one, I want to say that there is an arrangement between commercial banks and Ministry of Finance where they put matching funds. I think Shs 60 billion is put in by the Ministry of Finance and then it is matched by Shs 60 billion by commercial banks to lend to farmers who present proposals. It is still working – (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, honourable minister and I salute you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, yesterday at 10.00a.m. in the morning, I was in Aliba Sub County in Moyo District, my constituency. While there, I met the sub county team comprising of the chairperson LC III and the sub-county chief, among the others.

The NAADS officer in charge of that area, a military man called Major Tali Nazareth, visited and I have his number here.  According to the questions raised by those people, NAADS operations under the army have no work plan. They want the sub-county system to collect data for them. There is no work plan indicating what to be done, when, where and how the sub-county comes in. The sub-county does not know the budget of the NAADS of today so they asked me about this. 

I would like to inform you that down there, those people are operating without a work plan or budget. They wanted the sub-counties to collect information about veterans and their aim is to shift away from the former farmers’ group to new associations of veterans. So this is a new problem, which the sub-counties are facing, especially in Aliba sub-county, Obongi. Thank you.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you so much for that information. Maybe later with the permission of the Speaker, I could ask hon. Kataike to explain the achievements of the army when they were working together with our staff in Luweero -(Interjections)- If that is not acceptable alright. 

I was still explaining this question of the loan. The Ministry of Finance puts some money and commercial banks put a similar amount and this money is available to lend to farmers who have viable projects.

Many of the questions were repetitive and I am just grouping them in that sense. Finally, there is something I would like to quote and I think it is of interest. I want to refer to the Constitution Article 209 (d) which says, “The army will engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.” I think when they come out to assist and reinforce extension staff, they are doing productive work. I thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. What we pick from this debate is that there is need for this House to be somehow briefed, through the committee, about some of these activities. This is so that we can have a comprehensive briefing and discussion from an informed view on what is going on; what the successes and failures are and what needs to be improved upon. The House should be sufficiently briefed and we will find time for you to do that with the committee and then come back to the House.

3(VIII) ON THE RECRUITMENT, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION OF 
KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (KCCA) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS

4.45
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): The minister is not in the House. The information we have is that both the Minister for the Presidency and his usual colleague are out. I will ask them to come -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is his usual colleague?

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: The minister of intelligence – (Interjections) - Yes, it is the minister of intelligence who usually -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean the Minister of Security or somebody like that?

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, the Minister of Security - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, Right Honourable, you may remember the discussion that took place. I was chairing when these matters came to the floor and issues were raised about the way the enforcement officers operate. Members needed to understand how these officers are recruited, and it could be that this contributes to the shortcomings in the way they operate. So it is important that this statement is made.

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: I just want to say that I am most obliged. I will let them know and they will come to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement will come back on the Order Paper tomorrow so please inform the ministers responsible for this sector to come back tomorrow.

3(IX) ON THE SALE OF EXISTING IVORY STOCKS AND 
THE PROGRESS OF INVESTIGATIONS ON THE LOSS OF IVORY

4.47
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Again I am sorry, Mr Speaker, as both ministers are not in the House. They are in the Cabinet so we are not ready until tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister or Leader of Government Business, there are those two statements. Then there is the one on blood transfusion, which the minister has undertaken to bring tomorrow. But there was one on a school - Which school was it that was supposed to be responded to by the Minister of Gender? Somehow it did not get on the Order Paper but it will be on the Order Paper tomorrow. Which school was it?

MR NZOGHU: It is Mubuku Youth Institute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we expect a statement on Mubuku Youth Institute tomorrow from the Minister responsible for Gender and for that sector. There is one on power outage in Gulu town. The Minister of Energy has undertaken to avail this. 

We cannot start this debate now. Let us finish with issues of the members, which are on item six.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 30/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.49
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, question 30/1/09: 

“ (i)What is the average cost per kilometre for murram roads at district level and national tarmac roads compared to other countries in the East African Region? 
(ii)Does the ministry have mechanism of checking the duplication of funding for the road infrastructure programmes in the country?”

4.50
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague who has asked this question, which gives me a chance to throw some light. 

If we were to fully re-gravel a national road, which fully conforms to the requirements in the horizontal curvature and vertical, if we are to follow and conform to the drainage structures as worked out on the national roads, we have found it to be around Shs 50 million per kilometre.

However, for all rehabilitations or the re-gravelling we are doing now, we are not yet at the stage of fully conforming to the horizontal vertical drainage requirements. As such, these days we range between Shs 25-35 million per kilometre.

This is at the national level; that is the national roads by UNRA. For the district roads, there are roughly at 50 per cent. In other words, full conformity is Shs 25 million or below per kilometre. 

Mr Speaker, as a sector and some time back with the help of the World Bank, we undertook some studies on the costing of road maintenance and what came out of the study is that we are more or less at the same cost. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is a question for oral answer. The rules require the member who asked the question to raise a supplementary question if he is not satisfied with the answer. It is not general debate. Is there a supplementary question from the member who raised the question? You have not answered on tarmac roads.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, the one from honourable -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is still the same question but the aspect of tarmac roads.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, there is some –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Minister of Works and Transport has just informed this House that if we had money, it would cost the country Shs 50 million to properly gravel one kilometre of murrum road in Uganda and that because of lack of funds, these days it costs us Shs 25 million.

Mr Speaker, I have here a letter from Uganda National Roads Authority copied to me in my capacity as the MP for Mukono Municipality and Uganda National Roads Authority said that they are going to re-gravel Seeta-Namugongo Road, which is 7.2 kilometres at a cost of Shs 1.38 billion and that they will re-gravel Najjanankumbi-Busaabala-Kazi, which is 11 kilometres at a cost of Shs 1.5 billion.

Mr Speaker, a tender has been given to one M/s Abubaker Technical Services and General Supplies Limited and the whole tender contract is Shs 10 billion for 34 kilometres of roads.

Is the Minister of Works and Transport in order to continue misleading this House that it costs them Shs 25 million to gravel one kilometre of murrum road in Uganda whereas they are spending exorbitant fees as can be evidenced by this letter, which I wish to lay on Table? 

Is he in order to mislead this House or does the minister want to tell us that in fact after spending only Shs 25 million, they are again giving contractors billions of money to gravel murrum roads in Uganda and by that, we are losing money as a country? Is he in order? 

I beg to lay this letter, Mr Speaker, and I want the minister’s statement to be examined against this letter. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in light of this letter, what would you say?

MR BYANDALA: I thank hon. Nambooze for having raised that. What I was talking about was the average. Hon. Nambooze is talking about particular and there is a big difference. 

Mr Speaker, now to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. I asked the minister about this letter and the statement he has just made. Can he harmonise them for us?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I just made a statement that what I was explaining about Shs 50 million per kilometre was an average in Uganda. I said if I do everything like curvature, horizontal, vertical it would cost Shs 50 million and I said that because we are not doing all that, the cost does not come to that. 

I am talking about the average for Uganda. Hon. Nambooze is right because she is talking about a particular instance. There is always a difference between particular and general.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think this may arise from your failure to have prepared a written response to this answer. I thought you were reading a response and I thought the member who asked the question had been duly served with a response but I see what you were actually reading was the Order Paper.

I do not know whether it is because of the problem of sight but -(Laughter)- we expect a written response and a copy is supplied to the member. The member can then ask supplementary questions based on your written response to his oral question. Because of the way you are proceeding, you now fall in this kind of situation. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, on Tuesday I will bring a written reply to this and also try to marry the particular letter that hon. Nambooze has brought. I wish you could give me a copy. I will also answer the rest of the questions so that they can be followed properly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you do not have a written response to the next question?

MR BYANDALA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the rules require that once these questions are asked, they go through the Clerk’s Office and they are sent to you. You make a written response, give a copy to the Clerk and supply the member who asked the question with a written copy of your response. This is so that they can prepare to ask you, after your presentation of your response, supplementary questions. That is what the rules say. 

The mere fact that it is a question for oral answer does not mean you show up verbally and proceed with an Order Paper instead of a written response to the issue. So please improve on that so that on the next occasion we can deal with this properly.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I will conform. It is only that this was not brought to my attention but I will conform.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The issue of how much the national cost of constructing one kilometre of road or tarmacking is coming up because in this country we do not seem to have a standard cost for construction of most national projects.

Sometime back, the amount of money that we spent in upgrading Bujagali was almost half of the amount of money used to construct a 6,000 megawatt power dam in Ethiopia. The international standard or rate is that one megawatt of power is constructed at between 1.2 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the relevance on this?

MR ANYWARACH: I am coming to the point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure so you need to be precise.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, just one minute, I am coming to it. It is about $ 1.2 million but ours was constructed at a rate of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: $ 1.2 million?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes, that is the international accepted standard. However for China, which is 21,000 megawatt power dam, it was at $ 1.1 million because they negotiated with the contractor very well. The one of Bujagali was at $ 3.6 million per megawatt. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, with the irregularities that are being expressed concerning constructing one kilometre of murram road, don’t you think that it is procedurally right for this country, probably through the Ministry of Finance, to put down rates for national projects, giving a projection of market forces, so that we know that Uganda is not in isolation? If a contract is being undertaken then this is the likely rate plus or minus this. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is coming back with a clear written answer on this. Right now he does not have a written text. Let him come with this then we can raise all these issues and see how to move forward with this subject. Thank you. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR BY THE PARLIAMENTARY AD HOC COMMITTEE IN RESPECT OF THE REGULARISATION OF THE OIL SECTOR AND OTHER MATTERS INCIDENTAL THERETO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received a report and from what we received yesterday, some of the issues that were recommendations from this report have been taken care of in the four Bills that we passed into law: the exploration law, the production law and the processing and transportation law. Those were three Bills and also the public finance law that we passed into an Act. Some of the recommendations were what have been passed in these laws. 

There are still outstanding issues, which are in the form of recommendations from this committee and I proposed a question for our debate yesterday for the adoption of this report. I propose the same question for debate for the adoption of the report of the ad hoc committee in respect of the regularisation of the oil sector and other matters incidental thereto. Debate starts now and we will rise at exactly 6.00 p.m. 

Can we take three minutes each? Okay, five minutes each. 

5.10
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the ad hoc committee and I also stand to thank the member who came with the minority report.

Mr Speaker, this report brought out certain issues and as an institution, we should take serious caution when getting information to be considered by this House. 

It is still vivid in my mind when we received a petition from members of this House and we had a debate that almost caused a turnover of this country. Yesterday, I was so disappointed that it was completely the opposite. Whatever the committee came with indicated that whatever we had debated was completely irrelevant because they had the time to undertake the investigations and come up with a proper report. 

That means that we need to take caution especially regarding whistleblowers. Please help this House. Whenever you are bringing something here, have clear evidence that will not make this House look – Really, I do not know how to explain it.

Mr Speaker, when the chairperson talked about the challenges that they faced when they were carrying out this investigation, from the silence alone one could draw his or her opinion. As he was outlining the challenges, I made my own opinions. 

Therefore, it means that when we are forming ad hoc committees here let us give our members areas where they can carry out the investigations. There were a lot of impossibilities for the committee because there were some areas where they could not go. If we can maybe limit the members so that they undertake the investigations where they can, we shall have better reports. 

Yesterday in this report, the committee said that there is a daughter who got a job on merit. That job was never advertised but they said she got it on merit so there was no problem. Really, this report has a lot of things but as I said, considering the challenges that were mentioned, I cannot blame this committee. I do not even blame those who made the minority report because the minority report ended up blaming the chairperson of the committee as if it was only the chairperson who had done the investigation. 

I thought it was a report of everybody but the chairperson of this committee was blamed because there were no other things to talk about. At least for you to have a minority report, you must have something so the chairperson had to suffer. If it was the whole committee to be blamed, it would be okay because I saw in the report that all the committee members signed but the chairperson was singled out. I pity him. 

I was also aware that by the time this petition came to the House, this chairperson was no longer in the ministry -(Interruption) 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yes, the minority report blamed the chairman but it was not blaming the chairman per se. It pointed out the possible conflict of interest of the chairman. It stated that at the time some of the contracts were being signed, the chairman was a minister in the Ministry of Energy. That is what the report says - [Mr Werikhe: “Let us put the record clear.] -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is a point of order.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: The report also said that the chairman was at the same time the chairman of the committee. So the report was pointing out that, it is possible that the chairman could have had a conflict of interest. The report was saying, in such a circumstance, it would have been better to have a neutral chairman who did not work in the Ministry of Energy, who was not a minister and who was not a chairman of the sessional committee. 

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member, therefore, to continue talking about the minority report in a disparaging manner when actually it was simply pointing out the issue of conflict of interest? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is indeed true that the minority report pointed to some issues about the chairperson and that is what the member is talking about. Yes, but you said the chairman should not have been the chairman and that is what she is saying; that the minority report only blamed the chairperson not the members of the committee. So I do not think there is any - Probably the words are hurting but I do not think she has – Please proceed.

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I am aware that by the time we received the petition in this House, the chairman of the ad hoc committee was no longer the minister in the Ministry of Energy so I do not know where – Maybe the one where he is now the Chairman of the Committee of Natural Resources - That one I have accepted -(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU	(NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the chairman for the report as well as members for the minority report. 

The issue of whistle blowers in the country is paralysing many activities. These days people blackmail others in form of whistle blowing and now that we are going into politics. I think as a country, whistleblowers are protected by identity but not the information. The way the country is running under the disguise of whistleblowers, this is becoming a very big challenge. People outside there are suffering. 

Now regarding the issue which came, we have not seen substance to prove that there was bribery. What sanctions are we going to give those whistleblowers? Yesterday I shared with hon. Lokodo about the issue of whistle blowing and how they are frustrating all activities in the country. A person goes and makes a claim, others disguise it as an issue of security and some of us were victims of that. 

A person came saying that he was a whistleblower and my account in DFCU was frozen. I asked why they froze my account and they did not give me an answer. I am not operating and this is too much. My account was frozen on 8th October to date. When I asked what the issue was, they said it is of a security nature. 

So we better come out clearly to see how we can manage this otherwise some of us are not operating. I do not get my salary. My salary goes there but the account has been frozen. So, Mr Speaker, which sanctions should we put for such people who bring false information? These allegations came - (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on the point of procedure. We had a debate some years ago and during that debate, members of this House raised issues, which were referred to a select committee of this House. The select committee has come back with the report and in this report, there are recommendations, all resulting from the debate we had and the issues were raised. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know if we are moving on well procedurally. Are we procedurally proceeding well when we abandon the report and its recommendations, findings and observations and concentrate our efforts on some people who contributed to the debate during the time when Parliament decided to form a select committee? 

Would it be procedurally right for us to call for criminalisation of members who raise issues in this House where they enjoy immunity, yet it is upon these revelations and debates by members that this Parliament is able to do its work? Would we be procedurally right to start calling on criminalisation and condemnation of members who participate here in debate, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue was brought to this House and information was laid before this House. Because of the information that was laid before this House, an ad hoc committee was set up to investigate. Now the ad hoc committee comes back and says, “The information that was laid before the House did not bear truth.” 

Now the member is saying, “What should happen to people who create information that they know to be untrue and they make it look true and cause other people anxiety?” That is what he is asking. Should they go away free or should there be some way of also dealing with it? I think the member is proceeding correctly and he has raised his own personal experience about how people have raised issues and now he is suffering. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. They talked about personalities. You know we talk here but outside here, people have responsibilities and they have families. If you raise issues here, which you cannot justify, can we leave you to go like that because you are a whistleblower? Those are the issues and we are saying, please before the information is processed, let us at least verify it. That is my request. We should first verify it because it touches people’s personalities and all that. That is my request, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had occasions to carefully read the report of the ad hoc committee and the accompanying minority report and I have two fundamental issues to raise: The first one is the credibility of the Ninth Parliament as an institution; and the second one is justice. I will deal with the first one first. 

Mr Speaker, you know every institution worth its name must deal very firmly with people who misuse their positions at any one time. It is not right for any member to abuse his immunity and make false allegations against any citizen or member of this House. Allegations were made that prominent citizens of this country and members of this House - hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa - received a bribe. Papers were laid on the floor of the House to show that he received millions of dollars. Allegations were made that his family participated in dubious activities in the oil sector. 

The same applied to hon. Hilary Onek and hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi. This institution spent man-hours, we wasted resources, we spent money investigating these allegations and they turned out not to be true. The position of the committee is that these allegations were false and this is confirmed by several other competent authorities in the UK, Malta and the Directorate of Public Prosecution of the Republic of Uganda. 

I think that as an institution and Rt Hon. Speaker, I am addressing you as a senior citizen and as a responsible person. You need to look these gentlemen in their eyes and apologise for and on behalf of this institution. You know, shame is a revolutionary sentiment and the capacity to own up and say you are sorry puts you a mark above the others. Sometimes we make mistakes, it could have been inadvertent that they were accused but all the same they were accused falsely and every available evidence now only points to that fact.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to address you also on justice. Every time you accuse a person without sufficient evidence, you only occasion injustice and unfairness. I sat here yesterday and listened attentively to the minority report. We simply achieved one thing: added another victim to the abuse of our authority, hon. Werikhe, the chairperson of the committee that investigated this matter. 

What accusations did you make against him and what were the implications? The minority report basically says the Speaker was not competent in her authority and, therefore, she appointed a person who never qualified. That is the summary, that is what I read between the lines and that is what was said in so many words and I thought this was very unfair. 

Hon. Werikhe was never a subject of investigation. He was a servant of this House and we also owe it to him to look him straight in the face and we say, “Hon. Werikhe, we are sorry” and I think, Mr Speaker, that duty will fall squarely on you -(Member timed out.)  

5.29  
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you get to page 6 of the minority report, it states clearly what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said and I want to read it verbatim: “We have no doubt about the integrity of the members of the committee but had serious reservations of the choice of its chairperson.” 

Mr Speaker, you recall that hon. Ogwal raised this issue together with hon. Kyanjo on the 27 October 2011 in the Speaker’s Board Room when the committee was being flagged off by yourself.

At the time of his appointment, the committee chairperson was also the chairperson - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By you or by the Speaker?

MR NZOGHU: No, by the Speaker. The committee chairperson at the time of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see when a meeting takes place in the Speaker’s Board Room, there is a person responsible. When it is here, it is either the Deputy Speaker or the Speaker. 

MR NZOGHU: It was the Speaker. The committee chairperson, at the time of his appointment, was also the Chairperson of the National Resources Committee of Parliament, which supervises the Ministry of Energy. The House will recall that until the last elections, the chairperson served as minister of state in various portfolios including that of energy. 

While we have no doubt that he chaired the committee well, he would have served the committee best as a witness rather than its chairperson, given that as a Natural Resources Committee Chairperson and former Minister of State for Energy, certain information could have been in his possession or he could have taken certain decisions that could have been best diverged to the committee as well. 

It concludes that chairing the committee put hon. Michael Werikhe in an awkward and compromising position, given the nature of the subject matter under investigation by the committee.

Mr Speaker, we can condemn whistleblowers but there are pertinent issues that are glaring both in the minority and main reports. I read this report carefully and when you read the main report - for example, I want to seek clarification from the chairperson on why your committee did not follow up the issue of non-payment of capital gains tax by Tullow. This is because whereas the committee identified this gap, they did not give us the steps that they took after realising that Tullow Company did not pay the capital gains tax.

Secondly, what precedents are we setting? Yes, Mr Speaker, we have ministers who were told to step aside and they continued serving as the investigations were going on. You will recall that in the major report also, the chairperson said that the Foreign Affairs Minister, together with the then Prime Minister, therefore had advantage to control some systems. This is highlighted in the major report as to why some of the information was not got. 

Some information was concealed because of such a scenario where the Foreign Affairs Minister had powers to speak to his counterparts in the UK and Dubai where investigations were supposed to be conducted. 

If you are investigating the Office of the Speaker and the Speaker is still in his seat and then you go to inquire information from the Speaker of Kenya, you would not get credible information in the event that they can still connect and give information that -(Member timed out.)           

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we continue tomorrow with this debate? Let us continue tomorrow because there are other activities that should be taking place now. There are Christmas Carols going on and several other activities that affect members. I am receiving notes from the members that they would like to leave. Can we stop the debate now and proceed with it tomorrow? 

Honourable members, thank you very much for sitting this long. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 December 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
 








   

     
