Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 4 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that yesterday, I communicated to you that this morning we would have the Anti-Corruption Walk and I invited all of you to come and participate. I was delighted to see many of you there; I particularly saw the member for Toroma County and many others.

Therefore, I would like to thank those who were able to make it. I saw many ministers who attended and of course I did not see my honourable colleague with whom we agreed with that -

Honourable members, I am saying this because I made a recommitment on your behalf. The Chief Justice made a recommitment on the fight against corruption on behalf of the Judiciary and the President did the same on behalf of the main arm of Government - the Executive - including the ministers. I made a partial commitment on their behalf as well and all the administrative systems of this country.

Members, you all know what corruption has done in this country. You all know how much damage has been caused and how much suffering ordinary people have gone through because what should have supported them has been taken by somebody else who uses his or her position to do the same.

However, we also know that the people we call the corrupt are not aliens or foreign bodies. They are us, our relatives, parents, spouses, children and grandchildren. These are the people we call corrupt.

Therefore, this fight starts with all of us from our own backyards and then we extend outward to cover the rest of the people. It is hurting this country. I keep saying and I will say it again that if we used the money that we appropriate in this House properly, it would be enough to run the entire Budget of this country without support from anybody. (Applause) 

We are getting tied to loans, aid and all kinds of borrowing and complicated financing of our Budget because a lot of what we pass in the Budget gets wasted and that is the sad bit.

This is the recommitment because we have already made these commitments before. Therefore, this is the recommitment I made on behalf of Parliament and I would like to read it to you.

“I, Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, on behalf of the Parliament and on my own behalf, do hereby pledge that Parliament will adhere to the following commitment in execution of our duties:

    a) To be honest and ethical in all our dealings;
    b) To provide timely service to the people of Uganda;
    c) To refuse to elicit or accept any bribe;
    d) To negotiate all Government contracts with integrity - that may not apply to us directly;
    e) To ensure zero tolerance to corruption.”

Signed by myself this 4 December 2019.

I did this on your behalf and on the mandate that you have given to me. There being no procedure in the rules for dealing with such matters, I put the question for its adoption.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are entirely committed, on our own behalf and on behalf of those who are not in the House at the moment. We did this on their behalf.

Secondly, honourable members, I received a letter this morning signed by hon. Jalia Bintu in her capacity as the Chairperson of the Board of the Uganda Parliamentary Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Limited.

We passed a law here recently and it looks like there has been some omission on what we passed and the copy that was transmitted. The assent copy that was transmitted to the President for his signature seemed to have some parts left out; inadvertently, they were not contained.

When we looked at the Hansard of what we passed and the assent copy that was sent to the President, there is some variance. Some critical aspects were not contained in the assent copy.

I am communicating this to you so that you know because this affects all of us and it also affects so many other people who are operating SACCOs in the country. I would like to let everybody know that we will handle this through our mechanisms of making corrections where errors were made so that all is well with the law, as passed, with the recommendations from the people of this country. That will be happening in due course and I will notify you accordingly.

Honourable members, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development has an urgent issue including some documents to lay. Therefore, before I deal with the urgent matters that have requested for by hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Adong, hon. Nambeshe and hon. Osoru, I will first allow the honourable minister to deal with item five then we can come back to urgent matters that are going to be raised by our colleagues. 

Can I deal with the laying of papers? We are coming back to urgent matters. I need to release the honourable minister. Let him do what he is going to do then I can allow you to make comments.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO EURO 300 MILLION (EURO THREE HUNDRED MILLION) FROM STANBIC BANK (U) LTD AND EURO 300 MILLION (EURO THREE HUNDRED MILLION) FROM TRADE DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE BUDGET DEFICIT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

2.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to do that and I congratulate you upon the walk. 

I beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to €300 million from Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd and €300 million from Trade Development Bank to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal by Government to borrow up to €162,445,694.1 (one hundred and sixty-two million, four hundred forty-five thousand, six hundred and ninety-four and one cent) equivalent to US$ 178,276,661.7 from Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the development of industrial parks i.e. power supply to industrial parks and power transmission line extension. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. They stand referred to our Committee on National Economy to handle and advise us on what to do. Thank you.

Honourable members, let me just conclude my communication then I will allow the members. 

The Parliament of Uganda will host the 10th edition of the East African Community games in Kampala starting this Sunday, 8 December until 18 December 2019; those are 10 days. The games, which shall include football, netball, volleyball, basketball, tug of war, athletics and darts, will be held at selected venues including St Mary’s Stadium in Kitende, Lugogo Indoor Stadium in Lugogo and here at Parliament of Uganda.

The opening ceremony on Sunday will involve a pre-tournament conference, which shall be held here at Parliament, followed by a march from Parliament towards St Mary’s Stadium. 

You are invited for the opening ceremony here at Parliament and in Kitende and thereafter to different venues to support our boys and girls on the fields. The fixtures will be communicated to you as it will be done on a daily basis.

From Sunday, please organise to be part of this. Even when you are not playing, you can play number 17. This means that you can encourage the team as part of the fans and people who make the game exciting.

Come and support our Parliamentary Team, which has been a champion all these years. We have never lost; they have always done so. We hope to win again.

2.11
Mr Theodore ssekikubo (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the communication and the undertaking on behalf of Parliament this day, 4 December 2019. It was a serious commitment.
 
As I sat listening to you, I thought that probably an opportunity would have been availed to this House to debate, as Parliament, where we started, where we are and where we going in the fight against corruption.

Marching by itself per se will not go far enough to stamp out the evil of corruption. The struggle starts with us. I thought it would be an opportunity for Government to avail the strategies they intend to pursue in the vigorous fight against corruption.

It would entail the full House because such wonderful communication would not be delivered on almost on an empty House. You can see that there is no front bench. One would easily interpret that to mean a protest against your communication and that they do not want to be associated with your communication.

The three arms would have been here save for the Judiciary who are not represented here. When Dr Philemon Mateke is dragged from the extreme end to stand in and field questions, I think we are taking your communication lightly. Yet, as I read in the papers, Shs 3.3 trillion is lost under corrupt tendencies in this country. When court ordered for the refund, out of the Shs 77 billion, only one billion has been recovered. Therefore, we need to come forward so that we can put into effect and crystallise the undertaking you have made on behalf of Parliament.

As a Parliament, we are ready. However, as we point fingers, there are also Members who have no business outside the country but cannot be available to transact the business before us. We also need to look at ourselves so that this glaring missing out in this House is fought. It has to start with us; let us discharge our duties without fear or favour and legislate when we are supposed to.

Mr Speaker, I pray that at an appropriate time, you permit us a day, which should be known in time for Government - either through the Minister of Ethics and Integrity but mostly through the Leader of Government Business – to come out and we lay strategies for debate. We should have an input so that the demonstration we have had today is accompanied by a real statement and resolution from this Parliament and we set out the cascading effect to the rest of the country.

I pray that you do not leave your communication fall by the wayside. We should pursue and put into effect its input in this country.  Thank you.

2.15
Ms Elizabeth karungi (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for representing us well in the walk and making a serious commitment, which I believe we are all for.

Quite many times, I have raised the issue about one of the ways through which we can curb corruption in the country. We could do a study, look at the public service sector as a whole and see if we can also, like some countries do, have our civil servants on contract and maybe appraise them after 10 years. I have been saying this but I have not seen anything come out of it.

We appreciate the walk but like my colleague has said, I do not think we shall yield much unless we sit down and analyse the issue and get a serious way forward.

If that issue is looked into and somebody knows that they are on contract, they will be serious. I am surprised that even in small offices at our districts, you find that there is somebody from the village carrying a child, the person does not even seem to have money but the civil servants want some little money. Corruption has eaten the nation to the grassroots among all our civil servants up to the last level; it is terrible.

I would like to thank you for today and pray that we sit down as a House, look at it deeply and get a way forward.  Thank you.

2.17
Mr Stephen mukitale (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, we are proud of you right from the walk and the commitment, which was made at Kololo. 

However, a few minutes ago as I went to your Chambers to book for a certain matter of national importance in Buliisa and I was told, “You’re late; the Speaker is already heading to the House.” I would like to commend you for that.

Can I request your indulgence that either the Minister of Ethics and Integrity or the Prime Minister, if possible, presents the commitment of Government, which was made today at Kololo and the minister’s statement in a document, which can be debated at Parliament? Commendable efforts are said to have been made and we would be the best people to discuss. 

I did not hear much about the role of the Criminal Intelligence Department (CID) and what we ourselves do, as the Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) or the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). I think when it comes here, we can discuss it.

The budget is one area where you could trace corruption. I come from a Procurement and Supply Chain background where somebody says, “When the budget is passed, I will pay the remaining part for this property.” To me, that confirms that by the time we pass a budget, people have already put their cut.

Therefore, I would like us to look at the procurements, which I think has 30 per cent of corruption. We also have areas of taxation, more so, transfer pricing as we go for oil. It would be very important if we looked into those areas.

Finally, and most importantly, I always sympathise with our police and army officers, nurses and teachers who take their children to the schools we take ours but only earn about Shs 400,000. As a Parliament, how do we expect them to meet their means?

I think there is a nexus between failure of Government to provide public goods, privatisation and corruption. My father who had a Government house until he retired only required one in Buliisa after retirement. The moment you make a police officer, nurse or teacher fend for themselves when you are not paying them, we are also guilty. 
 
I agree with your statement. “Let the one who has not committed sin throw the first stone.” I would like to own that statement and I think Government must revisit the public goods. If they do not know where to treat or take their children to school and even where to stay while working in a Government job, it has a very big nexus to corruption and I think we need to discuss it seriously.  Thank you.

2.20
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am particularly concerned about the missing link between what this Parliament pronounces itself on when we are processing Bills and what actually is sent to the President to assent.

Mr Speaker, in the Cooperatives Act-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that one, my communication was to the effect that we will do corrective measures on this. Can we leave that one for now?

MR NZOGHU: Yes. However, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to highlight particularly the constitutional amendment that we had of the age limit. Mr Speaker, we also considered the issue of term limits. However, when they were sending the Bill to the President to sign, they omitted that.

I just want to seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, on how this Parliament can ensure that actually what it passes is what is sent to the President to assent to so that we do not pass issues here and then find that what the President assents to is a different law.

Mr Speaker, I think this Parliament must look at that, scrutinise it and see that what we pass here is what actually is sent to the President for assent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, under the Parliament’s Act, the provisions are clear and the procedures are known of what happens to a law when it is passed by Parliament.

The technical people in Parliament are supposed to extract whatever decision was taken by Parliament and prepare an assent copy based on what Parliament has passed. Of course, we already have a gazetted Bill but then you have alterations that have been in the course of the work of Parliament. Therefore, you make the adjustments accordingly and that is how you prepare the assent copy, which ends up going to the President.

Sometimes, there are errors and those errors are inadvertent- they are never intended and I would like to speak for our technical people here and also being somebody who has that background that there can be a challenge sometimes. Some Bills really have pressure of time. 

Therefore, sometimes you go through the Hansard, some decisions were taken much earlier than the others were and then you try to synchronise them and sometimes you miss them out - I do not think it is intended.

However, where they occur, we have to take corrective measures so that we are okay - and there are very limited cases. Most of the time, they actually do a very good job.

2.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like congratulate all who walked today. I would like to say, “One Uganda, One Nation.”

It hurts so much to find that some people heap money when others are dying because of poverty, which is almost at its highest. There is no civic education. For those who walked, it will be a shame to backslide.

We are waiting to see if we have walked to do the right thing for Uganda and to love Uganda not to just say patriotism when it is lip service. We wait to see if we will improve services to our people.

When we talk of 3 or 4 trillion lost, that is the money that we can quantify. What about us here? Can we quantify the amount of losses that we have here in Parliament when we do not do our rightful work here or when we keep ourselves away from the work that the people sent us here to do?

Very many times, we forget that we are servants of the people and as members of Parliament, we are supposed to keep the ministers on their toes - we are supposed to oversee them. How many times have we been here in this House without ministers? Today, they all walked but where are they now?

I would just like to say that there was corruption even with the distribution of the t-shirts. In some ministries –(Interjection)– yes, it reached us; where you give some and for others, you look into their eyes but fail to give them. That is corruption.

When our courts stay in offices and yet we are not there, that is corruption. We are supposed to do public work for the people.

Now today, we have started a walk, we are all put to task to leave corruption and to love Uganda. You cannot love Uganda by thinking that I am here with my colleagues at that level and then don’t mind about the 80 per cent who are lingering in abject poverty. 

We do not get anything in the hospitals - when they go for services in the hospital, they do not get services. When we do not do better for our people, let us be number one in being exemplary. 

That is why I said that I congratulate all of us; let us live it. As FDC, we say, “One Uganda, One People.” The one who is suffering there and dying - if you are not dying today because of lack of something in the hospital - I think a Member of this House in the Seventh Parliament died because of a problem in the hospital. In Mbarara, a Member of Parliament from Bushenyi died because of problems in a hospital.

Therefore, it is until when it reaches you that you feel the pain. Let us not wait until when it reaches us. We should act now and be exemplary. We should not be too ambitious too accumulate millions of money –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable Leader of the Opposition. The gesture is good. The whole country is united and the cause is noble and the result is what we want to see.

However, even in due course of the action, Mr Speaker, there were a lot of inconveniences. Roads were closed without giving sufficient information to the people. Others were blocked from walking when the call was for all Ugandans.

We have all witnessed the brutality that has been manifested on former presidential candidate Col (Rtd) Dr Kiiza Besigye. He had also announced to join the walk for the cause.

His home was cordoned off in the morning. He sneaked out and found his way all in the name of walking against corruption. Now, we want to know who was corrupted to stop Dr Besigye from walking.

Instead of the police going to take him his t-shirt and cap and with his entourage, they only served him with none other than brutality.

His car was towed and people around him beaten. If that is the corruption we are talking about that we want to weed out of this nation, in a bipartisan manner, it does not serve that way. There is no one -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on information?

MR NSEREKO: The point of information I wanted to –(Laughter)

MS AOL: Thank you, for the information. You know we must love each other and our country. We must love the vulnerable. We are here for them. If it were for the able and the rich, some of us would not be here. We are here to serve the vulnerable but sometimes we do not care about them at all.

It is starting today. If we see money exchanging hands under the table, that is corruption. If we do not put ministers to task – although also my shadow ministers have to be here – but we all must put those ministers to task. 

They should be on their toes because they are the ones in the kitchen cooking for us to come and appropriate here. If the ministers are not there, honourable Government Chief Whip, we will not fail to put you to task. You are also a minister and you are cooking – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you about to wind up? 

MS AOL: I am about to wind up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do. 

MS AOL: Let me wind up by saying, One Uganda, One Nation, One People. Let us love them. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us leave this here. That was arising from my communication. It was not a substantive matter on the Order Paper. 

2.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We welcome you back. I would also like to welcome back the honourable colleagues that I saw at both the Constitutional Square and at Kololo. 

When I saw my Lord the Chief Justice, Bart Katureebe standing up and taking an undertaking on behalf of the Judiciary, I developed goose bumps. He stood up to speak on behalf of the Judiciary and I knew your turn was coming. 

You stood up after those remarks and I mobilised all the members of Parliament who were with us to stand up in solidarity because you were speaking on behalf of all of us. The key message was that fighting corruption begins with me. You cannot know whether I am serious or not. It is an individual’s undertaking. Yet you stood up to recommit Parliament and indeed all of us. 

I would like to call upon my colleagues; yes, we have received these declarations and recommitment but it is you and I. You may point fingers like the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition did to me and the rest but God is pointing His finger at you. All of us are supposed to be accountable. 

There is a lot to be done here in Parliament, in committees. Members who appear before committees go out there and speak of how you treat them, what you do and how you handle reports. It is all of us. We need to pray that God guides us so that we change our behaviour. 

You rightly put it at Kololo and I thank you very much for that. I re-commit myself to fight corruption. (Applause) I have not been corrupt and I will not be corrupt. (Laughter) 

2.34
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I shared this matter yesterday with the Government Chief Whip. It is concerning the arbitrary closure of Lwemiyaga, Lumegere and Lwebitakuli cattle markets.

The guidelines governing quarantine are clear. Once there is an outbreak of a pocket, it is a 20 kilometre radius around the spot that is subject to the quarantine. 

In the case of Lwemiyaga, there was a reported outbreak in Mitima which is about 40 kilometres from Lwemiyaga, Lumegere and Lwebitakuli. 

Surprisingly, the markets around us are open and operating. For instance, Kyemamba which is a distance of 5 kilometres from the outbreak spot is operating normally. Kashagama is also near in proximity. 

Lwemiyaga borders Kazo District but the market of Burunga, which is 12 miles from Lwemiyaga, Rwemikoma and Kazo are all operating.

We also border Kiruhura District where Kinoni and Nyakashashara markets are operating. We border Kyegegwa where Lwensasi market is operating. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move to the urgent matter, honourable. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: The point I am trying to raise is that even in the neighbourhood, Kyaahi, Maddu and Gomba are all operating. 

Apparently, it is only Lwemiyaga that is being arbitrarily targeted and the reason is to make way for these other markets for instance the market of Kyemamba, where the one who runs the market - Ninsiima, is a close associate with the minister for security. That is why the market – in fact, they are driving animals from Lwemiyaga to Kyemamba. 

This arbitrariness has gone to an extreme level. In September, the district veterinary officer issued travel permits for animals. He was arrested and dumped at Kireka on two occasions in one month. It was on the intervention of the Uganda Veterinary Medical Association that he was released.

Can Government tell the people of Lwemiyaga what the purpose of the arbitrary quarantine of Lwemiyaga and Lumegere is? As I speak, the minister, hon. Tumwine, has dispatched a pickup truck of soldiers. They have been sighted in Lwemiyaga. 

The people are saying that there is no outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease. They want to continue with their lives. They want to carry out their activities. 

The reason is clear: each market day there is an inflow of over Shs 600 million from cattle traders from Kampala to the local markets of Lumegere and Lwemiyaga. 

I petition this House and Government to reign in on the minister and to clarify why the markets are being kept without operating and to recommit to the people. If there is any outbreak, let it be known. The people are ready to carry on with their business in spite of the threats and the brocade that is arbitrary without any justification. 

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true I interacted with hon. Ssekikubo yesterday because I realised that he was uncomfortable. I reached out to him to ask what the matter was.

As he has explained, we have to find out the reasons the area he has mentioned is discriminated. When you consult the Act, the radius from the affected area is outlined there. 

I promised him that I was going to speak to the commissioner animal health and to the honourable Minister of State for Animal Husbandry, hon. Joy Kabatsi and hon. Gen. Elly Tumwiine. I have so far talked to the commissioner for animal health. 

I will approach the two ministers and if we are to follow the guidelines, the ban must be lifted.

Mr Speaker, this is a period where people need money for the festive season and school fees since January is around the corner. It is an urgent matter, which I am following up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.40
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance but I would like to beg that you allow me to raise two issues. 

Last evening, we had an unprecedented occurrence at the Albert Nile, where for the first time, the Nile near Pakwach burst its banks and cut off West Nile from the rest of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, from my interaction with some few people around the place, I found out that that has been caused due the construction of Buliisa–Tangi Gate. I think they did not carry out enough Environmental Impact Assessment. The contractors, instead of putting culverts or a proper bridge on Tangi River, decided to compact the place. When they compacted it, it narrowed the channel of River Tangi that used to absorb the over flow of the Albert Nile. That is why the Albert Nile overflowed and cut off the road.

My prayer, therefore, to the Ministry of Works and Transport is to reconsider carrying out fresh assessment on that particular place. If this is not done, the problem will continue.

Mr Speaker, the other matter of national importance I would like to raise is on Tobacco farmers. Last year, we had a Tobacco Company called Alliance One Tobacco that went to Nwoya District and contracted farmers to grow tobacco.

Mr Speaker, tobacco does not have many buyers like other crops. When they came to buy, they only bought half of it.   Ordinarily, they contract them and give them some credit. I think they literally bought to pay off their credits.

The farmers are stuck with tobacco in their stores and they have continued to meet expenses to pay for the storage yet it is now the festive season. Farmers wasted their efforts. I would like to know; how can the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives intervene in this matter so that the company buys the tobacco? Otherwise, the farmers have nowhere to sell it anywhere since they were contracted.

Lastly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you now have three issues?

MS LILLY ADONG: I beg for time, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please use the time properly. Otherwise, you have raised two issues yet we agreed on one. Honourable minister -

 2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, at one time I interfaced with my colleague and she raised this issue. We are inviting the companies that are purchasing tobacco across the country to see how best they can add on the extra –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not said anything. Please first say something and then he can seek clarification.

MR WERIKHE: On the issue my colleague from Nwoya has raised, we shall be able to bring a comprehensive report next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that he is going to bring a comprehensive report next week. Are you still seeking clarification on that?

MR ACIDIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem of tobacco farmers is not only an issue for Acholi sub-region.

Mr Speaker, I have been engaging the Minister for State for Trade outside the Floor of Parliament. He had promised that by November 2019, the tobacco farmers would receive their money. Now he is talking about a comprehensive report yet we are now in December. 

Mr Speaker, this is exactly why when he made a statement that he was going to bring a comprehensive statement, I immediately stood on a point of clarification. Therefore, could he clarify why up to now farmers have not received their money yet it is December? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The clarification was on a matter that was raised outside this House. Honourable minister, what did you say there yet you are now changing your statement?

MR WERIKHE: It is true we interacted with my colleague. I indicated to him that I would come here and make a comprehensive statement. Of course, November has just ended and Mr Speaker, as I said, next week, we shall come with the statement, which will include all the issues that he raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what will the statement do to the farmers? Why don’t you just make the meetings and arrange for payments? Otherwise, we can do without your statement on this issue of the tobacco. 

Honourable members, once the farmers are paid, we do not need a statement. In fact, we do not even need a statement from the minister. All we need is to ensure that the farmers are paid so that you can have your peace.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, can I give additional information? Speaker, the President, during the past, for the Bunyoro region – I cannot remember the date. During the past by-election, the President promised payment and we have a problem, as leaders of the region, because the minister who was tasked to follow up cannot meet those people and tell them that money is coming on this date. 

The Speaker is right to say that it is not about the statement. Can we get the payment? Aware that tobacco beds are supposed to be made this month, are we now killing tobacco production in this country? I think we better pay so that we know whether there is a future of tobacco production or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that is the way forward. The statement is not necessary. Just find the money from wherever. In fact, the money is not from you; the money is from the company. Kindly coordinate them to pay the farmers so that we have peace with everyone one. Thank you –(Mr Byandala rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are you informing, honourable? Otherwise, we have finished this matter.

2.48
MR ABRAHAM JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Mr Speaker, I would like to contribute on the issue of tobacco.   Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Since I joined Parliament, this issue of tobacco has been coming on this Floor. Can I, therefore, appeal to Government to sit down and sort this issue out? We cannot continue year in, year out talk about the same thing. I would like to urge the ministers responsible to sort out this issue once and for all. Otherwise, people are suffering.

First of all, it is one of the least lucrative things they can produce. I would like to, therefore, appeal to Government to make sure that they sit down and don’t bring here reports piecemeal. Let us have a report – whether you establish - funds so that our farmers can be paid in time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let those companies pay our farmers. They have an obligation since they signed a contract and so, they should therefore pay. Just enforce that.

2.49
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising an urgent public importance matter in respect to the many lives that have perished in multiple landslides in my constituency.

Yesterday, while we were here for plenary, I received bad news, courtesy of social media, about the catastrophic landslide that occurred. These multiple landslides have occurred in a number of sub-counties but the hardest hit is Bushika Sub-County, where 10 homes, which had an average of 30 houses, gardens and livestock have been buried. A whole ridge came rolling down and that rubble has buried those families.

So far, efforts by search and rescue teams have only been able to retrieve four bodies. Majority of the bodies are still trapped in the rubble.

Incidentally, access to the scene of this particular landslide is very difficult because the heavy downpour is still pounding and the earth is moving downwards. Most of the rescue teams are scared.

However, the wanainchi have persevered and they have been able to recover a few bodies and most of the causalities have been taken to Bududa Hospital, which is full to capacity with those that are injured.

River Tutu has also burst its banks and most of the civil servants who work at the health centre III could not go back home because the bridges had been washed away and people are stranded. 

As leaders of this particular disaster prone region, we are tired and worn out of every other year coming here to raise matters of urgent public importance pertaining to the loss of people who are claimed by these natural calamities.

The idea of resettling them permanently in Bulambuli was brilliant but it is moving at snail pace. More than two years down the road, the ministry has only afforded to construct for 107 households. For instance, in Bududa, the minimum targeted for relocation and eventual resettlement are more 1,000 households.

It will take us ages to logically conclude this relocation and eventual resettlement exercise. Last week, I raised this concern when hon. Ecweru brought here a supplementary budget for a request targeting the contingency fund. It is close to Shs 50 billion.

I reminded him that one issue of pertinent concern should be saving the lives of those who were in high risk places and evacuating them. There was no evacuation plan and no budgetary allocation for those people in high risk hills as the rains are pounding.

Credit must be given to the Meteorological Authority. This time round, they were accurate. They have predicted these rains and they are to continue up to early next year. These people are at risk; they ought to be relocated. 

I added on the other ones of Bundibugyo whose parish is sinking. If the budget could be readjusted to have the people, they are more than willing to be relocated.

Let the people be evacuated and be put in places, which are relatively safe within as they await eventual resettlement, which is also taking ages.

Secondly, it is cheaper if they had adopted the unanimous idea, which the stakeholders in Bududa had proposed; a compensatory approach. It is now more expensive to build a house, which will cost well over Shs 50 million and then you give each household three and a half acres. If aggregated together, that is a huge sum of money.

However, if someone was compensated and they left the place, it would be much cheaper, much faster and they would help matters or if we had gone by the earlier idea, which was short changed by the ministry, that of urbanisation strategy similar to Ujamaa villages of Tanzania, that is much cheaper. It is affordable urbanisation within. 

The multi-sectoral team of technocrats from various ministries came and identified within Bududa 17 locations for the affordable urbanisation strategy but it was short changed because of the corruption, which has forced His Excellency to walk today.

The prayer is that if we could have the urbanisation strategy implemented or a compensatory approach considered, it would be quicker. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to sincerely pass on our condolences to the bereaved families and on Monday this week, the Minister of Works and Transport presented a paper on the situation of our roads coming from the impact of the heavy rain. It was wide and Cabinet decided to pick out the points which needed rescue.

We can no longer reconstruct roads where rains are still pouring and the floods are still on-going. Rescue falls under the category, which was identified by Cabinet and the President directed the Ministry of Defence to come in and help. 

He even mentioned something to do with purchasing of boats because floods have taken over and people are moving in flowing water and risking their lives.

I would like to assure you and I am going to crosscheck with the ministers concerned to make sure that we rescue our people who are entrapped right now to save further lives from perishing.

The relocation must be done - I know that we have been building houses in phases. Phase I is done, phase II has to be fast-tracked given the fact that the rains have showed that more damage is being caused.

I am going to get in touch with my colleagues to make sure that we come to the rescue of our people. May their souls rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The relocation programmes can work. I recently saw on social media the picture of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, hon. Onek who had gone to visit the people where they had been resettled and the communities gave him a pumpkin.

I called him and he said that the people who had been resettled were happy and living well. Why don’t we do this and save people. We know as day follows night that wherever there is drought, there are going to be floods.

I am sure the honourable Member from Toroma is about to start speaking about draught and then Manjiya will start speaking very soon about floods and landslides. Can we do a more comprehensive way? They are going to happen anyway. Why don’t we do something more permanent?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the programme which is being implemented under the Office of the Prime Minister is a permanent solution. I can only say that probably-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those people should not be there now. Why should it be in phases? Why don’t we take a programme that we must execute and finish? We would not be having people buried there anymore.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: We secured enough land. I can stand and say that we have cleared the land, houses have been constructed and people have been resettled. The next phase of construction of houses is what I am talking about because –(Interruption) 

MS KARUNGI: Mr Speaker, recently, we faced a similar problem in Kanungu and had about four families in a certain valley. When it rained, the floods came with stones and killed one woman. We wrote a report to the Office of the Prime Minister but we have not received any answer.

Government Chief Whip, I pray that when you are organising, you remember those families in Kanungu so that they are not left behind. Thank you very much.

MS AOL: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Thank you, Mr Speaker. My clarification is, if you have 1000 people who are in dire need and you respond to one out of 1000 people in two years, are you serious? Can you clarify your seriousness to resettle 1000 families, yet, in two years, you have resettled only 100? Can you clarify your commitment? Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, moving people from their ancestral homes is not an activity that you can do in an evening. A lot of persuasion and sensitisation has been taking place to make people agree to move from their ancestral home to a different part of the country. We are moving steadily because they are not coming to visit; they are coming to stay and to stay forever. We are moving on. 

Secondly, Uganda now has the earth observation system and we were given an award recently, where hon. Kitutu represented us. We know what is going to happen in Kanungu and I can pledge that the minister will come here and take us through.

What we have to do is put matching funds to allow the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness to respond spontaneously. It is always the matching funds, which delay us. Otherwise, we can now tell the disasters as they appear or as they plan to appear in the country. However, the minister can come here and give us more information so that we appreciate what Uganda has achieved regarding earth observation.

MR OROT: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise is that landslides are a tragedy. Are we really proceeding well by not rising up in this Parliament to pray for these souls by observing a moment of silence? Those people are buried underground and they need our prayers so that God can do something. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a valid point. This country has lost people to landslides and also in different accidents. We can use this opportunity to rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues to do with the election procedures updates and also another aspect of electoral matters that the honourable member for Arua had requested to speak on as an urgent matter. The Busongora North Member of Parliament also wanted to speak on the same issue. Would you like to do so?

3.05
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. As I was moving around my district, I came across Electoral Commission (EC) officials. We all know that the EC is currently updating its voters’ register.

What the Electoral Commission has done in Ayivu and Terego counties is, although our sub-counties are big, the EC has given only one computer for each sub-county and yet, the computers are not working. The Electoral Commission has gone ahead to issue 10 forms per day. You know what it means for voters. The electorate hate to be tossed around.

When we tried to interact with them, they told us that they will add more computers but up to now, they have not done so. 

Secondly, on the forms that are brought to the location where the Electoral Commission is staged, we have an overwhelming number of people who have shown up but there are only 10 forms. Those people are doing nothing. They have become very lazy. Imagine sitting from morning to evening to only work on 10 forms. Once they are done, they have to wait until the following day.

There are even instances where we found them catching grasshoppers. Time is running out and yet, the Electoral Commission is saying that they will not adjust their time. If the 11th December deadline passes, they will close the chapter of –(Interruption) Mr Speaker, - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. You have the information. Tell the House.

MS OSORU: My prayers are that the EC adjusts its timeframe. Secondly, they should add more computers and forms to the areas where they are lacking. We are stranded and do not know what to do, yet, more people are still coming to update their voters’ information. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Member is raising matters coming from Arua. You have no information about it. What information are you giving?

3.07
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The laws of this country allow every citizen aged 18 years and above to participate in elections and electioneering. You can vote and also be voted. 

However, there is disenfranchisement of the rights of Ugandans in Kasese, particularly in Ibanda-Kyanya Town Council where there are youths who are 17 years now and by the time we vote, they will be 18 years. When they go to register, they are turned away and asked not to register. 

Previously, when someone is around 16 or 17 years of age, if the update of the voters’ register is done about one and a half years before the voting date, they are usually allowed to register so that by the time we vote, they will be eligible voters because they will have turned 18 years.

Therefore, I would like the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to tell this House whether there are clear guidelines that Electoral Commission officials are applying during the voters’ update exercise. If we do not do that, it is going to limit and disenfranchise the rights of Ugandans who are one and a half years to make 18 years by the time we vote in 2021.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There are two issues raised. The first one is on the voters’ updates going on and the computers being few and not working. Then, the Electoral Commission gives ten forms per day. As a result, the EC officials are overwhelmed by the number of the people coming as there are no forms and limited computers. 

Secondly, they are not considering who are going to turn 18 in January and December next year who would be eligible to vote. These are critical issues. Would you like to say something about it?

3.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker. These are very pertinent issues because this is where all of us are very interested. I will make sure that I contact the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs regarding sending more forms and computers to all our areas. It seems this issue cuts across.

Regarding the guidelines, which have been articulated by hon. Nzoghu, they were issued. The guidelines for the updates of the age in this new registration were all over unless you require us to give them again. They are very clear guidelines. 

If there are people who are misrepresenting the guidelines in Kasese, then this needs to be crosschecked. The guidelines, however, were issued.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. These are not matters for another statement in this House. Just go and act on them. Make sure that the computers are there and they are working. Make sure there are sufficient forms and that you make a review. Let the EC see the updates process happening in the country. There should be supervision because things can go wrong when we are seeing. Thank you.

Can we now go to the Order Paper?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Bill is this that I see two Members standing to read?

MS KHAINZA: The Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Bill going to be read by two Members? I see hon. Ssempala on this side? Were two Members delegated? (Laughter) You see the challenge. You have to invest in many people because you do not know who will show up. (Laughter) 

3.12
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sit on the National Board of the Uganda Red Cross Society. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019” be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. These motions do not require secondment but yesterday, people insisted that they should be seconded without amending our rules. (Members rose) Is this motion seconded? The motion is seconded by Kumi Municipality, Bududa District, Lwemiyaga County and Gulu District. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for this Bill to come for First Reading, we used the authority of the Public Finance Management Act because there was no Certificate of Financial Implications issued. In accordance with that law, however, we have authority, on the expiration of 60 days, to proceed without the certificate. That is what we have done with this Bill. Therefore, it goes to the committee responsible to handle it expeditiously and report back to the House. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT OF STATE OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE PROGRESS OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY INTEGRATION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Bukonjo County West had a procedural point. I am sorry I kind of forgot about it.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your grace. My procedural point was intertwined with the Electoral Commission. You recognise that in 2016, someone who was 14 years will meet the requirement to vote by 2021. We are also aware that according to the academic calendar, the Senior Four and Senior Six students including those in tertiary institutions and universities are still in school. 

Now, the Electoral Commission has come up with a deadline that they do not want to extend. Mr Speaker, I was wondering whether it would not be procedurally right to ask the Government Chief Whip to also bring on board the students who will literally be disenfranchised by the deadline, which will meet them in the schools, colleges and universities in her communication to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That is my submission. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Government Chief Whip, in your communication, take care of the deadline, please. Thank you.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. During the Sitting of 14 November 2019, I made a statement on the celebration of 20 years of the East African Community Integration and as a result, the Speaker directed the ministry to provide a report on the progress of the East African integration status for the last 20 years. This statement is in response to that directive and it will provide an update on the current status on the performance of the four pillars of integration.

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs is mandated to coordinate the integration agenda in accordance with the objectives of the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community. 

Under Article 05 of the treaty, the East African Community partner states undertake to establish among themselves, the Customs Union, the Common Market, then subsequently the monetary union and ultimately, the political federation. 

The protocol establishing the East African Customs Union was signed in 2004 and it is being implemented as from 2005. Also the protocol for the Common Market was signed by the East African Heads of States in November 2009 and entered into force by July 2010.

In line with Article 76 of the treaty, the protocol provides the following to be aggressively implemented:
Free movement of goods, free movement of persons and labour, free movement of services, free movement of capital and the rights of establishment and residence. The partner states signed the protocol for the establishment of the Monetary Union in 2013 and it is expected to be established by 2024. This is the undertaking for the fast-tracking.

Mr Speaker, the final protocol is the political federation, which is now a priority of the East African Community (EAC) and the launch of the constitutional drafting process is already underway. Our President has already put together a team.

Mr Speaker, allow me to spell out what each protocol has so far achieved. Under the Customs Union, the implementation of the Customs Union has made significant impact on trade in goods by lowering the cost of doing business. For example, we have the adoption of a Common External Tariff, which is currently under review with the following tariff bands: 0 per cent, 10 per cent, 25 per cent and a rate above 25 per cent.

Transit times have greatly improved along the Northern Corridor; it takes two to five days for a container of goods to move from Mombasa to Busia or Malaba. It used to take about 2l days. We also have the simplified trade regimes for small traders engaged in cross-border trade with goods less than $ 2000. They only need a certificate of origin from Uganda Revenue Authority or Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. This will definitely allow them to be exempted from some taxes that they would have attracted if they imported those goods outside the region.

Mr Speaker, under the Customs Union, we have established the One Area Network for the harmonisation of customs systems. This combines the one area network mobile telephones because our system of customs; ASYCUDA uses the telecommunication systems.  It is two-way; it works under the Customs Union but also applies under the Common Market because the Customs Union facilitates the implementation of the Common Market.

It has reduced on the costs of doing business significantly and particularly in this fiscal year of 2018/2019. EAC destination, especially for exports in Uganda, has registered a total of $ 1,469 million as exports as compared to $ 911 million, which we have imported into this country. There was trade surplus of $ 557 million based on this simplified trade. 

As leaders, we will productively increase our productivity once we engage in intra-trade, which is highly recognised around our region, especially within the EAC, SADC and COMESA where our contribution as EAC is now 19.35. This is being considered as the highest in the region doing intra-trade.

The Customs Union has also led to the improvement of intra-trade. In 2003, we had $ 1.3 billion, peaking at $ 55.8 billion in 2015 before reducing to $ 5.2 billion in 2017. The cumulative total number of harmonised standards was l,526 for the period 2000 to 2018. This is being implemented by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Mr Speaker, I have a table that can give us the performance of our trade indicators within the region on page 5.

On the elimination of tariffs, which has also been a barrier, especially on implementation of the Customs Union and Common Market, we have established the One Stop Border Posts, which have been constructed to facilitate 24-hour operations around gazetted border points. 

We have, under the Monetary Union, established the Single Customs Territory. This has been introduced where customs operations systems are linked to clear cargo and also reduce the time of movement of goods from Mombasa to Kampala from 15 days to only four days, as of today. 

Mr Speaker, the region is also now implementing the Single Customs Territory where tax collection for Uganda Revenue Authority for collection and payment of taxes and security for direct delivery is at owner’s premises. This is an indicator that you can pay taxes today from Kampala when your container is still in Mombasa and it will be directly delivered to your residence.

You can also now report any tariff barriers by simply dialling *201# on your phone. Once you establish that there is a non-tariff barrier anywhere, this link will directly channel you to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of East African Community Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the agency of Uganda Revenue Authority.

We have also introduced the Simple Certificate of Origin to facilitate faster clearance and exemption of goods within the region, which are under the threshold of $ 2000. This is to help people living around the border who may not be doing big business so that they can also benefit from goods produced within the region. 

The East African Community, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives have stationed officers to facilitate in times where the Ministry of Health works on issues of drugs, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives helps UNBS on standards and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries supports on quarantine matters. All these officers have been positioned at all the border points of Uganda. 

The East African Community has right now embarked on the elimination of non-tariff barriers. We have an Act of 20l7 and we have continued to establish remedies where non-tariff barriers keep emerging. There is a mechanism that the ministry has now started to engage. For example, we now have the Mutual Recognition Agreements, which are being implemented to support professionals to use their associations to do business across the region. Implementation of the movement of goods, services and people is also being monitored. I know that this programme is going to reduce tariff barriers.

The laws, regulations, directives, decisions and recommendations of the Council are also being fast-tracked. These are some of the areas where we have got under the Customs Union.

Mr Speaker, the Common Market has also made profound impact on the lives of the citizens of the East African Community, especially regarding the movement of goods and services, labour, capital and the rights of establishment. Border crossings have been identified for conversion into one-stop border points and we mentioned this. We are almost completing Elegu by fixing all the systems. Otherwise, the construction has been done. 

This move facilitates the operations of a One Stop-Border Post Act, 2013. The East African Community One Stop-Border Post Regulation, 2016 and the East African One Stop-Border Post Operation Manual are all under review to ensuring effective operations of these establishments as well as the investments, which are already putting the buildings, roads and parking yards. 

When you go to the border points, most of the roads that you see and the good infrastructure are now emerging due to the One Stop-Border Posts, the new parking yards, cargo verification shades, bays and scanners. You see that we have already established automatic verification systems where we have scanners. There are no longer aspects of opening containers and pouring out material or goods. We use scanners. 

We have established the scanners at Busia, Malaba, Mirama Hills, Mutukula and our border with Tanzania.

We have passenger shades and Warehousing canopies. There are the Information, Communication and Telecommunication (ICT) networks and hardware. All these are within the institutions.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that under the Common Markets, we are moving in the right direction. We can only say that as time goes on, the whole system will benefit all Ugandans. I have given a table, which also indicates how our people from within the region have been securing jobs across.

On page 7, you will find the table that shows the number of Ugandans who are employed outside the region and another indicating the number of other citizens outside the region who are employed in Uganda in table 5. The table is clear and I will not go into those details.

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, your statement is over 15 pages. I would like you to summarise it because it is uploaded on the iPads.

Mr maganda: Mr Speaker, the biggest part has tables. I am left with almost two pages if you could allow me. 

The third protocol is the East African Monetary Union. The protocol for the establishment of the Monetary Union came into force in 2013. We expect that by 2024, we shall have already introduced the common currency to replace the national currencies of EAC states. 

Under the Protocol, Partner States are required to achieve and maintain four fiscal and monetary targets for a period of three years prior to full Monetary Union and maintained thereafter once union has been effected.

The primary convergence criteria are ceilings on headline inflation of eight per cent, fiscal deficit including grants of three per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and gross public debt of 50 per cent of GDP in net present value terms; and a floor on reserve coverage of 4.5 months of imports of goods and services.

This is the percentage ratio that is anticipated in the Monetary Union. The protocol will raise the concern on buildings resilience and appropriately managing economic shocks in the context of the Monetary Union.

As I conclude, we have a table, which will guide us on how the management and implementation perspectives of the Monetary Union. It is on page 12. 

Allow me to finalise with one aspect of the political federation. These others are just explaining what the other part of the Monetary Union is. The political federation is now at the level of the constitutional drafting process. Like we said, the six partner states have appointed the constitutional drafting experts. The inauguration of the constitutional drafting experts has been done. We did it on 19 November at Entebbe. 

Our President was nominated by colleague presidents of EAC to be the patron of the federation and the process has started. We also anticipate that by 2024, this process must have come into force.

We also have some other benefits that have come with the integration. Right now, we have the East African Regional Centre of Excellence where Uganda Cancer Institute is a centre of excellence for Oncology and cancer. This would reduce patients who seek treatment outside the region thus reducing the transfer of resources in the partner states.

We have the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) as the EAC Regional Centre of Excellence for Virology. All this is research; on Ebola, Marburg, Cholera, HIV and Tuberculosis, which have been given their status.

Kenya has a centre of excellence for issues concerning the heart. The main research centre establishment of the institute is in Bujumbura.

The three partner states of Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda are now using the single tourist visa policy. Other partner states have applications on the variable geometry where we expect that the flexibility in the process of implementing projects will usher in the faster tracking of countries like Burundi, Tanzania and South Sudan who are yet to come on board as per the policy of moving as a team.

Also, the summit has picked out on the introduction of Kiswahili as the language that should be spoken by all East Africans. Uganda has already put up the Kiswahili Council, which will be implementing the introduction of Kiswahili from the low level of education to the higher level. We should make our children and ourselves adapt to the language and speak it well.

We have the higher education area of EAC where it has been established that the centres of learning and syllabus should have similar syllabi and also the quality assurance mechanism with similar reforms for the provision of quality and competitive education in the community. This is done by the Inter-University Council of East African, which is hosted in Uganda.

The East African Community is also implementing the East African Road infrastructure network. We have the Ntungamo - Mirama Hills/Kagitumba Road, which has been constructed to link to Mirama Hills and ease connectivity to the Rwanda Market. 

We also have a bridge stretching from Uganda to Kenya via Malaba Border post to complete. It is a one kilometre dual-carriage bridge. This links to the Mombasa Port. 

The dual carriage bridge will replace the current bridge built in 1961. In Malaba, there is new infrastructure, which has been built by Trademark East Africa.

There is also the four lane toll of Entebbe-Kampala Expressway linking the international airport. All these are a link of the East African Road Transport Infrastructure. There are many that I will not be able to mention but we also have that as a protocol under the cooperation.

Mr Speaker, we normally participate in the inter parliamentary games. This will be the 10th year and Uganda is hosting. This is all because of the Treaty.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that we also have challenges that we face under the integration. The first challenge is the financing mechanism in the region. Right now, the system is such that each partner state makes a contribution based on the budget that they have been allocated. There were proposals of alternative financing but they have not been concluded. The ministers of finance have been involved in negotiations but they have not been concluded. 

The biggest achievement that we got is that the first sectoral council advised that we deduct a percentage of import levy on imports within the partner states. However, because of varied development of the countries, they have not been able to harmonise this. We have been informed, from the previous council, that by April 2020 the financing mechanism will have been concluded.

Mr Speaker, I have given a table indicating the status of our contributions. The table runs up to page 19.

There is also the problem of emerging Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs), which we are sorting out as they emerge.

We also face a problem of human trafficking, which is very established because of porous borders. As we implement the Common Market that removes borders, we are attracting people who are trying to lure our boys and girls to seek greener pastures. These people have gone without proper documentation, which has caused us problems.

There is also a problem of the proliferation of small arms and terrorism, which we face as a region due to the opening of borders.

There is also the element of mistrust existing between the partner states; for example, we have issues between Uganda and Rwanda. However, this is being handled. There was a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), which was signed in Angola. The ministries of foreign affairs of the two countries are right now engaging in fast tracking this MoU to ensure that it can be implemented.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you once again for giving me this opportunity to come back and make a few clarifications on this. I know that as Ugandans and East Africans, we have to support the implementation of the integration agenda. 

Reports emerging from the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa indicate that the East African Community is a highly growing economic bloc compared to other blocs around the world. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. It is a very clear statement. Is the chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs here? Hon. Ouma, are you the chair or the vice chair? Have you handled anything like this?

MR OUMA: Mr Speaker, we have had numerous meetings with the minister as a committee and most of the issues that he has raised are known to us as a committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you compiled a report for the House?

MR OUMA: Not yet, Mr Speaker. However, I think we shall be compiling one soon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to give a proper timeline, vice-chairperson?

MR OUMA: Not now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking this because ministerial statements of this nature are very involving. We usually need them processed for the House to have proper debate and take decisions. 

We can debate this statement and leave it there, like we have always done. Ministerial statements are debated and then we go on to the next item. However, it might be more productive if it is a committee report that comes with all the issues analysed and investigated and recommendations made for the decision of the House. It would be a more structured debate than the one we are going to have now on the ministerial policy statement because we can only comment on the statement; we cannot really debate it as such. 

However, it is a ministerial statement that attracts debate. We can have a short debate and see if this particular statement, like the last one, can be sent to the committee to give us more in-depth proposals for the decision of the House. Do you want to have a full debate today? The Members who have stood give me an impression that you want to have a full debate on the minister’s statement. 

Debate without decision is not debate. We need to debate and take a decision substantially. I thought there would be a few comments but now I see the whole House rising, so I am tempted to refer the matter to the committee. Can I do that? Can we have the committee examine this matter in detail and then come back with recommendations? Chair, would that be the proper way to handle this?

MR OUMA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The statement is referred to our Committee on East African Community Affairs. Let them process it, have more interaction with the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and see how we can move on. We could also have a perspective from the Pan African Parliament before coming to have a full debate. 

It is substantially referred to the Committee on East African Community Affairs to process and come back with recommendations that can guide us on what decision we should take as a House. 

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that we give the committee a timeline within which they have to report so that we can have a full debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, how much time do you need?

MR OUMA: Mr Speaker, I heard you say “soon” yesterday, but I think we are time bad. I think we can bring the report after recess.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be when we resume for debate on the Budget Framework Paper. I think January would be a good time. For now, examine it and do the consultations so that you can give us proper recommendations after assessment of all these things.

MR OUMA: Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE INQUIRING INTO THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ARISING OUT OF THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF OVER 300 FAMILIES IN KYABISIGAZI VILLAGE, KIGOROBYA SUBCOUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, we deferred this matter to today.

3.48
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli North County, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to skip pages 1 to 9, which are about the methodology. I will go to the findings, observations and recommendations.

Term of reference 1: To Study All Claims of Ownership on the Disputed Land
The committee was informed that the land in dispute is comprised in Leasehold Register Volume 1039, Folio 8, Plot 5, Block 6 situated at Kyakahogoro, Bugahya, Hoima District. The land measures approximately 438.0 hectares or 1,082.298 acres and belongs to Mr Edgar Agaba. While appearing before the committee, Mr Edgar Agaba informed the committee that he acquired the land through the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust (NPART) on 15 July 2005. 

By way of history, the land in dispute was leased to Mr Neko Rukanyanga by the Uganda Land Commission in 1978 for 49 years. In 1987, Mr Neko Rukanyanga, the registered proprietor, mortgaged the same land to Uganda Commercial Bank under instrument No. 232614. However, he failed to pay the monies due under the mortgage and NPART, in exercise of its mandate under the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Act, Cap. 95, took over the mortgage. 

Subsequently, in 2005, NPART transferred the mortgaged property and interest of Mr Neko Rukanyanga to Mr Edgar Agaba in consideration of Shs 28,800,000 who is now the current proprietor. The committee further received evidence from Hoima Land Office augmenting the same. 

Occupants on the Land 

According to the evidence gathered from the evictees, the committee found out that the majority of these people had been in occupation of this land since the l940s and l95Os. While appearing before the committee, Mr Edgar Agaba also confirmed that at the time of acquisition of this land, over 600 people had been living and staying on the land. He, however, allowed them to stay as tenants while paying ground rent (obusulu) of Shs 50,000 per acre per year. Whereas some agreed to pay, others refused on the account that they could not pay rent on their own land.

The Beginning of the Conflict 

The committee was informed that the genesis of the conflict and tension between Mr Edgar Agaba and the occupants of the land started in 2017, when the former decided to terminate their tenancy. This action by Mr Agaba met stiff resistance from the occupants who had peacefully settled on the same land for many years as bona fide occupants. 

Following the disagreement, Mr Agaba threatened to forcefully evict them. This, therefore, prompted the occupants, led by the then LCI Chairman, Mr Simon Achile, to petition the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters led by Lady Justice Bamugemereire over grabbing of their land. In response to the petition, the commission directed Mr Agaba to cease and desist from carrying out any activities on the said land, including boundary opening, titling, disposal, or any act or mission or otherwise for a period of six months until the commission of inquiry completes its inquiries into the matter. However, Mr Agaba did not adhere to the directive of the commission of inquiry and went ahead to plan for their eviction.

Term of Reference 2: To Investigate Allegations Relating to the Identity and Status of the Persons Evicted or Displaced

Kyabisagazi village in Hoima District, like other places in the country, hosts a wide range of tribes from across all parts of the country. They include the Lugbara, Alur, Acholi, Kebu, Lendu, Bagisu and Congolese. 

These tribes have stayed and lived harmoniously with the indigenous Banyoro and Bagungu for decades. However, in recent years, a section of the Banyoro has turned hostile towards the non-Banyoro, whom they term as “bafuruki” or migrants. The so-called bafuruki have been discriminated against by a section of indigenous Banyoro and accused them of grabbing their land.

As part of its background check to ascertain the true identity of the evicted persons, the committee obtained a copy of the 2016 national voters' register of Kyabisagazi II from the Electoral Commission as well as some copies of graduated tax receipts which date as far back as l980s, 1990s, and early 2000s. From the evidence gathered, the committee established that the evicted people were true Ugandans. This was further confirmed by both the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Chairperson LCIII Budongo Subcounty in Bujenje County, Masindi District.

Term of Reference 3: To Examine the Involvement and Conduct of Security Forces in the Evictions and Displacements 

The committee was informed that the involvement of the security forces was prompted by intelligence information that the evictees were a militia/rebel group. Hoima District Security Committee further informed the select committee that their involvement in this matter was to flush out the militia/rebel group which had allegedly established a parallel administrative structure called “Pele Republic” at Kyabisagazi II, Kigorobya Subcounty, Hoima District, which was headed by Mr Achile Simon who was the then area LCI chairperson.

The committee was further informed that upon receiving intelligence reports, the Hoima District Security Committee held several security crisis meetings presided over by the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), Mr Kisembo Araali. They resolved to carry out a cordon and search operation with the view of flushing out the militia/rebel group. This information corroborates the earlier statement made by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Mario Obiga Kania, on the Floor of the House on 26 February 2019 regarding the same matter.

Accordingly, the cordon and search operation was conducted on 13 February 2019. This operation, however, met stiff resistance from the occupants of the land in question, which left one police officer, PC Rutaremwa Vincent, dead and another injured. During the same exercise, several people were arrested and beaten while others fled the area. Those who were arrested were charged with different criminal offenses ranging from murder, being armed in public and threatening violence. 

When tasked to reveal the source of the information which the security agencies acted on, the RDC informed the committee that the information came from concerned people in the community. On the contrary, when the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, hon. Charles Okello Engola, appeared before the committee, he reported that following the arrests during the cordon and search operation, security agencies conducted a screening exercise and further investigations to verify the information on the alleged existence of the militia/rebel group. 

The outcome of these investigations and screening exercise ruled out the existence of the militia/rebel group in Kyabisagazi village as had earlier been reported.

On 29 May 2019, the committee conducted a fact-finding visit to Kyabisagazi II village after receiving numerous complaints from hon. Daniel Muheirwe that eviction activities were sporadically continuing and evictees’ properties were being destroyed including their houses and crops. 

Upon reaching Kyabisagazi, the committee got information on site regarding the following:

a) 	There was merciless and massive destruction of property belonging to the evictees by earthmoving equipment belonging to Mr Edgar Agaba and Bwendero Dairy Farm belonging to Mr John Magara. 

b) 	The people who were carrying out the above illegal activities were being guarded by the UPDF personnel, and we shall reveal where they got that authority.

c) 	The Uganda Police Force would occasionally patrol the area to buttress the security provided by the UPDF. 

d) 	It was also discovered that the UPDF soldiers were from Kakiri Military Barracks deployed by Col Ndahura. 

e) 	The remnants of the evictees who had persevered and stayed on the land had been chased away by gun-wielding security personnel.

f) 	A combined force of the UPDF, Uganda Police Force, the youth and guards swept through the village of Kyabisagazi, beating people, burning their houses and threatening them and they were acting on behalf of Mr Edgar Agaba.

Committee Observations

The committee observed the following:

    1. The so called cordon and search operation was merely a conduit for the security agencies to hand over the disputed piece of land to Mr Edgar Agaba, free from any encumbrance. Therefore, they carried out an illegal eviction under the guise of flushing out a militia or rebel group.

    2. The security agencies acted on concocted information of the existence of a militia or rebel group. There was a high level of unprofessional conduct of some security personnel, namely Maj. Gen. Sam Okiding, the Commander Field Artillery; Maj. Esau Mwebembezi, Intelligence Officer of the Artillery Division; Mr Kisembo Araali, the District Resident Commissioner; and the former District Police Commander (DPC) of Hoima, Etima Twaha, who commanded the unlawful and illegal eviction.

    3. The Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, hon. Ernest Kiiza, fully participated in the preparatory meetings and also presided over some of them which culminated into the unlawful evictions.

    4. Strong tribal sentiments expressed by Mr Edgar Agaba and hon. Ernest Kiiza, while appearing before the committee, were likely to exacerbate the tribal conflict in the region. The duo openly told the committee that the Banyoro were left with no option but to defend themselves against the bafuruki - non-Banyoro.

As a result of the above conduct and involvement of security personnel, the evictees lost their food stuff, household belongings and livestock. Some people including children, pregnant mothers and the elderly lost their lives. Some young women who attempted to collect food from their gardens were allegedly ruthlessly raped by the soldiers who were guarding the land for and on behalf of Mr Edgar Agaba. These evictees were rendered homeless.

The use of security forces in land evictions and wrangles remains a contentious issue characterised by violence, loss of property and lives. Indeed, numerous instances of violence and excessive use of force by security agencies, hired gangs and “bouncers” have been documented, not only in Kyabisagazi village but in other parts of the country where illegal evictions have been carried out; for instance, Lusanja in Wakiso, Mukono, Mubende, Mityana, among others.

Term of Reference 4: To Identify the Humanitarian Crisis Arising Out of the Evictions and Displacement and Establish the Current State of Affairs

When we visited the land in question, the committee established the following:

1. 	The committee physically witnessed appalling effects of the aftermath of the illegal and unlawful eviction, where over 600 people were rendered homeless, food insecure and children malnourished. Some children lost their lives as a result of lack of food.

2. 	The committee noted that all the houses, gardens, livestock, churches, schools, boreholes and markets were mercilessly destroyed during and after the eviction. The committee found homeless women and children with their male counterparts hiding in the neighbouring areas. Some were hiding in Budongo Forest and Bujenje Constituency in Masindi while the rest sought refuge in the homes of their relatives, churches, tobacco barns and under trees.

3. 	The committee interfaced with the victims and recorded about l35 children, 55 women with babies, 116 other women and 174 men. Reports received by the committee revealed that four children had passed on due to the cold and lack of food and the situation was likely to escalate. Since there was no water, health and sanitation facilities, there was high likelihood of an outbreak of cholera and other related water borne diseases.

4. 	The committee also interacted with the leadership of Budongo Subcounty, which confirmed that there was an influx of evictees in the area. There were fears of increasing cases of criminality arising out the many people who were loitering in the villages without food and shelter.

5. 	The committee further visited Hoima Central Prison to ascertain the situation of the arrested victims of the Kyabisagazi eviction incident. The committee leant that only 45 suspects were in custody against 75 suspects, which the district security committee reported. That meant that 35 people remained unaccounted for.

6. 	During the visit, the committee also established that out of 45 suspects in custody, four were juveniles. The committee obtained reliable information that Hoima District does not have a remand home and therefore resolved to write to the Hoima Chief Magistrate, His Worship Samuel Ntende, to immediately release them. However, to date, the juveniles are still languishing in prison.

Committee Observation

The committee observed that as the country continues to witness unabated unlawful and illegal evictions and displacement of persons by perceived rich individuals, cases of homelessness, hostility and hopelessness are also increasing. Displacement brings with it risks and vulnerabilities such as loss of land and work, homelessness, food insecurity, loss of access to services such as education and health, and possibly destruction of social networks which people depend on particularly during crisis. Displaced people are at a high risk of being both impoverished and unable to enjoy their human rights.

Mr Speaker, the situation in Kyabisagazi remains so dire that it requires immediate intervention by Government to resettle the evictees on their land. Where Government is reluctant to do so as the chief custodian of people's lives and property, the evictees should promptly be compensated for all the losses and damages suffered as a result of this unlawful exercise, which was supported by Government officials.

Term of Reference 5: 

To Examine Government Efforts and Other Mitigation Measures to Solve the Crisis
During consideration of the assignment, the committee invited the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the honourable engineer Hillary Onek, who declined to appear before the committee. On 28 March 2019, hon. Hillary Onek wrote to the committee indicating inter alia that investigations into circumstances surrounding evictions were the responsibility of security agencies and not Parliament. 

The minister further stated that the Office of the Prime Minister had responded early this year, with delivery of 250 bags (100 kilogrammes each) of maize flour and 50 bags (100 kilogrammes each) of beans for the affected population in Kigorobya. Mr Speaker, we have the letter to that effect.

When the committee interfaced with the Hoima District Security Committee early this year in Hoima, the Deputy Chief Administrative Officer informed the committee that she had heard about that delivery directly sent to the affected people in Kigorobya. However, the District Chairman of Hoima District informed the committee that no relief had been delivered to the evictees. This was reiterated by the evictees when the committee visited and interacted with them early this year.

Committee Observations

1. 	The committee observed regrettable disrespect for parliamentary powers by hon. Hillary Onek.

2. 	The committee observed that the displaced persons had been left to seek refuge in the nearby bushes, tobacco barns, neighbouring villages in Masindi District and other areas in Masindi such as Budongo Forest in Budongo Subcounty.

3. 	The committee was further concerned that with no proper gazetted place to accommodate the displaced persons, there was a high risk of occurrence of other health related challenges.

4. 	The committee further observed that even the substantive minister of state responsible for Bunyoro affairs, hon. Ernest Kiiza, had neither offered intervention in the plight of the victims nor sought relief assistance in form of food and non-food items but rather was behind the planning of this plight.

Term of Reference 6: To Make Appropriate Recommendations to Parliament

We therefore recommended as follows:

l. 	Government, through the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, should urgently provide humanitarian relief, both in food and non-food items, to the affected persons.

2. 	The committee recommends that the evictees who were occupying their land as bona fide occupants prior to the acquisition of the same by Mr Edgar Agaba should be verified and returned to the land or adequately compensated.

3. 	The UPDF and the Uganda Police Force should restrict themselves to their roles and core functions provided for by law and desist from taking sides when it comes to land matters.

4. 	In order to secure a maximum degree of effective legal protection against the practice of forced or unlawful evictions for all persons under their jurisdiction, the Government must take immediate measures aimed at conferring security of tenure to all persons with interest in land. That is why they even give land titles to all.

5. 	The affected persons should be screened and thereafter be helped to acquire national identification cards replacement since their identity cards and properties were destroyed during the eviction exercise.

6. 	Mr Agaba’s involvement in the forceful eviction of the displaced persons must be further investigated by the responsible Government agencies and face the justice system.

7. 	Government should be held vicariously liable for the unlawful conduct of its officers including the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs.

8. 	The UPDF and the Uganda Police Force officers who participated in this illegal action should be held responsible both in their personal and official capacities.

9. 	The committee recommends that the minister responsible contacts the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions to issue a nolle-prosqui or a document withdrawing charges against the four juveniles that are illegally being detained at Hoima Government Prison.

l0. 	Government should strengthen institutions such as the district land boards, district land offices, area land committees and the local council courts mandated to handle land administration to effectively address land conflicts. 

ll. 	The ministry responsible for lands should closely supervise the operations of the district land boards and the district land offices to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in their operations.

12. 	The ministry responsible for lands should update Parliament on the status of eviction guidelines in compliance with the recent court decision of Justice Musa.

l3. 	Government should sensitise communities on land matters.

14. 	The committee further recommends that Government adopts or puts in place involuntary displacement safeguards to prevent involuntary displacement and resettlement. This is a United Nations (UN) concept that you sit with those affected by the unlawful action and then you decide on the way forward. Where possible, Government should reduce involuntary resettlements by exploring alternatives of conflict resolution, engaging in meaningful consultation with the affected persons, compensation of losses where necessary as well as provision of assistance to the displaced persons especially the poor and the vulnerable.

Mr Speaker, the problem of evictions is enormous and if not handled with the utmost justice it deserves, it will soon plunge this country into regrettable consequences. I beg to report and I must thank you.

Allow me at this juncture to lay on the Table the raw material we used that include, but not limited to, the minutes and the Hansard of the proceedings of the committee; the lease agreement between Uganda Land Commission and Neko Rukanyanga; a copy of the special title and transfer by NPART to Edgar; and all attendant documents. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, we can appreciate that this select committee went through the entire terms of reference with a fair amount of detail and the report shows that they worked well.

Honourable members, this is a report of a select committee and this House should debate it. As you debate, the question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the select committee to inquire into the humanitarian crisis arising out of the evictions and displacement of over 300 families in Kyabisagazi village, Kigorobya Subcounty, Hoima District be adopted.

That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now with Bujenje. How long do we take, honourable members? I think let us do three minutes.

MR KASUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. Just as it rightly indicated in the report, all the evictees are settled in Bujenje Constituency without relief and the situation is very alarming. However, I find it very difficult for this House to discuss the report when all the officials mentioned that are even supposed to guide us or help the evictees are not here.

Hon. Hillary Onek had been mentioned in the report but he is not here. Hon. Ernest Kiiza is not here. Hon. Obiga Kania is not here. Hon. Okello Engola is not here. These are all ministers. The person who raised the question is also not here. Are we really proceeding well without those people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that you were going to debate.

MR KASUMBA: No, I rose on a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what do you think? It might make sense that the persons who we are going to make reference to in our debate should be in attendance to be able to make some responses. In that case, we will defer this matter to next week because tomorrow is quite loaded; we have a few things to do. Let us handle it on Tuesday next week. Thank you very much.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS ON ISSUES RAISED BY MEMBERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities here, neither do I see the Minister of Works and Transport, the Attorney-General, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Security. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, come and brief us on where we are on this matter.

4.18
MS VERONICA ERAGU BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are on the Second Reading of the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018. The committee report was read and debate is supposed to ensue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what the problem is with this Bill. It is a Bill that we should deal with and finish because we have an entire arm of Government waiting for the conclusion of this Bill. I do not see the minister or the Attorney-General.

The sad thing is that the Judiciary thinks it is Parliament delaying them, which is not right. We have been ready to handle this Bill to its logical conclusion. Each time this Bill comes up, we do not have anybody to steer it. If it was any other Bill, I would have asked this Bill to be withdrawn. However, this Bill is very critical that I would not even want to imagine thinking that way. 

Hon. Amongi, since you are leading the team on the Front Bench, can we bring this matter back tomorrow? The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General should be here to handle this matter tomorrow.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise because the Public Finance Management Act dictates that Government should, by 31 December, have concluded part of the budget process. So, right now, there is an inter-ministerial meeting taking place in State House and most of the ministers are attending this Budget Framework Paper meeting. I was supposed to be in that meeting as well.

I will relay all the directives from your Chair so that tomorrow, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney-General are here in person. However, we are committed to this Bill. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is deferred to tomorrow. Tomorrow, we will proceed with or without any of them. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the committee ready with this? Where did we stop? Have we received a report yet? No, we have not received a report. Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development or any member of the committee here? 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE SUGAR BILL, 2019 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives?

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, we have not yet completed consultations. We pray for more time - four weeks - so that we can present the reconsideration. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this Bill went through the entire process of the House. A decision was taken and it was sent to the President. The President disagreed with some provisions and sent it back.

There are rules that govern Bills returned by the President and we have violated every single one of them, in fact with impunity. Ordinarily, under the rules, we should have finished with this Bill by February this year. You can see where we are. We should have finished by February this year but we are still consulting.

If you are not entirely ready and not in position to process the disagreements that still exist in the Bill, you might want to consult the President so we withdraw the entire Bill and come back with what is more acceptable. We cannot go on like this. There is a Bill that is in Parliament, it has been passed by Parliament but it is still on the Order Paper yet we cannot proceed with it. You might have to take a decision on how we proceed so that we can get it off our list and it goes on somebody else’s list - your list, another person’s list, Cabinet’s list or wherever you want to put it. However, it should not be on our Order Paper anymore. I think you should go and consult on the possibilities and see how to relieve us, as Parliament, from the burden of carrying something that cannot move. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I sympathise with the ministers with regard to other Bills. However, the Sugar Bill has over delayed and we have done a lot of consultation. People have moved around various committees, which have been reported to this Parliament. We have heard a lot of controversial issues discussed around this particular Bill. I think it is important that the Government should attach some kind of priority to have this Bill passed.

I feel that since our committees are ready – I believe that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry are ready – we can proceed. It means the Government is not interested. However, when we get a crisis, people run to us like they recently did when they could not sell their sugar. They ran back to us and Parliament had to sort out the problem.

Therefore, I would like to propose, as a matter of guidance, that you allow us to proceed with the Sugar Bill. We can probably wait for the rest but with the Sugar Bill, we should proceed and pass it. We have already discussed it and there is nothing new that the Government is likely to brief us on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I recall that the motion for reconsideration was moved by the minister. Did we propose the question for debate? Was there even debate? No, there was no debate. I was here, honourable member for Kumi Municipality. I was here and we did not debate it but I went to the extent of proposing the question.

You know, the Bill has delayed so much so that we do not even know where we are with this matter. Each time the matter comes up, the minister is not ready. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde was here and she said they were not ready. She asked for one month and one month became eight months. Here we are on the same issue. 

Please, at least come and properly update us on where we are so that we know the last thing Parliament did with this Bill. I do not even recall anymore whether we received a motion from the minister for reconsideration. So, we need to know where Parliament is on this matter. It will give us good guidance. I do not recall if we have received the report from the committee. The committee had prepared a report on this matter and they were ready to report. Let us have this clarification made next week on Tuesday.

MR WERIKHE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY BILL, 2018 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we also do this on Tuesday? Please, pass the information to the minister concerned that this matter will be handled next Tuesday. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INSTITUTE AN INQUIRY INTO THE STATUS OF THE UGANDA ASSOCIATION OF EXTERNAL RECRUITMENT AGENCIES MONITORING FUND

4.30
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to institute an inquiry into the status of the Uganda Association of External Recruitment Agencies Monitoring Fund –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding is that this motion falls under the docket of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am looking at the front and I do not see any of the ministers. I am just imagining how we are going to proceed with a motion where the ministers are not here. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. We should be able to proceed with business especially where the issues being raised affect the ordinary people. If there is a delay from the Government side, should it cause a halt in the proceedings of this House? That is the balance we might have to debate one day. 

For today, however, I am going to ask hon. Mpaka if he is comfortable with raising his issues in the absence of the minister who should respond to him directly. We can as well do it tomorrow if you are comfortable with this, honourable member.

MR MPAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in agreement that we proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who will respond to your issues? It might make sense if your justification to this motion is listened to by the responsible sector people so that they capture it. However, if you are comfortable raising your issues in their absence yet the issues will stay hanging, I do not mind. It might make sense to raise them when they are there. 

MR MPAKA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will handle this tomorrow. Ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development or the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development to be around when this motion is being presented. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From our view, all business that is following today will require responses from the responsible ministers. However, I hardly see the appetite for some Members to continue with debate nor do I see the appetite of more ministers coming in the shortest time possible. I do not know whether it is due to the exhaustion from the walk against corruption or some are still walking. 

I would like to seek your indulgence as to whether procedurally, we should continue debating. I know it is in your wisdom to adjourn this House. Maybe we can go for a small break so that the ministers are called upon to appear since we still have time. Otherwise, we may not be able to proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should have moved a substantive motion that the House be adjourned. So, can you amend the motion and we see how – 

4.34
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): In view of the fact that the House lacks the presence of the Members, mainly the ministers, that are in charge to respond to the various questions that are on the Order Paper, I would request to move a motion that the House be adjourned. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Members for Busongora County North, Koboko District, Maracha District and Igara County West. I put the question to the motion for adjournment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

		(The House rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

