Thursday, 1 December 2016

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. 

I would like to request the finance minister for an indication as to when he will be able to bring the budget framework paper because it has to be here by 31 December under the Public Finance Management Account.

Taking into account that we shall be breaking off in the near future, we would like to know when he is bringing the budget framework paper so that if we can get it before the recess, we can pass it on to the committees. 

Secondly, we last week took a decision to form a select committee in respect to Uganda Telecom Limited. I propose the following names:
Hon. Michael Tusiime 
Hon. William Nzoghu
Hon. Thomas Tayebwa
Hon. Paul Akamba
Hon. Lillian Nakate 
Hon. Paula Turyahikayo 
Hon. Okin Ojara

I propose that hon. Okin Ojara chairs the committee. I will be giving the committee terms of reference before we close business this afternoon.

Honourable members, I was in Sebei yesterday for the annual campaign against Female Genital Mutilation. I am happy to report that Kween District has registered zero circumcision in the last three years. (Applause) 

I would like to thank the honourable members and all the activists for the campaign. We still have work in Bukwo and Karamoja. I would like to call upon you for support so that the campaign continues.

In relations to Sebei, the Suam-Kacphorwa Road has been in the pipe line. While there, I was informed that they are about to start – and I hope indeed they are about to start because travelling there is very hard.

I would like to call upon the Minister for Works and transport to take into account the need for their internal travel even beyond that border and to work out some proposals for them. 

They also told me that construction in that area is very expensive because the bricks come from Mbale meaning they have to drive to Mbale and back to the highlands. They also said the sand was very costly and that the budget that they are given is the same as that of the other areas. So they requested for special consideration owing to those difficulties so that they are able to construct including Government infrastructure projects.

The residents, just like in the past, complained that they do not receive radio signals from Uganda. They are therefore obliged to listen to Kenyan based radio stations. Their mobile phone communication is through Safaricom which implies that they pay more for communication than the other Ugandans.
I have discussed the above matter with the ICT minister because I have been going there for about 17 years and this is the same complaint given every year. I have written several times but no one is responds. 

I would also wish to alert the House to that issue to ensure that those Ugandans also receive communication.

I was also told that the Minister for Land, Housing and Urban Development visited them. The people are worried that the degazettement of the wildlife land is going to affect public institutions including the school where I was yesterday. 

I would like to call upon the lands minister to take interest in Kwosir Girls’ School that was built to protect the girls from FGM. 

I was told that the school is partially in the gazetted land of the Uganda Wildlife Authority – but since the authority and school are all part of the government, I hope the minister will take into account their concerns in the demarcation.

I held a meeting with members of the Uganda Manufacturers Association last night. They requested me to inform the trade minister and Prime Minister that they are still not able to sell sugar in Kenya despite the pronouncements by President Uhuru Kenyatta. They request that the Government works quickly to see that they are able to get into that market.

There are other issues that I will communicate when we come to the other items. There are two members who had some issues. Today is Thursday, the day for members’ business. The members will use two minutes each.

2.54
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Most Ugandans, for different reasons and purposes, have used and changed names over time. Some people have nicknames given at birth like is the case among the Batooro and Banyoro who use pet names. 

Those who give birth to twins are named “Ssalongo” and “Nnalongo” in Buganda. Cultural and Traditional leaders have names like Kabaka, Omusinga, Rwot and Paramount Chief. Names are also adopted as a result of marriage and for any other reason.  

Aware that that in 2015, Parliament enacted the Registration of Persons Act that required Ugandans to be registered and aware that the national identity card was used as a voter card, unfortunately, some Ugandans who endeavoured to be registered used the names popularly known to the public than the credentials on their academic papers.

Whereas there is an elaborate legal process of how someone can change their name and adopt a new one as stipulated in the Statutory Declaration Act and Registration of Documents Act, unfortunately, most Uganda are not yet aware of that procedure. 

This dilemma is still encountered while conducting interviews for public offices, graduates making application, nomination for various elective offices and presidential appointments.

Madam Speaker, even at banks, there are many Ugandans who use different details for their bank accounts and national identity cards. These variations have failed them from withdrawing their money.

Public bodies at times receive academic papers bearing names different from those appearing on their national identity cards. Many Ugandans have been victims of innocent usage of various names at different times with far reaching legal implications. I also note that there are fraudsters that impersonate others and make false claims and transactions. Again, many have been fraudulently conned of money, land and other valuable properties. 

Police have registered some cases of which some suspects cannot be traced as suspects change names overtime. There is confusion in the public. 

Madam Speaker, can the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs explain: 
The measure Government has put in place to create public awareness on the effects of changing names without following due process. 
The measures put in place to cub the impersonation by some people who use other people’s documents. Madam Speaker, this is a problem that has been going on for a very long time and as people at this level, we should do something to save the country from this problem. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, by way of explanation, that has come from the Appointments Committee. Sometimes, we are not sure who the President has appointed – someone comes with a different name – the certificates have different names, the birth certificate is also different and you are not sure who the President actually appointed. 

And also this habit of changing names casually and not formalising it is very costly. We need to help the country because it is like an epidemic. So I will give you time to clarify on that. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of changing names is a crosscutting matter. It involves the Department of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Uganda Registrations Bureau, the Ministry of Internal Affairs – I think it is only prudent that I should consult these other departments and then we come up with a comprehensive answer and proposals to solve this dilemma. Thank you very much. 

2.59
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning iron bar hitmen in the districts of Gulu, Amuru and Kitgum. 

Madam Speaker, in November, we had over 20 cases of men who were hit by iron bar hitmen. These people move with knives, pangas and guns. If you go to Gulu at this time, Amuru and Kitgum, people close their houses very early, which was never the case before. 

As I speak now, the example we have in place is that of a boda boda guy called Opoka Jimmy. He was hacked on the 23rd and right now, he is fighting for his life at Lacor Hospital. We have a local musician called Okello Denis Tupie. He was hacked on the 24th; we have a student a S.4 in Gulu High School who was hacked on the 20th and he died on the 24th of last month. There is a man called Okema Paul, staff of Amuru District Local Government who was also hacked. Right now, he is fighting for his life at Lacor Hospital. 

There is a man called Nyerere Julius Omonyi, he was shot at a trading centre called Parabor in Amuru District and he died on 13th of last month. There is a boy called Odong Stephen Balmoi a staff of Mega FM in Gulu. He was hacked seriously on the 4th of last month. 

Madam Speaker, the situation in Gulu District is alarming. As I speak, the police officers, instead of rescuing people, are moving in Amuru District along Gulu – Juba Road. The moment it comes to 8 p.m., they cane the youth at the trading centres indiscriminately. The moment they find you moving on the way, they cane you. 

Madam Speaker, the situation is not good in Acholi sub region – let me receive the information from – 

THE SPEAKER: No, this is not a debate; you want Government to do something. 

MR OLANYA: Okay, thank you, Madam Speaker. Our prayer to the Government is for them to rain on the police officers to stop caning the youth anyhow. 

Secondly, the security should be tightened to stop the iron bar hitmen in the districts of Amuru, Gulu and Kitgum. 

Thirdly, it seems there are illegal guns in the hands of some people especially in Amuru District which borders South Sudan. Therefore, we pray to Government to make sure they collect the illegal guns from those who have them. 

Finally the offices of the RDCs, DPC and DISO and the security personnel in those districts of Gulu, Amuru and Kitgum should be investigated by Government. Some people who were arrested mentioned the names of some security personnel as the ones backing them to do those acts. Government needs to investigate properly what is going on in the districts of Amuru, Gulu and Kitgum. 

3.04
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance which is the under payment of Universal Secondary Education (USE) schools. The funds being remitted to USE – (Interjections) – we all know that Government is supposed to be remitting money to USE schools to facilitate the smooth running of those schools. 

However, Government has failed to meet its obligations by sending the money late. They are underfunding these USE schools and this has led to poor performance in our schools. I have a list; allow me to read at least five or six schools in Mubende. There is a school called Kasenyi Secondary School. This school was supposed to get Shs 82 million, but it only got Shs 11 million. Mubende Light was supposed to get Shs 31 million; it only got Shs 7 million. Mubende Army – which is a Government Army School, was supposed to get Shs 39 million, they only got Shs 8 million. In Mubende High, instead of getting Shs 32 million, they only got Shs 15 million. Comprehensive High, instead of Shs 50 million they got Shs 7 million and so on. 

So, Madam Speaker, my humble prayer to this is that our Government should value education. The term is ending; how can you send Shs 7 million to facilitate a school, with an enrolment of 400 students. So I call upon the government not only to state the slogan “Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo” in word but also express it as they facilitate education. Thank you.

3.07
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In December 2013, rural electrification was commissioned in Amuru District. And we have been having stable power – for which we are grateful to the government of Uganda. Unfortunately, for the last one month, power has been cut off because of lack of compensation to the people whose crops were destroyed and trees cut down. And there is one particular person “investor” who has planted eucalyptus trees in a place called Kaladima and has refused to have the trees cut until he is compensated. As such there is no electricity in Amuru District.

However, what is hurting me most is that when I went home, I visited Otwe Health Centre III where I found a nurse struggling with a torch to look for a vein of a child. This is how bad the situation is.

Now my prayer is that the relevant ministry looks into this issue and takes it seriously. It should compensate the people who should be compensated so that we can have stable electricity in the district.

Secondly, we know the owner of this big land – the “investor” who is refusing the people of Amuru to access electricity although the name has been withheld for obvious reasons. So those are my prayers, but the people of Amuru are really suffering.

3.09
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national concern. Last year, when we were closing the Ninth Parliament, we passed a law on funds to help people with micro credit. And this money was supposed to help the vulnerable people, including people with disabilities, women and others. Unfortunately, up to today, we have not known the implementation of this programme; whether it has started or not.

Madam Speaker, I would kindly ask the Minister of Finance and in particular the minister in charge of microfinance, to come and update the House on the guidelines and the process through which our people can benefit. People at the grassroots are very poor and are waiting for that little money to help them start off. So we need an explanation so that we can join in the bandwagon of mobilising our people to improve on their income in our constituencies. Thank you.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Olanya for raising the matter of security in the districts of Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum and the neighbouring districts in the sub-region of Gulu and Kitgum.

It is important for us to understand that security matters are our concern – all of us. And, therefore, when they arise, all of us should be interested and should play our roles. It is unfortunate that the incidents quoted by hon. Olanya have occurred. I can say without fear of contradiction that these matters are not new; we have been aware of them and have been following them. Indeed, the Inspector General of Police camped in Kitgum and this problem is no longer in Kitgum. He is going to move on, together with other senior officers, to other districts in this area in order to address this problem in a comprehensive manner. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Ministry of Education on the short-landing of the funds – maybe they will report next week on the short-landing of those funds. 

Let us hear from the Ministry of Energy on the absence of power for the last one month in Amuru. They are not here.
Let us have the Ministry of Finance on micro-finance - you are not a minister; I am talking to the ministers. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We request make a statement here in that regard next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Let us now have civilians, starting with hon. Nandala.

3.15
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising is about power and roads in rural areas. We have been involved in getting money, basically from the World Bank, to finance rural electrification. But what has been happening is that they would give 70 percent and I think the community or government should contribute the 30 percent. 

Now, rural electrification means that the power would pass in rural areas. And that means people’s shambas, trees and others. I think that as people in rural areas who want power, they must make some form of contribution so that the lines are more because of the limited money they have. If you say that you are going to compensate people then it means that a two-kilometre line would become a one-kilometre line. I think government should engage the population so that they make an undertaking. Do you want electricity in all areas or only in a few areas? And there should be a contribution from the community in respect of where the lines are going to pass.

In our area, which I want to give as an example, we have power because we made an undertaking that where power lines pass, there should be no compensation. And that is why they say that Bugisu has a lot of lines; it is because we agreed –(Interjection)– I can tell you this; 

THE SPEAKER: Order, order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, they are talking of stealing; what about the big companies, which are here in Kampala, which are stealing power? The ones in the villages who are stealing power it is for bulbs, what about those who are stealing for generators and other things?

THE SPEAKER: Order, order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what I am trying to raise is that if we want rural electrification to expand, it is important that we the leaders of those areas talk to the wanainchi that they should give place for these power lines to pass so that they can have power.

Now, why is there stealing? I want to address myself to the stealing. Madam Speaker – (Interjection) - but hurry up – (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, what my brother has raised is very important but I want to inform him that what he is stating is not new. I remember when I contacted rural electrification and surveyed the area in Dokolo, we asked people to sign if they had agreed for the power to pass via their area. People signed and they did not demand for any compensation. This can be done in many parts of the country. As you stated, Members of Parliament can do it, but the only problem in his area is that there is a lot of illegal connections. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you state your problem. I see you do not know what the problem is. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to address the illegal connection. If you heard what hon. Ruth said, she talked about the reason they do not have power in some areas and people are not accepting the simple fact; I think UMEME right now looks for people to borrow money –(Interjections) - with UMEME, one must go there, fill in an application, and sit for a year. One must ask them to go and inspect their home while they have already paid the fees for surveying and installation of power.

Madam Speaker, you remember when we were passing a loan for small towns to access water. We said water comes from a source and on the way we should put standing pipes so that the wanainchi can protect that waterline. This is because if they do not drink it, they will cut it and it will not reach the town.  Some places were grey- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not understood what your issue is. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason they steal power is because- 

THE SPEAKER: Is it power or water? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can give you an example of an illegal connection; there is always a house and a pole erected in a compound. UMEME usually refuses to connect power and the people decide to take the matter into their own hands. (Laughter) 

We have asked UMEME to legalise power in places where people have made illegal connections and give them metres so that they can start paying for yaka. 

Madam Speaker, what they have done is not new. In Bugisu, there is no longer power theft. Power is being stolen in towns and industries; Kampala, Jinja, Gulu, Mbarara, and Kabale. However, in Mbale, there is no longer power theft. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.22
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. The famine, which has ravaged my constituency and the district at large, has caused other problems. 

First, people on ARVS have gone slow on taking their medication. They think that if they take the medication without food, they will die faster. 

Secondly, the next academic term of next year may not open. The prices of food stuffs are now sky rocketing. The price of posho currently ranges between Shs 2,500 and Shs 3,000. For next term to open, it means schools will have to hike school fees, which most parents may not be able to afford. I hope the Minister of Education and Sports is aware of this. 

Three, security; the rate at which people have started stealing food at night is high. In my constituency, a garden of cassava was uprooted at night and two gardens of sorghum were harvested at night. If you go there trying to guard them, be ready to face those people. I hope the Minister of Internal Affairs is ready to face the consequences.  

My prayer is that instead of us only relying on hon. Ecweru for the looming famine disaster, why don’t we have a multi-sectoral approach. This is because the famine has extended to other Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On that issue, honourable members, the other week, we had requested Government to come out with a joint strategy of agriculture, disaster, finance and trade to address the issue of famine and storage distribution. I hope the Prime Minister will bring that report before we go for Christmas.

I think I have answered the food query but he raised issues about the patients not having food and not taking drugs. I do not know whether the Minister of Health has anything to say about that. He is not here. 

MR KASIBANTE: I have a procedural point. 

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Sometime back, you made a directive to the effect that the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority should make a statement regarding the brutality made on street vendors. I can see the minister is now here and I wonder if it is not procedurally right for her to make the statement now. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, there is that outstanding issue. I think it has been on for the last fortnight; Minister for Kampala. 

MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (MS Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. All Ugandans are concerned about the issue of street vendors in Kampala. As managers of the city, we are working around the clock to make sure that we bring sanity to the city. 

However, the statement we promised to present to this House is not yet ready. Allow me to request for some time, at least two weeks, and let us come up with a comprehensive statement, which will be appreciated by all members of this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know these vendors are small people but they are Ugandans and they have rights. I do not know whether you should really postpone finding a solution. In two weeks, we shall be eating meat at Christmas. We need to talk about it before we close. You present this statement on Tuesday next week.

 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SITUATION IN KASESE DISTRICT

(Debate continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, on Tuesday, we had that extensive debate on the situation in Kasese. During the debate, a number of proposals were made but I want to observe as follows:

Since that debate, there have been new developments. The Rwenzururu King has been charged. Several other people have been arrested and probably others charged. Under our Rules of Procedure, a matter may be considered sub judice if it refers to active criminal court proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, discussion of such matters is likely to prejudice its fair determination. 

Of course, the issue of sub judice is in the discretion of the Speaker. One must weigh the public interest against the likely personal prejudice to the individuals involved in determining whether debate on the matter will prejudice fair determination. 

One, we have to put into consideration whether it is a civil or criminal matter and where the matter is criminal; the Speaker has to be more careful, especially where personal liberty of individuals is at stake. 

In our debate this week, there were those who proposed that we form a select committee; others proposed that we continue working with our sectoral committee. Relating to that, you may recall that in the Ninth Parliament, the House directed our committee to investigate the underlying causes for conflict in the Rwenzori Region. Unfortunately, the report was never debated by that Parliament.

This Tenth Parliament similarly directed a similar investigation. Indeed, the committee went out and interacted with several people in the region and main stakeholders and the report on their findings has not been presented to this House. 

I also recall that in the minister’s statement, there have been other inquiries, like the Kajura Commission. So, to me, setting up a select committee means that we must start from the beginning and re-interview the same people. We would be doing it like four times; the same group of people on the same issues, which I think may be counterproductive. However, I would like to urge the committee to complete their report because it was done on our behalf. Bring it here, Table it and debate it in such a way that you are not interfering with what is going on.

Secondly, I would like to propose that the Uganda Human Rights Commission takes up those areas of violation of human rights which have been alleged - the Uganda Human Rights Commission, to conduct investigations into those incidences which have been identified and then send a report to this House. I would also like to propose that it should be done as a special exercise. I know that they have some other work they are doing for the country, but I thought that they should do it as a fresh exercise for this House.

We would like to send out a message to the people of Kasese, that we are taking their issue seriously and that we are continuing to look for ways of minimising those incidences. We also would like to appeal that the institutions in charge of the arrested persons should work through the due processes available, so that justice prevails. We also would like to ask the citizens to remain calm and remain law abiding in order to give the investigating agencies and courts, an opportunity to carry out their work.

We also would like to appeal to people using social media to be more responsible because they are causing a lot of pain and havoc, among the citizens. We would like to agree that there should not be more inflammation of this situation. So, that is the difficulty we are finding ourselves in; how do we discuss this matter without interfering with what is going on. That is what I had in mind, honourable members.

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: Madam Speaker, following what you have just communicated, is the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs going back to Kasese to follow what has just taken place or they will simply give us the old report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it will be difficult to go back to the same people, on the same issue – I think let us receive their report because we do not know what is in their report. Let us find out what is therein and if there are gaps, we can then look at how to address them. Telling the committee to go back before they have reported – I do not know. We would get their report in its present form and see if there are gaps. 

3.33
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for your wise observation. However, I am at a loss because, if you direct the Uganda Human Rights Commission to investigate the matters that happened last week, Article 54 of the Constitution gives the commission absolute independence from many directions or control of any person or authority. How fast can we have the report of the Human Rights Commission in view of that provision?

Secondly, at least it is clear that the charges that have been preferred against the king of Rwenzururu relate to the events that happened in March, not to the events of last week. If Parliament shies away from particularly addressing the events of last week, which in some quarters are being labelled to be a genocide, a massacre of a kind, it would be an abdication from our responsibility.

If it is in your wisdom that the committee can do a job, the basic to me would have been to direct it to also include, matters of last week and get a specific timeline, so that this matter is not buried under the carpet.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the first issue, the Human Rights Commission reports to this House. What constitutional provision stops one from requesting for help in this area? I simply want their help; I am not directing them on how to rule or how to report. But I am just saying that, can you go and address this one urgently? What is wrong with that?

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee to which I belong is the Committee of Defence. Yesterday, we sat and looked at the report of Kasese, and as a committee, we identified that, around 70 percent of our report has already been overtaken by events – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are violating the rule against anticipation.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, please take your seat.

3.36
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for your guidance. However, I am having a problem. The matter of Kasese that happened last week raised a lot of concern to this Parliament and the entire country; the incident that happened in the palace, involved 120 people being killed and heaped together. 

On Tuesday, Parliament extensively discussed this matter and several proposals were laid before this House. It would not be okay for this Parliament to extensively debate the matter, come to almost a conclusion and then leave it hanging, and yet the situation down there is still not very clear.

It is important that as Parliament, we come out with a clear position and a way forward. First of all, the matter in court has not been delivered to Parliament; we do not have the real charges that have been preferred on the king. And the matter we are discussing here is not actually concerning the king. We are discussing a matter where over 170 people have died and the situation there is now bad. As Parliament, how do we intervene in this matter to arbitrate? We are the arbitrators in here; between the Executive and the people. So, we as arbitrators must come in the middle of the whole thing and try to act.

Your advice is okay but I would like to earnestly and humbly request, that let Parliament soberly – I think this matter, as we stated on Tuesday, it is a very important matter that we must handle with a sober state of mind, so that we bring peace in that area.

If it happens again, and they say that Parliament said no, that they cannot act and more people die, it will be actually the fault of this House. I, therefore, would like to appeal to this House that let us soberly discuss this matter and come up with a conclusion. I for one, I am not thinking of going through the causes, I just want the incident – because we have been having different information. What really happened on that day when those people were killed? What really happened? The minister is saying something else and the people from Kasese are also saying something different. We need to discover a middle ground, so that Parliament gets a clear report on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Now, we are not saying that we are not going to discuss the matter. My difficulty is that we have a report of a committee, which has not come, about that situation and its causes. 

Do we leave it without discussion? What happens to the report of this House? We instructed them to do the work. We either throw it away - but that is not in our rules. We cannot just throw it away. I was suggesting that they complete, bring the report and then we discuss it and close the matter.

3.32
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am equally contended by your guidance that we could hold to receive the report of the committee because it could contain some details about the causes of the conflict.

However, the dilemma, Madam Speaker, is that we are debating as if the conflict is now waiting for what comes from Parliament. The recent information I have from Kasese is that the conflict is metamorphosing into a different turn altogether.

We will appreciate the uniqueness of Kasese; politically, Kasese is one of the few districts fully represented by FDC. However, Madam Speaker, the current situation in Kasese is that the NRM supporters are in danger -(Interjection)- please listen to me. I am giving you fresh information from Kasese. There is an assumption that the NRM supporters are part of the anti- Obusinga group and, therefore, they are being seen as part of the cause of the suffering of the King of Rwenzururu.

There was hope that he would be given bail but it has not been possible. He will stay incarcerated until when he is given bail.

The current situation is that NRM people especially the leaders are worried. After the burials have taken place - the people of Kasese are burying their people from either side; it is them who largely died. Now after the burials there are statements coming through that there is a big problem among them; some people are being seen as traitors for not protecting their king.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with you; much as Parliament can wait for the committee to present its report and then we take a position, we could take a position now to arrest the current situation so that we contain the potential outburst.

THE SPEAKER: In what way? Can you propose? We want the situation to be good and so that our people have a good Christmas.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, we can think of many ways, but first, we could encourage the leaders of Kasese to lead the way in the peaceful coexistence or pacification of Kasese to avoid the inter people conflict especially. They should largely desist from discussing it with political sentiments. The more they make it political, the more they alienate the other groups. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for the guidance that you have given us on the Kasese issue.

My take is that it is very important for us to note that in Uganda, we have security. We have leadership and security that has a system. We are going to talk here as Parliament and come up with resolutions but we need the backing of security in Kasese.

At the time when the wounds are still fresh, it is very dangerous for Parliament and especially the leaders from Kasese to continue talking a lot about this issue. We are talking here, but these people are at burial; we are creating more dilemma.

I suggest that we leave this matter for security to handle; the security situation in Kasese then as Parliament -(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that Government continues to speak about this matter. Felix Kaweesi was this morning on television and radio talking about it. We have said that there is a falsehood that has been reported about Kasese. 

Is it, therefore, in order that Government continues to speak about the matter accusing even the leaders and then you expect the leaders not to give a response on the falsehoods that are being alleged about the people and the leaders? Is he in order to say that we should keep quiet?

THE SPEAKER: No. I think he said that he wanted you to go and talk in a more reconciliatory manner. I was not aware about what Kaweesi is saying. I rarely listen to the radios.  Please conclude but let us have some real solutions.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, thank you for the wise guidance. I am not Government; I am the honourable member from Bukooli Central and I do not speak on behalf of Government.

What I am saying is that we the leaders should desist from making heated debates, inciting people and talking about many things. Let the wounds first heal and when they have healed, we shall come back here to this same Parliament, listen to the report from the committee of defence and then we come up with logical conclusions.

However, the moment we continue talking about this and that, we are not going to come up with a solution in this hot moment. Tempers are very high; everybody is hearing Kasese and it is becoming too much now. 

I humbly request that this Parliament makes a decision, we first put the matter to rest and the committee goes ahead and does its work then we shall come and debate after the report of the committee has been presented to this House. I rest my case.

3.50
MR SSEMAKULA LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, circumstances have changed in Kasese, therefore, we cannot debate an old report. It is better we constitute a select committee to reinvestigate the situation so that we can come up with a clear report. Thank you.

3.51
MS BEATRICE ANWYAR (Independent, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following what has happened in Kasese, as leaders of this House, I pray that we tow the middle line. Leaders from Kasese early this week came crying in this House and we debated the issue but we have not concluded.

Today, I heard a colleague say that another section of people is in danger. Literally, everybody in Kasese is insecure. My humble proposal is that we give chance to dialogue. We should encourage the leaders and elders from Kasese and Government to start sitting down and talk about what is happening and chat a way forward.

We would like to see people encouraged. If Members in this House can even point fingers at each other, that is a pain to me. The leaders from Kasese are also crying with their people. We are also crying with them as a country. They are already angry and at a loss. 

It is our duty to make peace and encourage these people to talk in a tone of reconciliation to their people. As for now, they are traumatized. They are not in their real senses. Now for us to keep on adding salt does not add up.

As a House, I would want us to resolve that peace talking start therein. We involve the leadership, the elders and Government. Let them come to the table and this is what happened in Northern Uganda. As much as people wanted to show gun power; talks did the work, this is my humble submission.

3.53
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I believe that all our hearts are with the people of Kasese following what happened to them. It was not only for the people of Kasese but for the entire country. 

Madam Speaker, at this critical time when some bodies are not yet buried and some are yet to be buried, the tension is really high. My humble request is that we should be very sober and also very considerate.

As for our political leaders in that region and to Government we as leaders of Parliament, our role is to ensure that there is peace and calmness in Kasese; but how to achieve it is the million dollar question.

All of us are very concerned about what happened and the solution lies in our hands. First and foremost, arresting Mumbere and other people and the killing many people cannot solve the issues in Kasese.

Madam Speaker, let us request for assistance from our leaders especially the inter-religious council. People from Kasese belong to various religious denominations and I think that is a unifying factor. 

Let us put our political parties aside and get people who can come in and see how best we can move. If the Government or the spokesperson speaking on behalf of Government is not towing the line of peace and reconciliation, do not expect others to do so. 

In as much as we appeal to our local leaders in Kasese we must also request the Government to listen and also ensure that whatever statement they make does not add insult to injury. Let them also walk the talk. If there is need for reconciliation, how is it going to be achieved?

Madam Speaker, all of us who come from institutions where we cherish our cultural leaders - I cannot imagine a situation, as I am speaking now, when the king of Buganda is in prison! I cannot stomach it.

These cultural institutions cut across – definitely, the tension in Kasese is high. As hon. Abbas Agaba, has said that people were expecting Mumbere to go back so that we can start from there. 

I request that if we are to move ahead, let the Government which is in charge of what is going on, as far as the arrest of Mumbere is concerned bow down, swallow our pride and say: “Yes, we have committed mistakes from either side, now this is the way forward; let Mumbere be released and then we start on the reconciliation and forget the past”. 

3.57
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Like we said the situation in Kasese is still very bad. I saw on TV women crying that they do not know the whereabouts of their husbands; they last saw them on Friday at the same place where they were releasing the bodies of the police officers who died, however, the civilians who died are nowhere to be seen.

In the circumstances, rather than telling leaders to keep quiet - I was interacting with the leaders of Kasese and they were saying that they cannot talk if the king is still in prison. I also heard that from the people from Kasese.

I would rather recommend that the king be released, maybe on bail, so that talks can begin, then we can talk about peace when he is at his palace. Otherwise, we are going to pretend that things are well, but the strife will happen again. 

And when it happens again, we will come here and talk and start regretting. Madam Speaker, I would propose that we recommend to Government that the king be given bail so that talks can begin – (Interruption) 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, hon. Frances Mwijukye for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information. One, Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under the functions of Parliament says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, we have heard that the leaders of Kasese whom we know were elected have a certain view on this matter. They are exuding pain, they feel dejected, and they feel left out. 

On the other hand, we have statements from the security organisation trying to explain their position on the matter. But more so, we are tending to have a view especially in this House as though it is a matter between the ruling political party and the people of Kasese. That is making Parliament miss the point. 

Honourable members of Parliament, I would like to enjoin you to look at the people of Kasese as Ugandans; to look at the people of Kasese as possible supporters of the NRM; to look at the people of Kasese as a responsibility of this Parliament.

So as we discuss this matter, let us look for a solution that is not based on solving a political equation; a solution that will bring back peace, stability, tranquillity and unity amongst the people of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should desist from creating impressions; we have not done any other work this week because we said the issue of Kasese is important. It is not about parties; it is because those are citizens of this country. What I have been appealing to you since Tuesday is that can we find a way forward which will help our people. 

4.01
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My dear honourable members, the point at which we have reached concerning Kasese is very critical. 

I would like to tell this House that I am speaking from experience because we experienced such bitter circumstance. Honourable members, the bullets in Kasese did not discriminate anybody, whether you are from NRM or the Opposition, they were all killed. 

My appeal to everybody is to know that the pain of Kasese is very strong. It is not only in Kasese because we also lost somebody from West Nile. That means it is a national affair. We do not know what it takes to release somebody who has already been charged. I request all the leaders, starting from the Members of Parliament from that region up to the level of the LCs that we need to put our heads together to get a humble way of handling this issue.

First and foremost, let us leave all other issues that we came across before. Let us see how we can come together and help stop the possibilities of having such issues again. I request that all Members of Parliament and other leaders should help us seek a peaceful resolution by putting aside their differences. Let the LC5 chairperson and other leaders come on board so that we join hands and handle these issues amicably. 

The issue of releasing the king may delay a bit, but this is a situation where women are suffering and it is not good. For example, the social media was awash with pictures of naked women, which we are not happy about. I am happy that the Minister in charge of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) is here. Let us see how information can be taken to ICT so that we get the real information. 

The social media has amplified everything. It has put people on tension. We are requesting the minister to look into that issue. It is not only that issue, but also other issues on social media have always caused problems. If we do not control it, I see very big problems in the near future. Please, Minister in charge of ICT, come to our rescue. Our Members of Parliament from -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether there is an equivalent law of subjudice in the Executive so that the inflammatory statements from the security agencies can also stop. The Attorney-General is not here. I do not know who can help us. This is because if one side continues to punch, what will happen is not good?

MS DRIWARU: To conclude, Madam Speaker, –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, the honourable member had allowed me to give information.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Nzoghu.

MS DRIWARU: To conclude, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Honourable member, you had given me a chance to give you information. 

MS DRIWARU: You played. (Laughter) Allow me to finish. Madam Speaker, I therefore support the idea that the committee continues with the investigations, only that we add them more terms of reference on top of what they were supposed to do. These things happened when they were there. They know the details and already have benchmarks on where to start. They interviewed key persons, only that there are particular issues that we are going to add to what they already did. Thank you.

4.06
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I will briefly speak about three matters. One is that when the minister was making his statement on Tuesday, I did not get the feeling that we are a country at war with itself. I carefully read his statement, trying to make a trace as to whether we are a country at war and I did not see it. 

The reason why a lot of information is all over the place – truths or lies – is because the first victim in that kind of situation before even anybody died was the truth. When the truth became the first victim, it became an avalanche of whoever can pick a picture or information to put on social media. Why I am bringing this is that at this stage, when the community and the most affected lives are in fear and suspicion, we need a mechanism of telling the truth. 

Madam Speaker, on Tuesday the minister was clearly not sure as to how many people actually died. He gave an indication, but later on, you could clearly see that he was not sure. 

Secondly, up to now, we are not sure as to how many people are in custody. As we speak, we are picking information from Kasese about reprisal arrests. These could translate into, again, reprisal killings. Therefore, we are talking about a mystery of the truth and this can be problematic. 

I can only implore the state. Members speak about the Government not knowing that they are also speaking about Parliament. I am very particular that the state and its apparatus have a duty to facilitate a mechanism of giving the country the truth. This is because, right now, everybody seems to be at liberty to tell the country whatever information they have. We have pictures on social media. 

I am very sure nobody has stripped anybody naked and have their pictures paraded on social media. We are in a state of darkness. We do not seem to have the right information at the right time and, therefore, everybody is free to speculate whatever their interests are. Are we able to compel the state apparatus to tell the country the truth?

Madam Speaker, this morning, one of the spokespersons of a state agency referred to sections of the people of Kasese as “bandits”. That is where you run into danger. This is because while a clarion call is out for making peace, there should not be another section of society that thinks that these are bandits and necessary bandits must be vanquished. That is dangerous.

Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, we had almost moved. This is because where we have counter-accusations, the only possible remedy is to have a neutral arbiter in this matter to try and bring potentially warring parties together. One of the neutral parties is actually Parliament. Where people are accusing the state of genocide, it will be dangerous to expect the state to give us information and come and report to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we do not yet know officially the extent of what the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has done, in lieu of the eventual activities of last week. Last week, we had almost moved to the centre to suggest that on top of that job done by that committee, Parliament being an independent arbiter in this matter can have its own committee to work with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to try and particularly work out these issues of the last few days. These activities seem to be the missing link in having a complete report.

Madam Speaker, I pray that as a way forward, Parliament having taken this matter by its horns must actually move to complete it. I agree with you that we have not done any job in this Parliament apart from trying to find a solution to this problem and we should not in any way be deterred from going to its conclusion. I am very sure that this House is in position to stand between the state and the people of Kasese. The people of Kasese believe that the state is haunting them. 

Somehow as a House of Representatives, we must be able to assure them that we care, and therefore while you believe the state does not care, we should try and listen and give unedited truth about what happened so that we are able to report to the country as a Parliament of the people.

4.13
COL (RTD.) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with hon. Mpuuga that as Parliament, we should be seen to carry out our responsibility. We should not be shy.

The situation in Kasese has been going on and that is why in its wisdom, Parliament tasked the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to carry out investigations; the committee should present its findings. Maybe during the course of the debate, other issues could be handled. 

Madam Speaker, the Constitution mandates all of us under National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, in III National Unity and Stability: “(i)All organs of state and the people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability”. It is our duty as a Parliament. It goes further to say: “(iii) Everything shall be done to promote a culture of cooperation, understanding, appreciation, tolerance and respect for each other’s customs, traditions and beliefs”. 

It is our responsibility as Parliament of Uganda to stand firm, speak the truth and provide direction to this country. Therefore, the committee should do its duty and report to this House so that we can finalise this matter and we take a clear position as Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Col. Mwesigye, are you proposing that they defer their presentation – should they go and address the recent issues before they report?

COL. MWESIGYE: Yes, Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, my very good friend Col. Mwesigye for your submission.

Madam Speaker, the committee in question, Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs, has had extensive interactions with our king, the leaders and our community. 

Madam Speaker, I remember when my colleagues - the other five Members of Parliament were in Kampala, I was in the village and my colleagues requested me to find time for the committee. On that day, I was burying my aunt but again I had to create some time to drive to Kasese –(Interjections)- I am bringing the point of order. This is what I heard from the chairperson of the committee. We gave them the build-up to all of this and we said - but the chairperson said, “You are pure mongers.” 

Madam Speaker, my point of order is, is it order for Col. Mwesigye –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, you are also violating the rule against anticipation. You are now telling us what transpired in the committee. They have not reported. You cannot talk about what you discussed with the committee until you have reported.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much for your wise ruling but what I am trying to say is that we have had the committee before. I think the committee requires some further reinforcements in a form of a select committee. That should not be ignored. Thank you very much.

4.17
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The fact that these issues were debated on Tuesday, and you tried to give guidance when we were commencing to discuss this issue - I would like to propose that as a Parliament, we are bound to come up with concrete resolution that the public and the whole country can look up to. For example, what steps is Parliament taking to address the issue at hand – the Kasese issue.

When addressing the issue of Kasese, it is not necessarily Kasese alone because it has a huge impact on the entire country and the entire region - the East African community and as a tourist destination.

Madam Speaker, as an action point, I would like to urge   Parliament to come up with an ad hoc committee that can be put in place by the Speaker - (Applause). 

The terms of reference and the time frame should be given on when this committee should report to this House. Later, the ad hoc committee will at the end merge with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs report so that we can have a comprehensive presentation to this Parliament in order to come up with the action points. I beg to move.

4.19
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, first of all, as a Member of Parliament coming from the mother Kingdom of Bunyoro –(Interjections)- read your history – Madam Speaker, what is happening to us who cherish our cultural institutions – we do not want to be reminded of how Amin was sent by Obote under the guise of a Republican to attack Buganda Kingdom. We do not want the NRM Government, which I support to send the same message to the cultural institutions that the Kyabazinga of Busoga, the Omukama of Bunyoro and the Kabaka of Buganda can tomorrow be attacked in the same way. I do not want us to make Obote and Amin heroes under these circumstances. 

If we wish, we could even have the Mumbere under house arrest in his palace. We can even do that if we have the will to negotiate. If it is not about the powerful and weak, if we are not looking at it as if Man-U is winning Arsenal, it is much more than that. We cannot continue militarising political questions. Whatever steps happened in Kasese and those dead bodies, it is about militarising political questions. We have done it for many years but we have not succeeded. Political questions must be solved as political questions.

Madam Speaker, to our committees, I am a strong supporter of functional committees. Can we make our committees relevant? In the last Parliament, the committee did not present that report and in this Parliament, it has not. We were here on Tuesday. Yesterday, there was no business at Parliament. What stops a committee from expressly requesting a place on the Order Paper to present the old report? 

Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this Parliament, you directed to save all the old work? Nothing stops the leadership of that committee from presenting those findings. It is because I know the grey area. There are problems which are not mentioned by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Members of Parliament from Kasese. These include issues of land, marginalisation and power which are not being mentioned here, and yet they are in that report.

I wouldn’t want a scenario where we continue saying ad hoc or select committees; that means a vote of no confidence in this sessional committee. Let us mandate our committees and allow them bring their reports. Why would members go to the field, burn night candles and make reports which will never see the lights?

The Kingdom of Bunyoro - Chairman Biriga who is now in exile and I were one time framed and accused of rebellion in Bunyoro. I am happy, by divine intervention, I was not taken to Luzira, but my brother is in exile. However, there was no rebellion in Bunyoro. A select committee developed by the Speaker on the Balaalo was put in place. We have never seen the report of the Balaalo. The whole country moved around –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my brother for giving way. The reason why you never got the report of the Balaalo was because the chairperson also became a Mulaalo. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, my proposal is that we should demand that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs uses its mandate to present on the floor the old report saved from last Parliament and the new one in view of the recent events. What are the interim proposals by the committee for when Government can do it immediately? 

Therefore, my appeal to Government is to let the Mumbere be put under house arrest in his palace as we negotiate and find a solution. Thank you so much. 

4.25
MR JACOB OBOTH OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate whether to have a select committee or use our committees is a debate that requires us to ask again, Are they both committees of Parliament? Are they going to be comprised of Members of this same Parliament? If the answer to both questions is in the affirmative, I would go with the existing committee then –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have our Rules of Procedure and when the committee was making them, one of the persons on that committee was hon. Oboth. Why did he choose some to be called select committees, standing committees and others sessional committees? Is he, therefore, in order to come and tell us that a select committee is the same as a sessional committee?

Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament sit on the select, ad hoc and other committees. However, we have select committees for specific functions. Therefore, is my brother in order since Kasese is a serious matter, to say that the existing Committee on Human Rights should continue when we are saying we need a select committee to do this specific activity?

THE SPEAKER: He is in order to propose because some work has been done by that committee. That is as well our problem. What do we do with their work? Please conclude.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I have no doubt in my mind that I was making a proposal. 

Madam Speaker, we are faced with a very difficult question. A colleague debated here and asked what this Parliament can do in the circumstances to appear we are dispensing justice for the people of Kasese –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I didn’t want to interrupt my friend, but all the same it is very important. We have just formed a select committee to investigate UTL. Are we saying investigating UTL is more important than doing things that concern lives in Kasese?

The second point of clarification I would like to make is that this committee of Parliament, I understand, is chaired by hon. Nabakooba, who was the Spokesperson of the police. Now, the investigation that we are going to have –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Judith Nabakooba is a Member of Parliament like any of us here. Before she joined Parliament, she resigned from the Uganda Police Force. Therefore, she is no longer a member of the Uganda Police Force. If you look at all of us, before we came here, we worked somewhere else. 

Is hon. Okot Ogong in order to victimise hon. Nabakooba by relating that because she was with the Uganda Police Force, she is also going to work in the interest of the Uganda Police Force? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, since he has not substantiated, he is out of order. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am not contesting, but I was seeking clarification from hon. Oboth. I wanted him to give me clarification. I was not actually talking about hon. Judith Nabakooba; I was asking hon. Oboth. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I am happy to give you clarification using my own example. I worked with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for so many years. I am chairing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Let us work out the conclusion to this matter.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this is Parliament of Uganda and whatever we say or do here can be set into a rule. If we say, as Members of Parliament, we have biases from the places that we worked before, then let it be on the record that anything that comes, you must declare your interest and show whether you can be compromised or let personal issues override national issues and this is my humble view to colleagues. We can have a back and forth argument, but are we asking ourselves what this House can do even when the select committee is set up? This is a matter under rule 64 of our Rules of Procedure, on sub-judice; we do not know to what extent we can be of help in this matter – and I feel for the king that he finds himself in prison. How I hate to think that that is true!  

However, supposing we come to terms that it is true, this Parliament can send a strong message to the Government or state. What is our limit as Parliament on matters which are before court? Shall we apply selective justice? What will court think of us if they have remanded Oboth and Parliament debates that I should be released? It is painful. I feel for my brothers from Kasese. 

I do not want to imagine his highness, Kwaradhola of the Japadhola in Luzira prison. I would speak and act the same way. Brothers from Kasese, I understand the pain that you are in, but we have a reconciliation that we have to make not only with our minds but also with facts on the ground.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us go to the question of a sectoral committee, select committee or - let us look at those areas.

4.34
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you, Madam Speaker. On the question of the way forward, let me borrow the words of Jesus in the Bible. In John 20:19, after resurrection, the first words spoken by Jesus were “Peace be with you.” That is where I would like to start from. That even to those who participated in cutting my clan brother, a member of the Uganda Police Force, may peace be with them and I say that in good faith.

Madam speaker, on the question of the way forward, first of all, this Parliament tasked the sectoral committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. They have done some work pending presentation. This is my humble appeal to honourable members, why don’t we accept that this same committee be tasked by this Parliament within a set timeframe to go back to Kasese, investigate the recent event, incorporate it into its earlier report and the committee makes a comprehensive report? The question is about tasking them and setting for them a timeframe.

Madam Speaker, through your Chair, you can even task the committee to move to Kasese next week or even tomorrow. The question of the timeframe is very important. However, to the leaders, may I say this; from a point of experience, Lango, from where I come from had such a crisis: but the political, cultural and religious leaders took it upon themselves to preach peace. Lango would not be at peace up to now.

If the leaders from Kasese could borrow this - it has happened before. This is what I am saying in good faith. It has happened and it is not only Kasese that is mourning. Lango and my clan are also mourning, but we must get a way forward. In order for us to move as a country and for me to meet a leader from Kasese and I see him as a Uganda like me and not to see him as somebody in whose area my brother was slaughtered –(Interjections)– no, this is my humble appeal to my brothers and sisters the leaders from Kasese. I say this in good faith. May peace be with you.

4.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I associate myself fully with the submission of my brother hon. Obua that we empower our committee to go back, task it with specific tasks and time and then they report back. We are dealing with a historical problem. The committee went and did thorough investigations and I believe they would be in a position to understand the current happenings better having the historical background and the findings they came up with. I also believe that receiving their findings would help us in coming up with the proper solutions. 

Madam Speaker, it is very important that we empower existing institutions. For example, the Uganda Human Right Commission has the mandate to sensitise our people about their civic duties and responsibilities. Why would any right thinking Ugandan shoot at police on duty? However, these people have been misled by a political opportunist and our people are misbehaving because they do not have the right information-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please do not go into the evidence of what happened or did not happen. Do not talk about what happened, who did what and who did not do what. Just let us agree on the principles of way forward. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way forward is that we also think in solving-(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, it is a pity; we are here to ensure that the area Rwenzori regains peace. It is crystal clear that it is the police and the army who attacked the palace -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are also going into the evidence now. 

MR NZOGHU: Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable member to lie to the people of Uganda that it is the royal guards who provoke police and the army when it is the army and police that attacked the palace?

THE SPEAKER: That is a matter still under investigation.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the solutions we must come up with is that we empower the Uganda Human Rights Commission to carry out teaching and sensitisation about our people so that they know about their duties and responsibilities. For example, when you take arms to fight any one you are an enemy of the state because if you hold a weapon intending to kill another Ugandan, then you are an enemy of the state and you will be responsible for the consequences.

I do appreciate the situation that we are in, Madam Speaker, but it takes two to tango. Therefore, as leaders, we must be committed to bringing peace not only in the Rwenzori but in all parts of Uganda. We are taking advantage of our people not knowing their rights and responsibilities to fellow citizens and to the state. Therefore, it is of paramount importance that we do carry out this kind of sensitisation so that we can create harmony in our communities-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please can you focus on the strategy? Those are long term issues. What do we do? That is what I would like to hear now.

4.43
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not a good time to point fingers nor is it a time for trading accusations.

What is not in dispute or contestation is that we all need an inquiry devoid of any vested interests. We need an inquiry that will address our collective and civilised duty of upholding the rights of the victims.

I recall during the Tuesday deliberations, a decent burial was proposed. But what could have been an oversight - because this was a disaster that did not require any discrimination. It would have been an olive branch on the part of Government to accord a decent burial to all. Actually, the Government should have met the burial expenses on both sides. This was an omission. 

Whenever we commence our proceedings in this House, we pray. My other proposal, therefore, is that the Kasese skirmishes require spiritual intervention to exorcise the looming spirit of genocide. 

As a God-fearing man, I would propose involvement of the Inter Religious Council of Uganda. We have held prayer breakfasts but this one pertaining to the loss of our dear beloved Ugandans – it would be good for this House to participate in a prayer meeting.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Christian and in the Bible, God gave man an order to go fill the earth and rule over it. Therefore, we cannot abdicate that right given to man by God.

As a student of History, I know that in every event that occurs, there are two factors. The first is underlying factors and the other is immediate factors or causes. This has occurred and God ordered man to rule over earth and yet, some honourable member is saying that Parliament should stop at what it is and ask God to intervene.

Madam Speaker, Parliament is an authority. There is no better authority positioned than Parliament to solve this matter.

Is it in order, therefore, for aN honourable member to propose that we only ask God to intervene and Parliament cannot do anything?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you want to deny the role of God when we pray here every day at the start of our proceedings. We have even provided a mosque and churches at Parliament. Please, do not interfere with God. (Applause)(Mr Centenary rose_) 

What is the problem, hon. Centenary?

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me share the problem.

With all due respect, Members did guide that the local leaders from Kasese should be at the forefront of preaching peace, restoration of peace and stability in Kasese.

The main purpose for us to go and have an inquiry into this matter is to restore calm, peace and unity so that we can achieve steady progress as it has been said.
I do not want us to constitute a committee for the sake of it. Can we have a select committee that is going to be listened to by everyone so that when they bring the report here, it is debated in good faith? 

I do not see a problem with constituting a select committee because at the end of it all, if we are already disagreeing on who should go and investigate the matter, it means that we do not have the will to solve the problem.

Let us agree - after all, it is not leaders from Kasese that constitute the select committee; it is still the mandate of Parliament to constitute that select committee. That is my guidance as a leader from Kasese.

4.50
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that we are dealing with a historical problem and successive governments have attempted solutions to that problem. 

We may not get into the details but what we know is that there have been mistakes on both sides. There have been mistakes around the palace and on the side of Government.

The information we are getting from Kasese at the moment is that the Bakonzo are being targeted because they did not vote for NRM – that is the popular opinion.

The other opinion is that the Government has done away with the Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu. The arrest of the king is not helping in any way to bring about peace in the area. It is just galvanizing the people around their king who has been arrested.

We first of all need immediate solutions in the short run - an olive branch - which sends a message that there is a change of heart. Unfortunately, I have not heard much from my colleagues who are leaders in the area other than on insisting on the select committee.     

I think we need immediately the Government to clarify on the status of the Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu at the moment. 

The second important point is to have some interim committee partly led by the Government and leaders from that area so that they can start talking. What is most important about this is that the core around the negotiation must have the participation of the king. Otherwise, it will be very difficult to move forward on that.

The last point on this is that because we are dealing with a historical problem, we need the facts. I believe we already have facts from the ground, which must be in the report of the committee, which investigated the matter. What we need – what I am hearing from my colleagues on the other side is that we should have those facts laid on the Table and we debate them. 

If there is anything we are not satisfied with in that report, there is the option of a member from the committee to come up with a minority report, which brings out issues that may not have featured in the main report. 

So, in my opinion, we need interim action, which sends a message that there is actually a change of heart; that the Government is no longer taking things in terms of the military means to solve a problem, which seems not entirely religious but very much based on convictions, which can be compared to religious beliefs. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before the minister comes, honourable members, supposing we augmented the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with some additional four members, would that make you happy - [Members: Yes] – we augment them with four other Members - from Human Rights?

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the proposal that you have put forward of having the committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – 

THE SPEAKER: Defence and Internal Affairs and we augment them with some additional Members. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we want to set a good starting point for this Parliament. I wish we had not reached this level of choosing between the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs or a select committee. Now that we have reached there, there is a concern from the area Members where the problem is. I do not want us to take a proposal, which they do not trust or doubt. That will set a bad trend; that is why I said, I wish we had not gone into this choice. 

If we go with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs where we have reached now, then we would be starting from a different page. That is why I jumped up when I heard you say that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – may be that will be comfortable for the area Members and then we augment that with a few other Members. That way, we will be able to work on it – if Members are not comfortable with a select committee. Although, as I started earlier on Tuesday that a select committee would have been the best – where people do not have mistrust; after all they are again Members of this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know it is the responsibility of the Speaker to protect the work of this House. So, she cannot be the one to say, “I think you are not good enough, therefore, let me remove your work from you”, I think that is not right – Hon. Mukitale, you spoke; let us have hon. Oguzu and then the minister.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, on augmenting a very important point –(Interruption)

4.57
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I know he is a senior member but I also have right to speak on this Floor. I have keenly listened to Members contribute on how to bring a logical end to this problem. There are both short and long term solutions needed to avert further escalation of violence in the region. 

I think the most immediate thing to do is for Government to show good intentions and gesture if peace as expressed by majority of my colleagues is to be achieved. So, how should Government show a good gesture? In the media, we already see a lot of incriminatory statements made by the Government side. There are people being called bandits, terrorists and all sorts of names. I think that must stop. 

Secondly, the king is like the beacon of hope in that region and nobody would want to negotiate when their King is in jail. It is like talking peace with another country when our President is in jail. Would that happen anywhere in Uganda?  It just cannot happen. 

So, for me the solution lies in Parliament directing that all Government and state agencies making inflammatory statements must stop immediately. And the second thing is that Government must consider extending an olive branch – the king must be released unconditionally. I do not know how they can legally execute it. (Laughter) I do not know how that will be legally executed in the interest of peace. And then the talks can start after that. If that is not going to happen, then I am worried there may not be anyone from that region to talk peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot sit here and direct the courts. Honourable minister, please, let us conclude. 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, we ended the sitting with a statement of peace and dialogue. As hon. Jovah Kamateeka has said, this has been a historical issue. In the previous Parliament, this matter was investigated and the report was saved. 

When we came in the Tenth Parliament, we gave a special assignment to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and they did some good work. We are still waiting for it. Then some unfortunate events happened on Friday and Saturday and they are going on up to now. On Tuesday, we had different arguments from both sides and I do not think it is proper for the people of Kasese to put this issue to a vote. We should resolve this amicably. 

When we left, we decided to think about it and you, Madam Speaker, the head of this House, have guided that we debate the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. In addition, we can add two or three or five people to look at the events of Friday and Saturday, which were not in the report because this happened when the report was already done. 

Madam Speaker, can we leave this in your hands to guide this House and we conclude this matter? Thank you. 

4.01
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is no doubt that the sessional committee is doing their work for Parliament. They had a task and they must report back. Let us not hide our heads in the sand. Something of a big national nature has happened that makes our colleagues the representatives of that area say, “No,we shall not be happy; we shall not be satisfied with a sessional committee report.” 

Mr Speaker, if we just get two or three other Members and put them on that committee, I see some little bit of practical challenge in terms of management, mistrust. I wanted to propose that instead of one side winning and the other one feeling bad, can we attempt to have a win-win solution? That the sessional committee continues, finalise and presents its report as per the terms of reference it was given. 

Secondly, let us set up a select committee specifically for the events that happened last week – (Interjections)– Members, let us listen to each other. That committee is not delving into the work of the other committee and that both committees make recommendations because at the end of the day, it is this Parliament that decides. That they do report and we take a decision together.
Madam Speaker, I feel that this way we shall not disrespect our own committee which we set up. But we shall also take into account the fact that the events of last week deserve some special and quick investigation. Thank you.

5.04
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a different view because this Parliament is bogging itself down with things that have a very long history and we shall never debate this issue conclusively.

First, the Rwenzururu matter started in Bundibugyo; it moved to Bunyangabo, which is in Kabarole District; it came to Burahya to my constituency. Even last week, there were attacks in Burahya County in Nyabuso. So, when we are talking about Kasese without thinking about any other place where these things have been happening, we are not looking at the root cause of the problem. 

I have met leaders in my constituency who are on the mountain area. I have talked to them out of carrying pangas and spears to fight the Police and the Army. In this House, I have never heard anyone condemning the militia for killing the Army personnel. I have never heard anyone condemning the militia for killing the police personnel. All of us are simply talking about – (Interruption)

MS KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I am a man and I think if I were not to be one, probably I would have broken down. Madam Speaker, you are the ultimate leader of this House. Colleagues, you have been here and you listen because at least we communicate using a language all of us understand – English. We are here, six Members of Parliament from Kasese; you have heard none of us promote violence. 

As we speak now, I got a call in the morning that some of our brothers and sisters from the NRM side were trying to own up by saying that: “We have humiliated their king and we have murdered them.” And our supporters, especially the FDC ones, said, “Can we do something?” But we said, “You cannot do it; we are one and we love our country. You cannot begin retaliating.” And that is the message that we have been giving out there. And if that was not the case, Madam Speaker, there would be blood all over Kasese.

So, Madam Speaker, is my honourable sister in order to insinuate that it is we, the leaders, promoting the violence and have never tried to bring about peace in this particular situation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the tensions in the different areas is the work of the police – the Minister of Internal Affairs; he will address it. I do not think we can do it here, as a House. But on the other one of not condemning killing of police – honourable member, you have a right to come to me and say, “I have a matter that I would like you to put on the Order Paper.” You can say, “There is a matter of serious concern in my area.” I would have given you time. Anybody could have brought it.

So, honourable members, we need to conclude this matter.

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude – right now, as I speak, one of my chairpersons is in hiding because he is being accused of giving information to the Army and other security agencies. So, it is not only in Kasese that people are living on tension.

I have three sub-counties next to the mountain; people cannot sleep in their homes and are living in other homes. I have even written to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to help me with food for people who are now living in IDP camps in their own country.

And, therefore, let us not gloss over this matter; let us not make it a Kasese matter and political and incline it to only the people living in Kasese yet we are also suffering. So it is a national matter that touches about four or five districts in the Ruwenzori. If the spill-over has not reached Kamwenge, but Kabarole, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and Kasese are equally affected. Thank you.


THE SPEAKER: So, this House directs the Minister of Internal Affairs to take charge of that security situation in all those areas. Wherever there are skirmishes, please, handle it.

Honourable members, as I have already told you, we cannot diminish the work of the committees, especially when we are the ones who asked them to do our work. (Applause) But I am willing to augment the committee with additional Members. And we have done this before; for the Public Finance Management Act, we had two committees – we had a Committee on Local Government and we added other Members and we got results.

So, I appeal to colleagues – I will deal with the issue of management. But I want you to agree that we should add five more Members from different committees to support the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

My only worry is: When do they report because if they are going to complete the recent events, it will require them to go and not just sit in Kampala and that means they will report after Christmas. Are you agreeable with that? They can report when we return. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All has been proceeding well but I would like to entreat you, Madam Speaker. To say that the committee reports when we return is a bit far. I would entreat colleagues to bear with this. Probably what we can do, you have the powers to set two weeks, starting from today. Now, before – (Interjections) – No, we may extend that fifteenth date; we can even meet on a Friday or Saturday, once it is a matter of great public importance.

Madam Speaker, I entreat you to use your prerogative powers and you guide that before we break off for a Christmas recess, we have this report so that the country can be properly guided. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Members, the question is that the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs be augmented with five other Members and that they report before we close for Christmas.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Monday you have been invited to meet Dr Ssali, a naturopathic doctor and his team from Dama Medical Herbs; they are coming here to Parliament. You can meet them at the Members’ Lounge at 11 o’clock in the morning.

Honourable members, I had earlier indicated that I would give the terms of reference for the committee on UTL:
Investigate and determine the current state of corporate health of Uganda Telecoms Ltd.
Determine the extent to which the company is complying with Uganda’s company laws and regulations and international communications regulations.
Inquire into the company’s human and financial management, corporate governance and finance and accounting principles specifically but not limited to addressing the following concerns:
Conflict of interest by the managers, that is the company’s interests including collusions and fraud. 
Remuneration of top managers vis-a-vis the employees, audit reports of the company, compliance to taxation laws in the country, compliance to the requirements of the National Social Security laws in Uganda, allegations of asset stripping of the company assets, consider and report on whether there is organisational leaning including change in policy and practise which would help to prevent the recurrence of the current situation being investigated, determine the economic value and justification of Uganda’s continued shareholding in light of its return on investment in UTL, report to Parliament within 45 days, do anything incidental to and pursuant to the terms of reference clearly stated out.  
I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter on the select committee. 

THE SPEAKER: We closed that matter please. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the names-

THE SPEAKER: Which committee? This one? 

MS ALUM: This one for the UTL. I have listened to the names carefully and I have not heard names of members of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). I was looking at Rule 179 of our Rules of Procedure and it states that the whips are supposed to also propose names to you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether we are procedurally right to leave members of the Uganda People’s Congress out of this very important national issue. 

THE SPEAKER: You are represented by the Leader of Opposition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. UPC has issues. On the Government side, they are represented by the Government Chief Whip and on the opposition side; they are represented by the Opposition Chief Whip; so, we do not know where UPC falls. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, given such circumstances- 

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Given such circumstances, I think UPC must clearly come out to tell us where they belong because they are giving you problems for nothing; this is a serious matter. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament of the Uganda People’s Congress and I am not aware that the UPC is represented or has crossed to the Government side. A member of UPC individually decided within her own right to cross to the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and that is only one out of six who sit on the opposition side. 

Madam Speaker, this question has been here- (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At least I know the Constitution of Uganda. It says that any member who crosses loses a seat.  However, there are parties- (Interjections) - you are not aware of the Constitution. Madam Speaker, didn’t you give them copies of the Constitutions? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are aware that hon. Betty Amongi, who is the Minister of Lands, belongs to the UPC Party but she sits on the Government side. Hon. Jimmy Akena is also supposed to sit there anyway. (Laughter) We have the opposition side represented by the Opposition Chief Whip chief and the Government side represented by the Government Chief Whip. The Government side is led by the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business and in the opposition, we are led by the Leader of Opposition. 

UPC is on both sides. We know they are everywhere. If they are everywhere, they will lack how to be treated and that is why we are saying where should they match? Therefore, is my brother in order to say that the one who crossed here hon. Betty Amongi Akena and where hon. Jimmy Akena is about to cross say - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, take your seat. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is he in order? (Laughter) 

THE STATUS OF OPERATIONS OF UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to make a statement on the affairs of status of operations of Uganda foreign missions.

You may recollect, I was invited sometime in August this year to make a statement on an incident that occurred in our engagement in New York, status of Uganda Properties Abroad, and detention of Mr Sam Mugumya and other Ugandans in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). I was requested to do that and welcome the opportunity to make this statement today.

On the 12 August 2016, the United Nations Security Council adopted resolution 2304 (2016) on the situation in South Sudan. Prior to the Council action, Uganda actively participated in the efforts by the regional grouping IGAD to find a resolution to the situation in that country and also actively engage with members of the-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are addressing the issue on the Order Paper. Are you addressing “Status of operations of Uganda’s foreign missions?” 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Yes I am. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that what you are handling? 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: That is a preamble. Please, proceed. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: I am going to talk about the Sam Mugumya issue because I was told that there were some concerns. People think that our mission in DRC does not seem to be concerned about Mr Sam Mugumya and other Ugandans, who are in the DRC prisons hence the question what are the people in the missions in DRC doing, if any, in terms of management of operations in DRC? 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I was not here when the matter was raised. If you could hold on a bit, let me just check the Hansard. Hold on a few minutes because I was under the impression it was more general, rather than specific to the DRC. Have you got additional information?

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Yes

THE SPEAKER: Okay, minister, present. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I am also going to talk about the current state of Uganda Properties Abroad, the handling of a situation in our mission in New York by one of our officers, who indulged documents, which he should not have done. Therefore, it is not only about Mugumya.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I brought copies on Tuesday for circulation. We gave it to the ushers then and I do not know if they are there to be circulated. However, I did specifically give copies to the - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: On the 12 August 2016, the United Nations Security Council adopted resolution 2304 of 2016, on the situation in South Sudan. Prior to the Council action, Uganda actively participated in the efforts by the regional grouping IGAD to find a resolution to the situation in that country and also actively engaged with members of the UN Security Council here in Kampala and New York.

In the period preceding the Council adoption of the resolution, the Ministry sent guidelines, as it often does, to our Mission in New York on the issues of concern and interest of Uganda, which was the subject of discussion on the draft resolution in the Security Council.

Regrettably, the guideline that was internal communication intended to inform the engagement with Council members, ended up in the public domain.

Following the incident in New York, we sent a circular instruction to all our missions abroad reminding them of what is required of them when handling internal communication. We also cautioned that failure to observe this rule shall subject the officer concerned to disciplinary action.

In addition, we met with the representatives of the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and others, to explain that Uganda's intention was not intended to undermine the adoption of the Council Resolution. Our intention was to underscore the support for IGAD outcome and the adoption of a council resolution, in that direction. That is, where the sovereignty of the Republic of South Sudan is respected and ensuring that the Government of South Sudan is consulted on the deployment of the Regional Protection Force. Indeed, this idea has been accepted by both the AU/PSC and the UN Security Council.

Madam Speaker, what happened was regrettable and contrary to press reports, this battle has been resolved amicably and will not affect our warm and cordial relations with council members. Uganda continues to be held in high esteem by the council members for its contribution on peace and security and the fight against terrorism.

To this end, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa, was on 22 August 2016 invited personally to engage with the UN out-going Secretary of State, John Kerry in Nairobi to discuss matters of regional security, situation in Burundi, South Sudan and Somalia, amongst others. 

Every effort is being made to ensure that there is no repetition of what happened in New York.  We will continue to provide regular training; counselling and strategic seminars for our officers at home and abroad, in order to equip them effectively for their work.

The ministry will also continue to mentor, guide and advise officers on a regular basis. So far these efforts have yielded positive results, as a number of issues have been resolved in various Missions.

In addition, the ministry is in the process of setting up the Uganda Institute of Diplomacy and International Affairs, whose objective is to build capacity for the Foreign Service Officers, among others. It is envisaged that with regular training, the staff capacity will be enhanced and thus eliminate issues of inadequate training.

The ministry has prepared a Bill referred to as, “The Uganda Institute of Diplomacy International Affairs Bill”, which is to be presented before Parliament soon for consideration. I have it here with me, Madam Speaker.

Over the years, Uganda has made a positive contribution on regional and International Affairs, including those issues on the agenda of the UN Security Council and those on the UN General Assembly. These efforts have been applauded and have been visible. Our contribution has been made possible because of our active engagement at the regional and international level. We are committed to continue doing so and would like to continue to count on the support of this House.

Current status of Uganda property abroad

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs current development budget for Missions abroad is Shs 16 billion (for buildings, transport, equipment, and furnishing).  Although the allocation is inadequate and has been affected by foreign exchange losses, the ministry has been able to construct, renovate and refurbish the following properties, in the last three years:

Uganda Chancery in Kigali (new construction). It was just commissioned sometime early this year.
Official Residence in Pretoria; totally renovated
Uganda House in New York, has been renovated completely.
Uganda Commercial House in Kinshasa has been renovated and let out.
Uganda House (Chancery) in London and Official Residence have both been renovated.
Uganda Chancery Building in Washington DC was renovated and commissioned last year.
Chancery Building in Dares Salaam is undergoing renovations.

The ministry has been able to complete purchase of the following properties in the last Financial Year 2015/2016:
 Land housing the current Ambassador's   residence in Addis Ababa, including the existing structure; and vacant plot in Guangzhou for construction of the Chancery and the Residence of the Consul General.

The ministry is scheduled to work on the following properties in this Financial Year 2016/2017:

(i)	Chancery Building in Brussels
(ii)	Chancery Building in Ottawa
(iii)  Uganda House in Nairobi
(iv)	Uganda Chancery Building in Paris
(v)	Official Residence in Ottawa
(vi) 	Chancery Building in Juba.

The status of properties is therefore improving year after year. My ministry will be engaging Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to increase the allocation of funding from the current Shs 16 billion upwards for development, renovation and maintenance of properties abroad. Bearing in mind that the performance of the ministry has increased and also the four (4) commercial properties in New York, Nairobi, London and now Kinshasa, generate at least $ 3,886,000 every year, an equivalent of Shs 13.2 billion annually.

As you recall, on 24 August 2016, honourable members from this august House also raised the issue of detention of Mr Sam Mugumya and other Ugandans in the DRC. I would, therefore, like to brief the House, on this issue.

Brief Background

Mr Sam Mugumya was arrested on 21st October 2014 for illegal entry into the DRC and pronunciation that he had gone to Congo to fight the Government of Uganda. The DRC military establishment took interest of the matter and undertook to carry out investigations since Mr Mugumya had willingly stated that the purpose of his entry and using of other names of Hakiza instead of Mugumya was because he was going to fight a bad Government. He was arrested with four other Ugandans.

Under the Ngurdoto agreement on Bilateral Cooperation of 8 September 2007 between the Republic of Uganda and the DRC, each party undertook not to harbour or support subversive activities on either territory. The DRC government therefore, detained Mr Mugumya on the basis of his revelation.

The Government of Uganda after receiving such information, instructed the Ugandan Ambassador to DRC to pay a consular visit, and seek extradition of Mr Mugumya to Uganda. The DRC authorities granted the Ambassador audience on 9 May 2015 and allowed him to hold discussions with Mr Mugumya and the three others detained with him but also many other Ugandans in Ndolo Military prison, totalling number of 35 Ugandans. This was followed by the second visit on 2 April 2016 and a third visit on 8 September 2016.

The Embassy of Uganda also facilitated the visit by the members of the FDC party, led by hon. Alice Alaso in May 2015 and who held one to one talk with Mr Mugumya.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has refused to extradite Mr Mugumya on the basis of lack of an extradition treaty between the two governments. The drafting of the treaty was agreed upon by the Joint Permanent Commission (JPC) of the two countries and the DRC undertook to provide the draft.

The other key challenge faced in seeking the release of Mr Mugumya and others is the differences in the legal systems of Uganda and DRC. Whereas Uganda's system stems from British Common law, whereupon arrest, one is innocent until proven guilty, the DRC's stems from the French legal system whereupon arrest, one is guilty until one proves himself innocent.

Honourable members, before I came here this afternoon, I did talk to our ambassador in the DRC to make inquiries about the condition of Mr Mugumya and the other Ugandans. He told me that he has made arrangements with the prison wardens to allow him to talk to these prisoners regularly by phone and keep them informed of what is happening.

I wish to conclude by informing this august House that the Government of Uganda remains seized of this matter and will continue engaging the Congolese authorities to ensure that Sam Mugumya and other Ugandan detainees receive a fair trial. Thank you Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

5.34
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I would like to acknowledge a change because previous reports were about properties in a sorry state. Now, for the first time, we are getting a report that not only says they have rehabilitated the properties but they have gone ahead to acquire new ones. I think we should congratulate the ministry for this development. (Applause)

I think the request for Shs 16 billion, if I heard him very well, given that the properties are already generating Shs 13 billion, now makes a lot of sense. I hope that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the next year’s budget will really see to it that the request of this ministry is catered for.

Secondly, on the issue of Ugandans held in DRC, honourable minister, you talked of Mr Mugumya being held with 35 others. I am somehow not comfortable; it is as if Mugumya is the only known Ugandan. Why don’t you tell us the names of the other Ugandans? Are they less Ugandan than Mugumya?

Lastly, what is the way forward, honourable minister? You have not concluded the issue of these Ugandans. Since there is no extradition arrangement, what is the way forward? Thank you.

5.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report. 

When one is posted to a mission - we have raised this issue on this Floor a number of times - they apply to join the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and they go for induction. I am glad the minister is talking about an institute to train people who join Ministry of Foreign Affairs through the Public Service Commission. 

The issue that happened in New York was so embarrassing to the State of Uganda. There was an internal message that was sent to an officer and since he was not a career diplomat, he circulated the message to the other Member countries of the UN Security Council about what Uganda was going to do in Sudan. It was so embarrassing. I expected the ministry to have reprimanded that officer immediately. However, now the Minister is telling us that they cautioned the officer and it was resolved amicably. 

This terrible mistake should not happen in the Foreign Service. However, this officer is a political appointee and for that matter, he is No.2 in New York; he is the Deputy Head of Mission. Honourable minister, this is a very serious matter. We expected you to have reacted and acted immediately. If it were some of these other countries, this person would have been put on the fastest plane out of New York. I was in New York recently and the fellow is just parading himself around as if Uganda does not know what other countries do, or what ministries of foreign affairs do. I keep wondering why that happened.

Madam Speaker, the minister talks about properties but he does not tell us about the staffing in missions - how officers are posted to missions and the promotions that are given to these officers in missions. The situation in missions is terrible. The performance of our officers in missions is below average. They cannot even write reports. We have visited missions and they are performing below average.

Madam Speaker, we have a committee on foreign affairs. This committee works with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and they visit missions and come up with reports and recommendations. We have sent a number of recommendations to be acted on by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but nothing has been done.

There was a problem in Sudan where an officer was acting in a terrible way. We advised the ministry to recall this officer but he was not recalled. We had a problem in Washington; the Committee on Foreign Affairs wrote to the ministry to take action, they have never done anything against that officer who had unbecoming behaviour and he was fighting.

Talking about properties, we have some that were acquired some years back and they are in terrible condition. We have a plot in Brussels where the ambassador’s residence was. This building was brought down and the plot is still empty but you do not talk about it. 

It is surprising that the minister talks about- (Interjections) - No, let me finish; the time is not enough. The minister talks about Guangzhou but it is just a Consulate General; we have a Mission in Beijing. China is a member of the Security Council, instead of acquiring land in Beijing where we are permanently, we lost land there. I understand you are going to construct in Guangzhou; it defeats my understanding that you want to go and establish a Consulate General and you leave the place where we have an embassy, which is in Beijing.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of Mugumya in DRC, we have so many other Ugandans languishing in different prisons. I raised the issue of Ugandans in the United Arab Emirates, in Abu Dhabi - 31 of them and one died in prison. We expected you to come and tell us about that. There was no report about those Ugandans and the many other Ugandans in prisons all over the world. You do not talk about those issues.

Madam Speaker, we want the minister to bring to the attention of this House everything that is happening - the recruitment in the ministry, the promotions, the postings and how they are done. If you look at the list of postings in the ministry, Ugandans are crying even in the ministry itself.

Honourable minister, we want you to bring a list of staffing in all these missions so that the Members know. Look at these lists and promotions; there are people who have stayed in missions but they are over 70 years old and they are being given promotions. These are not ambassadors who are appointed by the President, but they are left in missions. What has the ministry done about that? There are a lot of things happening- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the retirement age in Uganda is 60 years; who are these who have passed the retirement age and they are still in missions? Hon. Wamai, can you give us one example so that we understand?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, as I speak, there is one person in one of the missions who is over 70 years old. This person is not an ambassador but an officer who was just posted. He is in a foreign mission -(Interjections)- The minister will bring a whole list of postings. We would like the minister to bring the whole list of postings and you will look at the ages of these people and the promotions in all these missions.

Madam Speaker, some time back we were in Brussels-(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. 

In addition to the list of postings, since this Parliament has debated the state of missions aboard, we need the minister to give us the status of all the missions in writing. We need to know those that have been rehabilitated and up to what stage they have been rehabilitated. We know, for example, that the mission in Brussels and others are rotting away. We need to have a comprehensive list of these missions and at what state they are in. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the missions aboard are a window to this country. When you look at Ugandan missions, you know that you are looking at Uganda. Many colleagues in this Parliament have travelled abroad and they have seen that the situation is very bad.

We would like you to come with a comprehensive report so that Members here can get copies and know exactly what is happening in those missions. Recently, there was a report from the Public Accounts Committee accusing the ministry of a number of issues. We thought the minister would come up with all these issues. Hon. Ssekikubo, you had something – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not the Speaker. Please, sit down. (Laughter)

5.45
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for bringing this statement to the Floor. 

Our foreign missions many times are quite embarrassing to Ugandans when we travel. Recently, when we were in Addis Ababa, we saw a number of missions belonging to other countries and when we reached our own, many people did not even want to come out of the vehicle. They could not believe that that was where the Ugandan foreign mission was. The situation is made worse because when you reach the missions, there is a sense of discomfort in our team because of the inability to organise for Ugandans who are visiting them. 

I would like to welcome the minister’s proposal that an institute be set up to train them to build their capacity so that we can avoid scenarios such as the one that happened in New York. However, we also call upon the minister to be stronger in disciplining those who have already been caught red-handed. In this report, it is just stated that they cautioned and they are going to take action. For how long will you take action?

Secondly, I get worried about our communication; if something that we are communicating can get into the hands of strangers, do we have a system that can protect the information that we send and guard it against landing into wrong hands? This is because it can be used against us at some point. 

The other issue I want to comment on is the services that our people get when they are outside Uganda. For the whole of last year, we had many people from Lango who died in South Sudan but there was difficulty in retrieving their bodies and transporting them back home. Many Ugandans died in South Sudan and every time the public had to go to radio and demand for politicians to contribute money. 

Within these missions, do we have services that can support Ugandans when they get problems, including those who die under certain circumstances? If a foreigner died here, you would see how much attention they would get. Recently, an American was arrested in Lira over certain activities and within minutes, you could see how they came to rescue their own citizen.

What do we do for Ugandans who are out of the country? You can see for the case of Mugumya, the Government is not making any attempt to support him legally. Ugandans deserve to be supported because we know that our Constitution in Article 28 (3)(a) says that you are presumed innocent until proven guilty. I know the legal system is different, but we must help our own people when they are out there because this is a very big problem. Therefore, I would like to encourage that we set up a legal aid unit that is specifically stationed to help Ugandans whenever they get into any problem of any nature. Thank you.

5.49
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for this statement. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has indeed renovated some of the missions that were in a sorry state. However, I wish to state that there are still more that need renovation. We lost a precious mission in Bonn. After the Germany unification, the capital city transferred to Berlin and the Uganda Mission in Bonn was sold under circumstances which I cannot explain. I wish to ask the minister what strategies the ministry has in mediating for the ownership of our missions so that Uganda can own property.

Madam Speaker, hon. Wamanga-Wamai talked about our mission in Brussels and he said that it no longer exists. For your information, colleagues, that was one of the most precious embassies Uganda had. In 1982 when Zimbabwe was getting its independence, that was where the whole of Africa hosted the party for Zimbabwe’s independence. Honourable minister, what strategy do you have to ensure that we restore our embassy in Brussels, which is the headquarters of the European Union, where we have a stake as partners in development? 

Another issue, honourable minister, is that there are many vacant plots which Uganda gets out of reciprocity with other countries that host us within embassies. We know that we have lost some, including one in India. For the one in Beijing, I do not know whether effort is being made to keep it. I would like to know from you, honourable minister, what strategies you have to ensure that we develop the vacant plots we have before they are taken back by the host countries.

I also wish to inform this House that the Government of Uganda adopted public private partnerships as a cost effective way for us to own missions. What plans do you have in your ministry to adopt that strategy? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before hon. Othieno comes up, I know that we own apartments in London but I do not see them being mentioned here.

5.53
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement because it is very pleasing to hear that Government has started giving a facelift to our missions abroad.

I was part of the team that went to Addis Ababa. When we compared our ambassador’s residence to that of our counterparts from Rwanda, it was very embarrassing. I would like to associate myself with the statement which hon. Odur made that indeed a number of our colleagues felt ashamed. Actually, one person went back to the hotel and did not attend the meeting.

I am also happy because the minister has stated that there is a programme of capacity enhancement for our officers abroad. When we were in Addis Ababa, we suffered a number of protocol lapses. One of the high-ranking officials in the embassy, who was attached to our committee, actually took us to State House without any clearance. We reached State House and there was a visiting head of state; the Vice-President of Sudan was there. The guards there were just sympathetic when we introduced ourselves as Members of Parliament from Uganda. They were just sympathetic and kept us outside the compound. 

To make matters worse, they again included us in a presidential convoy without our vehicle being cleared to be part of that convoy. Again, they kept us outside the convoy. This kind of situation is very embarrassing -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you left here, were you going to see the President?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, those are the embarrassing situations we are talking about –(Interjections)- Let me just clear this. It was not in our knowledge that we were supposed to be in State House, but we found ourselves there. That is why I am saying I am happy the minister is saying there is a programme to develop the capacity of our technocrats who are in these missions.

In addition, Madam Speaker, sometimes our Government should not stop at just looking at the physical facilities. They should also look at the dignity of our officers outside there. Sometimes because of limited funding, these people find themselves travelling without their families, which is a bit difficult for some of them. You find somebody stays out of the country for a very long time while the family is in Uganda. Even when they travel with their children, they do not have the capacity to pay for the education of their children. (Member timed out)

5.57
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs for the statement. 

I have three or four issues to raise and the first one is in respect to what happened in New York. That matter would not have arisen if we had increased the number of career officers managing our missions. (Applause) Honourable minister and your senior colleague, you have the powers to ensure that our missions are manned by substantial career officers. There are many young men and women who apply to join the service and hope to rise to the highest level of that career, but this is being denied to them. It is in your power to fight for these Foreign Service Officers to reach the apex of the career they have chosen.

I was in that service until I retired in 2005. By the time I retired, there were only two of us who were heads of missions out of the 24 missions which were there. Today, I think there is only one – Ambassador Mull Katende in Addis Ababa – who is a substantive career officer heading a mission. As political leaders, you must fight for career officers to head some of the missions.

Madam Speaker, the second issue I would like to raise –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to raise this procedural issue. I would also like to thank the honourable Ambassador Baba. Hon. Baba has been a minister since -(Laughter)- I cannot even remember. He has been in the Executive and when these ambassadors are appointed, they are cleared by Cabinet. 

The procedural issue I am raising is: why is he raising this issue now? Why didn’t he raise it then, when he was a minister? Is it like the Baganda say, “When you are eating, you do not speak” or what? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure that the rights of the civil servants can be raised at any moment.

MR BABA: I was a minister in different dockets. I was in Cabinet and I raised it. Now as a Member of Parliament – a back bencher – I have every right to raise it.

The second issue I want to raise is that we need a further comprehensive report on the status of the properties of Uganda abroad. You have not included Mombasa. The Speaker has talked about flats in London. There are houses in Ottawa. We need a comprehensive list of those which have been rehabilitated, those in deplorable state and those non-starters like in Brussels, so that Parliament can see how to assist you in having them rehabilitated. (Applause)

The third issue, and I would really want to fault us on this, is that as a ministry and Government we have not fought for Ugandans in international jobs. Madam Speaker, Uganda is being praised for being a model country for hosting refugees. We bear the burden of global refugees. However, when it comes to international jobs, even in the UNHCR, there is no single Ugandan. –(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information to this House. Hon. Baba has raised a very critical issue of Ugandans not occupying international jobs. It is not a surprise. There is a lot of lobbying for people from other regions of this continent. 

Take West Africa, for example, they have a large block of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). However, we have only one ambassador in Nigeria who is representing us in the 16 countries that make up ECOWAS. Therefore, it may not be a surprise that we could not get that vote for Dr Specioza Kazibwe to get that African Union job. It could be one of the reasons; we do not have any representation in those 16 countries and the ambassador in Nigeria is the only one represents us in those countries. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think he was diverting the issue. What hon. Baba is talking about is that as a Government, we should make it a project to fix Ugandans in World Health Organisation, Food and Agriculture Organisation among others. Those West Africans do it and that is why you see many West Africans and many Ethiopians in those organisations.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, you are spot-on. What we are suggesting is that there should be a dedicated desk or an officer following up international jobs, pushing and advocating for Ugandans to fill those positions. That is what Ghanaians and Nigerians are doing. Ethiopians are all over in international jobs moreover big jobs. Where are the Ugandans? The ones who are in international jobs have gone there on their own without our support. This is regrettable.

Lastly, you mentioned those in DRC in jail like the Mugumya’s and others. What about those in other countries? We have other Ugandans languishing elsewhere. We should have a complete list of those people so that we see how we can help them. Our kids have been trafficked and they are in jail. Our women are being executed in China. We should have this comprehensive list so that this House can help to support your work. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I will be seeking your support. I have nominated three Ugandan women to be appointed as special envoys under Resolution 1325. I will give you the papers and you will give us the necessary support.

6.04
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for the report and thank the Government for the effort they have put in renovation. However, I think the minister is not open to us about the many challenges in the ministry. 

The missions in the European countries, Ottawa in Canada, Brussels, among others, are in that category; the houses are really worn out. Even village homes in Uganda are better. Honourable minister, you are aware that those governments in Europe want us to have a budget which brings the house to full stature so that they can make an agreement. Your report is lacking in this respect. You are telling us the budget for 2016/2017 is Shs 16 billion; this cannot build any chancery in Europe. You need to give us factual information so that we can help you to do your work. What you are doing is massaging but not giving us actual facts. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of staff, the minister has not talked about this but the staff are facing challenges. Recently, we went to a mission and saw that there is no support for families. Once you have been given an air ticket to your post, Government does not help your family to meet with you. You get young people who have gone to work out there and their husbands or wives could be in Uganda. There was a particular case of a young lady whose husband visited and wondered what was happening. You cannot continue on Whatsapp as far as a relationship is concerned. By the time she resigned from the job and came back to Uganda, her husband had married another woman. You can see the loss to this young lady. 

There are also issues with the celebration of Independence Day. Honourable minister, all your missions are complaining because they do not celebrate the Independence Day of Uganda. This is a day where you can invite other ambassadors to come around your home. It is a big shame. These people tell you “we do not have a budget for entertainment; sometimes we move with our flags in the pockets; our cars are too old even to drive the ambassadors.” 

You need to also tell us the types of cars our ambassadors are facilitated with. You sympathize with those ambassadors when you go to a mission. You see an ambassador trying to pull money from his or her pockets to make you comfortable and yet things are bad.

In Ethiopia, we have bought that plot but the house is very old and yet we are near other embassies like the UK Embassy. Our embassy looks funny along that street because the house is dilapidated. Honourable minister, we need to put the face of Uganda right as we promote economic diplomacy. If we are talking about economic diplomacy but I do not find even a computer on the table and I find very old chairs, I do not know what economic diplomacy we are talking about. Thank you.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this very good informative statement.

Madam Speaker, it is also comforting to learn that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has indeed taken a bold step in the right direction. In the statement, the minister talks about training. Training is very important and it is likely to realise very good and effective Foreign Service Officers. It is also the same thing we have done in the Ministry of Public Service. We have a civil service college in Jinja and it is working wonders with the public servants.

The minister has also emphasised the issue of non-tax revenues. This should be strengthened. This is the way to go, given the budget that we have normally. However, if every year we can put more money into rehabilitating and making sure that some of our missions actually raise money on their own, it is one easy way that we can raise funds to even work on the other missions and make sure that the life of our Foreign Service officers abroad is indeed very comfortable.

Madam Speaker, it is important that errant foreign officers be disciplined. Disciplining is a process. According to the Ministry of Public Service, you begin with a caution, you go to a reprimand, severe reprimand, interdiction, dismissal,  among others, depending  -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Honourable minister, what prevails in the Ministry of Public Service is quite different from the situation with political appointees. The officer we are talking about did not go through the stages to become an ambassador. He was picked from somewhere and made an ambassador, and he went to a mission and made mistakes. So, he is not a career diplomat who has been in the system that you can caution and warn before you dismiss. This one was politically brought in and he committed a terrible mistake. That is the difference between a political appointee and a career diplomat.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, but when one is offering services, regardless of which angle he has come in from, – (Laughter) - the standing orders remain the same. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Before we get to hon. Atim Ongom, please join me in welcoming community leaders from Nsambya Subcounty in Butemba, Kyankwanzi District. They are here. They are represented by hon. Pentagon Kamusiime and hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa. They are touring Entebbe and other places and they have also come to Parliament.

6.14
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information that he has given to us. 

I would like to thank him for informing the House that they are training the Foreign Service officers, disciplining them and also building their capacities. However, I would like to assure the honourable minister that some of these Foreign Service officers are political appointees as hon. Wamanga-Wamai has said. 

Madam Speaker, we were disappointed when we went to Turkey. We found that the person who was acting as the ambassador had posed for a Playboy Magazine in the hotel. He is an ambassador in the office but he posed for Playboy Magazine in a hotel. Much as they are training –(Interjections)- Yes, we went to Turkey and found that in Ankara. I do not know how to explain it but he posed for a magazine and it is all over the hotels in Ankara. In the office, he is an ambassador but outside there, that is what he is. Therefore, you should discipline and train them. Select the kind of people who can carry the image of our country. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I do not know what the minister has got to tell us about the Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL) in Mombasa. That is our property abroad but we know some people own that property. He has to update us on that.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the state of our property in Nairobi is alarming. It is like the tenants want to dictate that it is up to them to first- (Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to inform the Member that probably she went there some time ago, but we were in Nairobi recently and the only thing that was holding back the renovation of the building was the case in court against our nation. However, the day we left, the case was decided in our favour and renovation has started. Thank you. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much. I think she has agreed with me that the state of that building is not okay. The building is in a terrible state and it is only that building in that state, compared to the others. It is the tenants that are dictating and they took us to court. I am thankful that the court ruled in our favour, but we needed bilateral talks.

Lastly, there is the issue of Ugandans living abroad. Some countries really take good care of their citizens abroad. Recently, a Ugandan was shot in the USA; I expected the minister to also update this House about the status of such people, but he has not brought that up. Please, from time to time, you have to update this House about the status of those people because we are the representatives of the people in this country. 

Why are they mistreating Ugandans abroad, not only in the USA but even in other places? It is not only those with the police in Congo, but also in other places our people are in court or prison. You have to update us so that the relatives of these people get to know what is happening to their people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am glad you are here. There is an area that has been painful to us as Ugandans, that is the cost of using the VIP facilities in the UK. Here, they go in for free but for us to go into their VIP lounge, we have to pay one thousand pounds. For them, everybody is a free ride here. There should be some reciprocity.

6.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. From the outset, I would like to know what our foreign policy is. Do we have one in place to guide the country or we are interested in doing things in an ad hoc way. A country should have a foreign policy in place. I do not think we have even one in writing because this should guide the country to determine one position or the other.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that our embassies are the face of Uganda out there, but you are ruining this face. Members have spoken charitably about the embassy in Brussels being down. The fact of the matter is, if I can put it to Members, that the building was condemned as inhabitable. It was neglected, it was run down and the authorities in Brussels condemned it. They brought it down at the expense of Ugandans. This was the base for all African countries in the 1980s. 

Members talk of the embassy in Addis Ababa, but we have an empty plot between the embassies of Chad and Zimbabwe. Chad is not really richer than Uganda, and this is where we have the African Union headquarters, where the President frequently visits. 

Where do we put our money? In the Eighth Parliament, we passed Shs 4 billion to build a market in Juba and by that time, it was much money. Do we have titles to - (Ms Mutonyi rose_) – You will have your time, Madam Chairperson.

MS MUTONYI: Yes, I will have my own time but I wanted to come in at this particular moment. 

Madam Speaker, what the Members are saying is correct, especially what hon. Ssekikubo is saying. This morning, we got a report from the group that visited Addis Ababa and they said that the plot hon. Ssekikubo is talking about is 2.54 acres and it is lying redundant. It has been like that for some time and yet money for purchasing that plot is also lying redundant because Uganda delayed and some other private investor has fenced off the plot. I do not know what the minister is going to tell us about that plot. 

Therefore, hon. Ssekikubo, you are right. There are many other redundant plots and we are going to present the reports to Parliament in the near future. In fact, I wanted to present the report today if the minister did not appear. Since he has appeared, I did not want to clash with him. He is our-

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, chair, for the information. Do not fear clashing with him because you are doing your job for the country. 

Where are the titles of the Juba Market where Ugandans are being killed? That is our market. We demanded for the architectural drawings and the titles. Maybe the minister can now lay them on the Table. That shows that we have big stakes in our neighbours, but the way we are being treated in those countries is so demeaning that our lives never count.

Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be advised by this House that we need a comprehensive statement about the status of our properties. We cannot mention them one by one. If the one in Bonn was sold, who ordered for the selling of the embassy of this sovereign state and where are the proceeds from the sale? We have one in Rome, but it is in the backwaters in some slum. In Cairo, we moved away from the main centre of Cairo into the suburbs. 

Who is guiding our foreign policy, Madam Speaker? That is why it is imperative that this Parliament demands for a comprehensive statement about the status of our properties. We had properties of Uganda Coffee Marketing Board and Lint Marketing Board in London and Mombasa. Who is occupying our premises in those countries? I know the minister here is shy because he only brings here bad statements. Those responsible for doing that work cannot come here. We would like to know who is taking away what the illiterate Amin constructed. We are running them down with literate people.

Madam Speaker, I entreat this House that let us put our foot down and demand for a report on the status of these properties with even photographic evidence and titles. This is because at the end of the day, our country must move beyond us. We are not the last people to occupy this country. Our children are coming after us but we need to leave a statement on the status of our properties, and in fact add on more rather than running down those that we found. Thank you.

6.23
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for insisting on getting the report of foreign affairs. This minister here has been dodging us. We have been raising this since last year and we directed, but he dodges -(Interruption)-

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sincerely speaking, Madam Speaker, is it in order for a senior legislator, by the names of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to behave in an unparliamentary manner by using unparliamentary language, that a whole minister has been dodging, and he cannot even substantiate? I have stood on the Floor of Parliament and brought apologies from the minister at one time when he was sick; does that tantamount to dodging? Is he in order to be undiplomatic when we are handling diplomatic issues? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when we invite the ministry, we do not name this minister or the other one; we invite the institution. Therefore, you cannot fault one minister for probably not being here. Still, do not use unparliamentary language, honourable member; just address your issues without pointing figures.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have withdrawn the unparliamentary language. However, I know it is hon. Oryem who has been coming here. When we wanted the report in two weeks, he said “give me 30 days” and we gave him. We came back and asked for it and he said, “I am coming”. Whenever he saw us standing, you would see him getting out of Parliament. I am going to bring the Hansard to prove that hon. Oryem has been running away whenever we want to discuss the issues of foreign affairs, especially property. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say clearly that there is a problem. Hon. Oryem and the Minister of Foreign Affairs want the foreign affairs of the country to be run maybe for a few people’s benefit at the cost of the people of Uganda. I will start with the Juba market. You remember, they got Shs 4 billion to construct a market. They had got land and they were going to construct a market. Now they are telling us that the land is empty. Therefore, who took the Shs 4 billion for constructing the market? Hon. Oryem must explain to us with pictures and tell us the person who took the Shs 4 billion or show the structure being taken or the construction.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, are you saying there is no market? Are you saying that we voted for money and the market was not constructed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, you have heard what the chairperson has said, that the land is vacant in Juba. (Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I did not talk about Sudan; I talked about Addis Ababa.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, I have not been to the Juba market but I would be happy to have the pictures of Juba market because our people are being killed on the streets and yet we had built a market for them to go and work in Juba.  

Staff of foreign affairs: If you have ever gone to a mission, you will notice that there are camps. Even the current chairperson had her own camp when she was in India. There was another one with another camp. One time we went there, we got four camps. You get chits under your doors. There is a problem -(Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member, by the name of Nandala-Mafabi, in order to insinuate that I had my own camp? Was he there? Is he in order? I do not know what camps he is talking about; let him clarify.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please explain what camp she was in. We sent her as a committee chairperson together with her delegation, unless you can really substantiate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am going to explain. Hon. Bright Rwamirama and I went in 2004 - 

THE SPEAKER: Was it in 2004? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, when she was there. I was talking of the camp when she was in India- 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, as a Foreign Service officer not as a chair. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, when she was in India. I am talking about camps in missions and she is aware. It is good they made her a chairperson because she knows about the camps-(Interjection)- Even Osama who does not support me has said that they are there.

Camps are there and work is not going on. Hon. Oryem is not telling the true story. Foreign affairs staff are not performing because of camps. In 2007, I went to Paris for my own business and somehow they learnt I was in Paris. I walked to my room and there were 16 petitions; one was about rent, one about the Ambassador, in another one they said they are not getting money for their children to study. It was dangerous. I came back and took them to the chairperson and said, “Please, work out something”, but nothing was done. The President was right to retire the permanent secretary recently; maybe the new one might do something.

The other point I would like to raise is about the Kenya and London properties specifically. Those properties earn a lot of money but we do not know where the money goes. Now they have created Uganda Property Holdings Limited but we do not know who that is. Hon. Oryem owns it by saying “it is ours” but we do not know what it is.

Even in Nairobi, they say those properties are for Uganda Property Holdings Limited. Even if the property is in the same compound, they will say part of it is for Uganda Property Holdings and part is for the embassy. Hon. Oryem is here, he knows about it and he is just there smiling. These things are there happening; what else is left in Uganda for us? In London-(Interruption)-

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I need to be protected from hon. Oryem. 

THE SPEAKER: From hon. Oryem? 

MS MUTONYI: Yes. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not intimidate the chairperson of the committee. (Laughter)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to hon. Nandala. What he is saying is true and it is in our report, which we are going to present to Parliament. However, since it has come up, I would like to say that we really have a problem with Uganda Property Holdings Limited. They have 22 properties -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you are now bringing your report without tabling it. You are violating the rule against anticipation. When you bring your report, we shall address that. Conclude. 

MS MUTONYI: Let me just give him information. 

THE SPEAKER: Just bring the report and we will debate it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You know, it is very good she has a report. One time she went to Washington and they even showed her a place- Our properties in Washington are in a residential place. They gave us a plot where embassies and high commissions are, but hon. Oryem refused to take it. Now, they have taken the plot and we are remaining with the residential property. 

In fact, if you go to Washington, our embassy is in a village. That is not where embassies are supposed to be. We are not covered in Washington and we are in danger if we are attacked. There is a place where embassies are covered but we are not covered in Washington. It is dangerous. Madam Speaker-(Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, hon. Nandala. We do not want a Masaba issue here. There is Masaba here, there and there. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right about the Masaba thing. Even the chairperson is Masaba, the career diplomat is Masaba and the one holding the Floor is Masaba and you know I am in charge - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Let me give you information, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Madam Speaker, it is true that the Americans have warned us to leave that slum as all missions have been moved to one place. However, Uganda has not moved. The Americans said that they will not provide us with protection, meaning that we are in that slum at our own risk. What hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is true; the ministry has not done anything to shift the mission from the slum to an area where diplomats are supposed to be.

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps the word “slum” is a strong reference because I have been to Washington DC. We are in a residential area; we are not in the diplomatic area. However, “slum” is a strong word.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when you hail from Bugisu, you may assume that Bugisu is a top of the range area, but I can tell you that the place where the embassy is located is low-end in Washington.

THE SPEAKER: I know it because I have been there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister must bring us a comprehensive report as hon. James Baba, hon. Ssekikubo and others have suggested. 

I am also looking forward to the day when hon. Okello Oryem will sit behind the driving seat because he will speak the truth. For now, he cannot speak the truth as you can see – (Laughter)- If we do not know the state of our properties, some of them may be taken away without our knowledge.

Secondly, career diplomats are very important. If I get an opportunity to meet the President, I will tell him to stop appointing political failures as ambassadors. These are the people creating camps in the missions. Their minds do not work well because they are worried that whoever loses parliamentary elections will go and take over from them. Ambassador Katende is the only career diplomat left. There are some of diplomats who do not even have a senior six certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am about to. The people in the diaspora contribute a lot of money here, but whenever they have problems and run to the embassy, they are chased away. Some of these people entered the USA wrongly and are doing odd jobs, but we should have a way to protect and help our people when in crisis. 

In the UK, we know that there are some of our people who do not have proper papers and they do not have a place to go to, and it is the same in the USA. We need these people to create a desk like we did in Canada for Cuba. For those who might not know, we manage Cuba from Canada. This will help us to know that person X may be handling our illegal matters but because we benefit from them, let the desk remain.

Lastly, concerning people who are arrested, I have been to the prisons and our people really suffer. The people at the missions never go to visit them and offer legal support. Hon. Okello Oryem, these mission people never go there but you hear of them attending cocktails and yet our people are dying. (Laughter) We would be happier if these people could really produce a report and tell us how many times they have gone to visit the incarcerated. A prisoner is entitled to some rights. Those foreigners cannot visit our people; it is us to visit them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We should help the ministry by increasing their budget so that they can offer some of those services. We shall debate when the chairperson reports. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, the discussion is good but we have a problem. The minister has presented a statement that is evidently lacking in terms of the necessary detail and yet the information that we keep on getting is in bits and pieces.

We have been told that the committee carried out a study and they are going to present a report to us. I look at what we are doing vis-à-vis what we could actually gain if we got a complete report from the minister and another from our committee, so that we debate this matter in detail. Madam Speaker, I request for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson? Can you report on Tuesday so that we adjourn and -

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the committee and I know that the report is ready, so we can report on Tuesday. 

As you can see, honourable members have raised a number of issues and the minister’s report lacks a lot of information, and the minister is a good man and he has accepted this. As such, we should not take his report seriously. He should go back and bring a full report.

THE SPEAKER: When shall we finish it?  

6.38
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, while we wait for the report, we acknowledge what the minister presented.

While in Khartoum as a committee, there was one important thing that came to our attention and that the ministry should take up urgently. We have senior Ugandans in very high UN positions in Khartoum and the Government of Sudan has warned that when their work permits expire, they should leave. These permits expire before 15 December.

THE SPEAKER: Can you explain further? Are they Foreign Service officers?

MR KOMAKECH: There is a process of eliminating many of our experts working for the UN in Sudan. There are those working for UNICEF, WHO, among others. They met us at the mission and requested that the Government of Uganda urgently appeals to the Government of Sudan to ensure that their work permits are extended and not terminated. These are very urgent issues that need a response from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

6.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday when the minister comes with responses to the report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I would love to hear what happened to the staff at the UK High Commission in London after a police raid revealed that they were dealing in alcohol and cigarettes that were restricted.  

Regarding the use of VIP areas, it is not only in London Heathrow or Gatwick. Even in Belgium, we were there with you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and we paid exorbitantly to use the VIP lounge. We also saw the dilapidated house in Brussels where people were taking drugs. I understand that it has been demolished. We were also in Schiphol Airport in the Netherlands and it was the same thing. Why? When these people travel to Uganda, our VIP lounge is free. The only places where we can use free VIP areas are within Africa but outside Africa, we pay heavily. Where is the policy of reciprocity? I think we need to apply it.

Madam Speaker, we have talked about having a presence in key headquarters. Thanks to the late President Idi Amin, at least we can show off in New York because we have a good mission there. However, what do we have to show at the European Union headquarters? Despite being short on money, we should have a positive presence in key headquarters with good structures.

I am happy that the President took a bold decision to disband some of the people who were causing problems in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There have been issues in the ministry with the technocrats - the permanent secretary and his deputy. It is good that they have been moved from the ministry and I hope that there will be a change there. I hope the ones who have been transferred have not moved with their problems to those other ministries where they went. 

Finally, we would like to applaud the proposal to train Foreign Service officers. I wish this was done yesterday. If I was to rate the embassies based on where you feel at home, Nairobi is one of the best. Ambassador Wapakhabulo is one of those excellent ambassadors. The other one is Cairo, despite the challenges there. The acting ambassador in Cairo treats us well. Once you reach there, you feel at home. The other one is Washington where Ambassador Wonekha is also doing well. These are people who make Ugandans feel well represented. 

Madam Speaker, the faster this is done, the better for Ugandans. We should feel proud when we travel. Brussels is also one of them but they are only a handful. Hon. Okello Oryem, I give you credit on that account. Since the Uganda Ambassador to Egypt resigned and came for politics, I think we need a substantive ambassador in Cairo to help us with that mission. 

Madam Speaker, those are the issues that I felt I should raise. We shall discuss the other issues on Tuesday when a comprehensive report comes to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will be able to confirm to us whether Ms Kalibbala, who won a case against the country, has been paid. It has been in the press for a long time. Judgment entered and there was no defence in Geneva. I hope you will be able to tell us what you are doing.

6.44
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I raised the issue of Sam Mugumya, I was aware of the differences in the laws. My concern was that even when the laws are different and Ugandans have been in prison for more than two years, what are we doing, as a country, to make sure that they get justice and get presented in court? You cannot simply say that the laws are different and so Ugandans should remain in a prison in Congo for two or five years. Even when they are guilty, they should be taken to court. I thought that as a country, we need to demand that from Congo.

Secondly, there is the issue of Geneva. The other time we were there for the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting and I was concerned. I travelled with Members of Parliament from Nigeria who were picked up at the airport while for me, I did not have anyone to direct me to where I was going. I had to ask them for a lift because I had befriended them on the journey and I knew one of them before that trip, so they gave me a lift. They were using a hotel that was near ours. I was concerned that whereas the Members of Parliament from Nigeria were picked, I could not even be directed to my destination – (Interruption) 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, hon. Mwijukye. This is very important. The information I would like to give is in regard to our embassies. Whereas we are calling upon the minister to address these issues, our embassies reflect the image of Uganda. I am a Member of the Pan African Parliament and when we go for sessions, all our co-delegates from the other countries are picked by their embassies and taken care of. However, when it comes to Ugandans, we are the ones who are robbed at the airports and always stranded. Even when you send information to the embassy asking for something, it will not be availed. 

Normally, whenever Ugandans travel, we get lifts from either Zambia or Nigeria and they wonder, “Ugandans, don’t you have an embassy here?” Even when we communicate in advance, we are not helped. We always pretend that we came earlier than the actual arrival time. I always try to save the image of our country by claiming that we arrived earlier and the embassy expected us at 4.00 p.m. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, as Members of Parliament and diplomats, we must be helped when we travel abroad. 

In addition, when you visit the embassy, sometimes you do not even have a chair to sit on and there is no one to attend to you. I was in one of our embassies recently and they asked me, “Where are you from?” I said, “I am Ugandan”. I did not say that I was a Member of Parliament and everyone was simply passing me. I said, “I am a Ugandan and I need your services”. They asked, “Which services; you should have communicated in advance?” It is when I pulled out my red passport that they started attending to me. They then asked, “How do we help you? Where do you work?” 

Training is very critical because the way our embassies abroad handle Ugandans is lacking and very wanting. That is the information I wanted to give.

6.50
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo West County, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I am not sure whether you are aware of the fact that I am a counterpart in the Opposition Government. 

First of all, I would like to thank the honourable minister for the job well done. I am in pain because my counterpart is in a tricky situation. You have the will, the resolve and the determination to perform but you are not given space and the opportunity to perform. I will quantify this. You have been in the minister of state portfolio for a long time and basically, you have accumulated experience and yet you have limited space to deploy to good use your experience and seniority right now. 

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Institute of Diplomacy and International Affairs Bill, 2015 is lying somewhere in the House. The tragedy with this Bill is that the Japanese pledged support. As a matter of fact, the Chinese funded this diplomatic institute to a tune of $ 5 million and as I speak, the Chinese are already threatening to take back the money because we have not enacted this Bill. 

I had a chance to meet up with the interim executive director in my portfolio as shadow minister. I was expecting the minister, while he is planning on equipping or training Foreign Service officers with the necessary capability in terms of skills and technology, to talk about this Bill and encourage this honourable House to fast track it. I will leave it at that.

Madam Speaker, I will go to the Diaspora Bill, 2013, which is still in draft form. I was expecting my counterpart, Minister Oryem, to talk about this Bill and encourage this House to explore the possibility of fast tracking this Bill.

Having said that, honourable minister, you are aware that since 2014, our embassy in Khartoum has not had a substantive ambassador. You are also aware that the same embassy is charged with accreditation responsibilities for Chad. When you get feedback from Khartoum, they will tell you that accreditation requests are not facilitated in terms of funding and yet we have quite a lot to draw from Chad in terms of mineral exploitation.

Madam Speaker, I have had the chance to meet up with heads of missions and they have a lot of frustrations. You will feel like weeping when you hear from our citizens who are diligently serving this country in the Foreign Service. You will find frustrated and downtrodden Ugandans. It is like a condemnation to serve our country overseas. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you are aware that some of them earn as little as $ 512 per month despite the cost of living. They have run out of options and as I speak, we have citizens serving our country abroad who share rooms. Honourable minister, are you aware of this?

Madam Speaker, if we had the necessary strength, this Parliament, in the shortest time possible, would recommend a re-structuring of the line-up of the foreign affairs ministry. I would recommend that hon. Okello Oryem serves as the Cabinet minister because up there, it is gone. He has the will to perform but somewhere he gets frustrated. I will not get into that. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Katusabe. I thank you for the proposal and the prayer for hon. Okello Oryem to move up. However, I have just seen him shaking his head; I do not know whether that is in approval or disapproval. I wish he could clarify to us the meaning of him shaking his head. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, my senior colleague. I would encourage the minister to prioritise and come up with a priority list because the challenges confronting our missions abroad cannot wait; we need to prioritise them. 

Go to Kigali where people are frustrated. We are losing a lot of money renting very expensive properties. I do not know whether the minister is aware that they lost property in Kigali offered as free land. The national policy in Rwanda is that once you are offered free land, the offer is withdrawn after five years. 

The chair has just mentioned that in Addis Ababa, 2.5 acres has already been leased by a private developer. Why? The land was offered to us in 2005 – (Member timed out.)

6.59
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to seek clarification on a few things but first allow me to say that Amin did a great job to buy and establish embassies that are still in place to date. Through that, we have been able to fly the flag of Uganda high across the globe.

I had the opportunity to be hosted in one of the Ugandan embassies in France and my observations were disturbing. I found the structures were dilapidated and very soon, our building may cease to comply with the building codes of Paris. Tanzania was renting space in that embassy but they have since vacated and one of the reasons was because it could no longer meet their standards. They constructed their own structure. I actually took some photos, which I wanted to show our minister. Unfortunately, it is very hard to find them so I have not been able to show them. However, I can avail them the pictures if they so wish.

The clarification that I seek is about what we call commercial diplomacy. When the minister was making his presentation, he did not say anything about this. I do not know how our various foreign missions perform in that area. Right now, our country is grappling with the problem of youth unemployment and we expected some of these foreign missions to help us to attract direct investments and promote tourism. 

My observation has been that these missions submit proposals for funding to help them promote Uganda’s tourism abroad but this is often not prioritised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Therefore, I want to hear what specific provisions they have for that and for the renovation of the embassy in France since the minister did not clearly highlight that.

Lastly, I would like to know the rules and regulations governing the appointment and dismissal of people who work in our foreign missions. When Uganda’s head of mission in Cairo left to come and run in Maracha constituency, there were people working for him but a cook was dismissed immediately after his resignation with no justifiable reason. This gentleman lost his job and came back. He was complaining of non-payment of salary and yet his services were terminated unjustifiably. Therefore, I would like - (Member timed out.)

7.02
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank those honourable members who have made presentations. I take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the report. 

I also want to add my voice to those who have suggested that a comprehensive report be brought to this Parliament. I propose that this comprehensive report should include your budget because we might be falsely pointing fingers at you. What would the minister require to put all these things right? If he wanted to construct some of our structures abroad, what would it require? 

What is the salary of the staff? What do you require for the staff and for these buildings? What do you need for everything in your ministry and what do you have at hand? Sometimes they may have a big budget but end up with very little. Madam Speaker, I would propose that when he brings a comprehensive report, the budget must be part of it. 

Secondly, I wish that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was present. When the comprehensive report is brought to the Floor of the House, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be present because he is the one who deals with the budget and he knows all about these missions. The Minister of Foreign Affairs has been bringing his budget, but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be present for accountability purposes. This august House may be able to rescue the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and we have our properties worked on. Maybe we could allow for a loan to be given to this area so that some of these properties can be improved. 

I also would like to inform you that in the missions, there are camps. When you reach there, you find the military attaché on his own and the ambassador with maybe one staff. You do not expect disunited people to produce results. In addition, some of these officers are taken for foreign missions and yet they are not trained. If you go to an embassy where the ambassador and staff are trained, you will be welcomed; they will receive you and even take you back to the airport. So, training is an important issue. 

This matter of getting somebody who is frustrated and taking that person to an embassy does not yield good results. With the frustration, I do not think that he can perform. We have examples but I do want to mention them. Somebody is frustrated, maybe he failed and yet he expected something good, when he is taken to the embassy you find him working at his home. How do you expect –(Member timed out.) 

7.05
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The primary objective and purpose of our foreign missions is to ensure that the interests and image of our country are well projected, promoted and protected globally through diplomacy. 

I must commence by appreciating the minister for the refurbishment that is going on in Tanzania. I visited the chancellor last month and saw the modifications but earlier on, the building and property was really dilapidated and the image of our country, at that time, was very poor. 

I would like the minister to clarify, especially now that he will have an opportunity to come up with a comprehensive statement, on the financial aid in form of scholarships and awards that are offered through the foreign ministry to our students in Uganda here. Before these scholarships get to the Ministry of Education and Sports, you are the recipient. We would like to have a status report on these scholarships and also know the eventual beneficiaries. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.09
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for this statement delivered to us here. 

Madam Speaker, I visited a few countries when I was still practising journalism and I had some interactions with some foreign ministers. In their countries, most of them have an integrated database system for their people living in other countries. I, therefore, would like to hear from the minister if the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here has a database of Ugandans living abroad and what they are doing there. This helps us in times of catastrophe and disasters in those particular countries because our people can be tracked, fed important information and offered assistance. 

In his statement, the minister talked about the properties abroad, the buildings that are supposed to be constructed and the offices. These properties are meant to serve our people there. However, we do not know the people who are there. We need to know the number of Ugandans living in the UK, USA, Egypt and other countries. We need to also know what they are doing, to enable us move on well in as far as serving the people is concerned in the foreign missions. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to answer for the minister but my experience has been that in some countries, when people are living underground they do not even want the mission to know that they are in that country, so they do not even register. However, the minister will have the time to answer those questions comprehensively after Tuesday when we have the other debate. Prepare answers for all the questions. 

For the record, I would like to thank this House because some things have changed in the foreign ministry. The other day, I do not even remember where I was, but I found a new presentable car. I would like to thank the minister and the House for supporting the ministry to get a bit more money. I thought that I should mention that some things have changed. There may be problems but I think there are also good stories coming from the ministry and the missions. However, the minister will answer your questions on Tuesday when we have the report from our committee. So the minister’s response is deferred to Tuesday next week. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.11
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial years ended 30 June 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 for the following:

Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources;

Population and Development Linkages, Reproductive Health and Gender Reproductive Rights UNFPA Funded Projects implemented by Population Secretariat;

Ministry of Local Government;

Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control; 

Ministry of Education and Sports (Uganda National Education Support Project);

Ministry of Water and Environment (Climate Change Initiative Project);

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (United Nations Development Programme);

Ministry of Water and Environment (Improving Policies and Strategies for Sustainable Environment);

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (United Nations Development Programme);

Road Sector Support Project 3 – ADF Project Id No. P-Ug-Dbo-020 and loan No. 2100150020793 Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge Road;

Ministry of East African Community Affairs;

Ministry of Water and Environment (Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project);

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation;

Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology;

Uganda Embassy in Tripoli;

Uganda High Commission in Nairobi;

Uganda Embassy in Moscow;

Permanent Mission to United Nations, New York;

Uganda Embassy in Addis Ababa;

Enterprise Uganda (United Nations Development Programme);

Bank of Uganda;

European Investment Bank – Republic of Uganda Apex Private Enterprise Loan Scheme;

Bank of Uganda;

Uganda Bureau of Statistics;

Kyambogo University (Norhed – Enable Project);

Ministry of Education and Sports (UNFPA funded programme);

Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development (UNFPA Funded Programme);

Ministry Of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities (Improving Policies and Regulations to Support the Development of Markets in Tourism Projects);

Parliament of the Republic of Uganda (Strengthening Oversight Functions for Accountable Service Delivery United Nations Development Programme);

Uganda Bureau Of Statistics (UNFPA funded Government programme component of data availability and use);

Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (United Nations Development Programme);

Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project – Malaria Component Round 7 in the Ministry of Health;

The National Curriculum Development Centre;

Bank of Uganda – Agriculture Credit Facility; 

Ministry of Education and Sports (Improving Learning in Uganda Project);

The UNDP Funded Project of Strengthening Sustainable Environment and Natural Resource Management, Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in Uganda implemented by World Wide Fund for Nature Uganda;

Strengthening of the Management of the Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda;

The Global Alliance for Vaccine Initiative (GAVI) funding to Ministry of Health for ISS, HSS, and VIG Programmes;

Makerere University (Adaptation of Small Scale Biogas Digesters for use in Rural Households in Sub-Saharan Africa Project);

Micro-Finance Support Centre Limited and Rural Income and Employment Enhancement Project;

Ministry of Education and Sports (Australian Partnership Programme in Higher Education and Research for Development – Kyambogo University);

Ministry of Water and Environment (Improving Policies and Strategies for Sustainable Development, UNDP).

Madam Speaker, l beg to lay all these on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. They are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back. Honourable members, we skipped part of item No.4. Let us go to 4(a) quickly.

LAYING OF PAPERS

7.21
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, in accordance to rule 32(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the Appointments Committee to the National Assembly of Namibia. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. A date for debate will be appointed. 

7.23
MR OSCAR OMONY (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report on IOGT International in Cooperation with the Alcohol and Drug Information Centre Conference in Sri Lanka.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. A date for debate will be appointed.

7.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016, Statutory Instrument No. 42.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Finance will examine it and if there are issues to raise, they will come back to us.

7.24
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the Inter Sessional Meetings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Belgium, Brussels, from 10 to 14 October 2016.
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. A date for its debate will be appointed.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL (THE NATIONAL COMMUNITY WORKS BILL, 2016)

7.24
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I rise to present a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, moved under rule 111:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted it's Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94(1) of the Constitution and clause 4(b) of Article 94 and Rule 110 permitting a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

NOTING THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under objective XXIX of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy calls upon the citizens of Uganda to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda, to engage in gainful work for the good of themselves, family and the common good and to contribute to the well-being of the community where the citizens live;

FURTHER NOTING that Article 17 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 states that a citizen of Uganda has a duty, among others, to protect and preserve public property, render national service, and to create and protect a clean and healthy environment;

APPRECIATING THAT during the pre-colonial era, clan leaders, elders, chiefs or kingdoms in Uganda successfully mobilised community members to participate in self-help projects such as roads and water source maintenance, and this collective approach to problem solving by the community remained in force till the onset of colonialism, and the practice continued even in the post-independent rural and urban communities;

CONCERNED, HOWEVER, that the good practice of a collective approach to problem solving is dying out and most rural and urban communities have neglected their duties and responsibilities to work for the common good of the community;

FURTHER  CONCERNED that  there  appears  to  be  no  proper  oversight  or monitoring and motivation of the community to voluntarily engage in collective work for the good of the community and this has bred apathy, poor hygiene and sanitation, uncontrolled littering in addition to poor disease prevention;

CONVINCED, HOWEVER, that the enactment of a legal framework that regulates and encourages participation of citizens in community works shall promote sustainable development, a healthy community and foster unity in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that: This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Community Works Act, 2016”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Justify very briefly.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much for your guidance, our Chief Whip, because this is my first time to present a motion.

Honourable members, traditionally, everybody was a worker and there was no other way of earning a living other than working. This was confirmed by the late Nyerere who said, “Treat a guest as a guest for two days; on the third day, give him a hoe.” A hoe is a symbol of work. In Luganda, this Bill can be called bulungi bwansi Bill. In essence, the Bill is to make sure that all able-bodied Ugandans are put to task to participate in community service as we shall maybe agree in future.

Why do I seek for leave? We need to consult different stakeholders. As you know, local governments have been making ordinances and by-laws to compel people to work but they are not working.

We are also seeking leave so that we benchmark other countries like Rwanda. Of recent, you may have seen the President of Rwanda laying bricks. They have already constructed over 500 schools under this programme. 

Honourable members, I am seeking for leave and hopefully, you are going to grant it to me. I thank you. 

7.32
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Mbwatekamwa, for the motion that you have just presented. I stand to support and second the motion for the Parliament of Uganda to give leave to my honourable colleague so that he can present the Bill to this Parliament to enable Ugandans appreciate that this is an effort that people have to revive.

Madam Speaker, when I was growing up in a local village called Agu in Ngora, my late great grandfather, who was my mentor, would always organise communities whenever he would take leave from the police. He would organise communities to ensure that no one litters the roads and the community access roads would be cleaned by the communities themselves. Madam Speaker, today this is dying out. 

Ugandans are dying of different diseases, for example hepatitis B in almost the whole of east and northern Uganda. We also have diarrhoea and other diseases brought about by ill health. Uganda spends a lot of money to ensure that we address the emergencies brought about by these diseases caused by carelessness and littering in this country. I would like to imagine that this Bill would be very imperative in addressing issues related to sanitation and hygiene in the country. Given that background, I would imagine that when hon. Mbwatekamwa is granted leave, this will be very good for this Parliament because a Bill would be adopted.
 
Madam Speaker, we also know that in the local councils, different ordinances have been passed, like the environment ordinances in the local councils that were passed by some districts. However, some districts cry out that implementation of those ordinances becomes very hard because the line ministries delay to sign these ordinances. 

Regarding sanitation and hygiene, today if we are to get data based on household hygiene and sanitation in Uganda, it will still be very wanting. Cultural attitudes towards this are also wanting. I would like to imagine that when this Bill is presented and adopted by the Tenth Parliament, it will be a guiding document to enable Ugandans to appreciate that it is not all about Government; Government is the people and so they should appreciate maintaining sanitation and hygiene in their localities. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations Conference of Parties. Uganda has ratified different protocols promoting sanitation and hygiene and addressing climate change. Today, if we must address these international instruments and if they are to mean anything to the local person, they need to be domesticated. This Bill will address most of those concerns. 

Madam Speaker, as I take leave of this microphone, I would like to encourage the honourable members seated here; this Bill will be an eye-opener. Today, the Parliamentary Forum on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene visited Katanga. I stay in Makindye and we visited a slum in there. It is disturbing that even when there are toilets nearby that are built by Government, the community can still afford to use polythene bags to defecate and abandon the faecal matter -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now entering the contents of the Bill.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon honourable colleagues to grant hon. Mbwatekamwa leave of this House because he has a lot to do to ensure that this Bill is well packaged and brought to this House by benchmarking even great countries that are championing cleanliness. 

Rwanda has been awarded the title of the cleanest country in the whole of Africa. I think we have something to borrow from them. Singapore is another country to look at because its nationals have become very patriotic and ensure that if anybody throws even a paper, everyone is responsible to ensure that that person pays for doing this. 

Madam Speaker, with those arguments put forward, and I am convinced that the honourable members have bought them, I would like to second the motion to grant leave to hon. Mbwatekamwa to present the National Community Works Bill, 2016 to the Tenth Parliament. I beg to move. 

7.39
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the way you call us by name because I have been here since May and I am still struggling to know Members by name.

Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion. When the National Community Works Bill is passed into law, as a country and a city we will become cleaner. Look at Singapore and Rwanda; Rwanda was once known for its tragic history but today, it is said to be one of the cleanest countries in Africa, if not the cleanest country. 

Rwanda has been able to achieve this as a result of community works locally called “omuganda”, which literally means “coming together” in Kinyarwanda. They normally conduct this every fourth Saturday of the month and they do that in the morning. The National Community Works Bill will equally implement bulungi bwansi in Uganda if passed into an Act.

Secondly, the National Community Works Bill, if passed, will further bring people of different political ideologies together. Imagine a situation where a majority leader of the Opposition is doing community work with a majority of the NRM in communities like Kamuli and elsewhere in the country. 

Through community work, people would be engaging together and in this way, we would be bringing together people from across the business community, politicians, professors and people of all walks of life who would get in touch with the wanainchi. This would promote peace and unity in the country. Indeed, we need this National Community Works Bill. 

Madam Speaker, in Lugazi Municipality, we are already ahead. We passed a by-law at the municipal level where all local councils at village level are actively involved and are responding to community works locally known as bulungi bwansi. We are steadily progressing and in a period of five months, from July when we passed the by-law, we are witnessing great change. I have equally witnessed the same in Lwengo District under the chairmanship of the LCV Chairman, Mr Mutabazi. We indeed need the National Community Works Bill.

Looking at goal No. 1 of the Sustainable Development Goals and the National Development Plan, through community work we can be able to understand community problems better.

In conclusion, with national community work, all able-bodied Ugandans, including visitors, idle young men and women in communities, will be able to pitch in on a selected national day. We shall close all the stores, schools will be involved, streets will be cleaned, our drainages will be cleaned, pathways in villages will be cleared and water wells will be built and maintained. Hospitals will also be built and renovated and the same will apply to schools. This National Community Works Bill is long overdue; we need to see the Pearl of Africa shining once again. I so submit. 

7.43
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara West County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion to grant the Member leave to proceed with the Private Member’s Bill. I would like to do that because of four reasons.

The first one is that this is part and parcel of the African tradition. The late Prof. Akiiki Byaruhanga, in his book The African Philosophical Heritage, pointed out that collective community work encourages oneness. He said this is because traditionally in Africa, we believe “I am because we are and since we are, therefore I am”. I believe this Bill will encourage unity among Ugandans.

Secondly, community participation is part and parcel of our decentralisation policy. It will, therefore, encourage improvement in local government service delivery in terms of community contribution, participation and oversight. It will not only be in health and sanitation, as hon. Amongin articulated, but also in other projects such as roads, environment and education. If we encourage the community to participate and support their local governments, this will have a positive impact on national development.

Third is the issue of patriotism - the love of country and community, which is part and parcel of the NRM philosophy. This is good and consistent with what we believe in the NRM Government, and I believe that all other political parties would like to encourage Ugandans to love their community and country.

Lastly, it is good for our children. The future of our children is in us inculcating in them certain key values. A society cannot develop without good moral values. The values of voluntarism, self-help and collectivism will help us to reduce individualism, selfishness and crime. 

I would, therefore, like to congratulate hon. Gaffa for initiating this Bill. I would like to call on you to support him and I think he sits very comfortably on that Front Bench. (Laughter) This is the first time, honourable. Congratulations. 
	
7.46
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to differ on this motion as I do not support what this motion seeks to achieve. 

Madam Speaker, the spirit of voluntarism is good and we all cherish it. However, what this Bill seeks to achieve is actually compulsory conscription of labour, which will enshrine legal slavery in this country. It will become unconstitutional when every able-bodied Ugandan aged 18 years and above is forced – (Interjection) - I have a right to give my opinion – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Mbwatekamwa presented a motion seeking leave of the House to present a Bill; the Bill has not yet been presented. I am wondering whether the honourable colleague is in order to pre-empt the Bill that is going to be presented to this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should address whether he should be given leave or not. Don’t go into the body of the Bill because we are not yet there.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you very much for that wise ruling, Madam Speaker. For such a matter, we need to hold national consultations because we are looking at an issue, which touches on the people’s cultural fibre and way of life – (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Honourable member, what you are pointing out is that we need to do consultation. This is the process for the Bill and that is why we seek leave. What we are talking about is the Member’s constitutional right to move a Private Member’s Bill and he is seeking that leave. What you are attempting to define is how the Bill will proceed. (Applause)

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, what my colleague is saying is actually in line with my fears. To grant leave for this Bill to be presented is actually to set a precedent in this country where a Member can easily come up with a motion, which is unconstitutional. My fear is that the Bill is not about voluntarism because when you have Members talking about forced labour – the Bill is attached here -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, at this stage we cannot discuss the contents of the Bill. When the Bill comes, you will be able to speak for or against it. What he is asking now is, “Can you allow me to bring the Bill?”

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, we have had a history in this House where some Members tried to bring certain Bills and issues to do with financial implications were raised. 

Secondly, it is not voluntary -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, at this stage I do not know whether the Members will agree with him when the Bill finally comes. All we are saying is, can we allow him to bring it or not? Members may actually trash it when it comes. There is no guarantee that if we give you leave, your Bill is through.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I would like to assist hon. Othieno. He said that there is precedent where a Member was asked whether there was a Certificate of Financial Implications. I remember the response from the presiding officer then was that at this stage of seeking leave, you cannot ask for a Certificate of Financial Implications. 

Therefore, the Member should be rest assured that there are processes. The Parliamentary Council will be authorised to draft and when they are drafting, they make sure that they harmonise to ensure that there is no duplication and that they take into account issues of financial implications. If there are financial implications, it has to be the Government to move that motion or Bill according to Article 93 of the Constitution. This is the clarification I wanted to make.

THE SPEAKER: We are not yet there, hon. Othieno.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My stand is that you do not legislate on voluntarism. It is not correct for this House to come and say, “We are promoting voluntarism” and then set up a law to regulate it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have failed to appreciate that all he is asking is, “Can I be allowed to bring the Bill for first reading?” That is what he is saying.

7.52
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, this Bill should have come yesterday. (Applause) The earlier we gave him leave, the better. We want our community to have a sense of ownership in all that we do. This business of waiting for Government to help us has kept members of our communities behind. 

Madam Speaker, the other day you were presiding over a function in my constituency where the communities themselves are building a health centre III because that area lacks a lot in terms of health service delivery. I stand here to support you, hon. Mbwatekamwa, my neighbour from Mubende. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.54
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion in which the honourable member is seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. 

Madam Speaker, Members know that what the honourable member is coming up with was formerly called “Keep Uganda Clean”, which we have diverted from. We are now keeping Uganda very dirty –(Interjections) - It is very different from Operation Wealth Creation. People drop litter, polythene papers, maize cobs, among other things, and they do not mind and nobody is removing these things.

Madam Speaker, it is as if Government cannot do anything. For those of us who were in the local governments, recently Government came up with a project called Community Driven Development (CDD) where Government was giving communities money to smear their own houses, to erect racks in their own homes, dig pathways to their toilets, and dig pathways which their children could follow to go to school. This is unfortunate, Madam Speaker.

I always tell people in my community that if they refused to dig a pathway for their child to follow on their way to school, a snake will bite their children and I will go and help them bury. It is the responsibility of these communities to clear paths for children to go to school. Again in my community, if someone did not go to clean the water sources or the pathways, his goat, chicken or saucepan was taken out of his home because he did not act responsibly. I think this is right. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Defence and hon. Odur will concur with me that in my constituency and home district, we have a by-law that one must have a toilet in their home. If you do not have one, your waste will go to the water source and everybody will drink it. Some of these things have got to be enforced. I would like to stand with hon. Gaffa because what he is bringing out is really genuine. Thank you very much.

7.56
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support my colleague because I believe that it is his right to seek leave. Let us give him this opportunity because we have all justified and we know this is nice.

However, I would like to say that this will give him the opportunity to harmonise some of the good practices and maybe leave aside the bad practices. We should carry forward the good ones that have been highlighted. 

Madam Speaker, these days very many boreholes have been drilled but once they get spoilt, the people say that it is Government’s borehole that has gotten spoilt. They will not say, “our borehole”. That spirit of ownership is gone. I believe that when we agree to grant leave to our colleague, he will have more time to research and come up with a good Bill that will help us as a country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.58
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the movers of this motion because supporting each other is a virtue and I believe that if all Ugandans were mobilised, we would move another step forward with ease.

The second point that I would like to raise in support of this motion is that once upon a time in Uganda, there was a ministry called the Ministry of Culture and Community Development. It existed up to 1971 and one of the objectives of that ministry was community mobilisation for development. I am, therefore, very happy that you are bringing this Bill. We hope that Members of this House, when the time comes to present the Bill, will support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.59
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member and I support this motion seeking for leave of Parliament to bring a Bill for community work. I see a lot of merit and good faith in what the Member is asking for.

Madam Speaker, we have suffered a lot in our villages, in the areas we represent and in this country as a whole; people take for granted what Government has done for them. People do not look after the properties and infrastructure that Government has put in place. We tend to leave a lot of these things to go to waste. 

This Bill for which the Member is seeking leave is going to help us, particularly when it manifests into a law, to take responsibility, especially when we participate in cleaning. We are going to own these things and not destroy them the way we have been doing before this very good motion came to us. Thank you.

8.01
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate hon. Mbwatekamwa for coming up with this very good motion. I therefore wish to support it.

Madam Speaker, this is a revival of the good manners, cooperative spirit and cohesion in our society here in Buganda, which is enshrined in bulungi bwansi. This Bill, if permission is granted and it is enacted into a law, is going to cause community cohesion. We will not only stop at working together but we will even have cohesion within the society. When we were growing up, children belonged to the community. Any parent who found you misbehaving along the road would take disciplinary action against you and call you to order.

Madam Speaker, what we are doing here is not new in modern society. In the business world, this is called corporate social responsibility - giving back to where you reap from. We live in the community and we should therefore work for the community. 

Most importantly, this is going to inculcate a culture of owning our properties in the communities. One of my colleagues referred to boreholes. The community does not own the boreholes; they are the responsibility of the Members of Parliament. Whenever they break down, they look for the Member of Parliament to repair them. Whenever the pit latrines at the schools break down, it is the Members of Parliament. It is as if the Member of Parliament is the only member of the community who is responsible for providing these community services.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion and I call upon colleagues to support it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 8.00 p.m. The motion has been spoken for by many Members but one Member has spoken against the motion for leave. I would like to put the question that this House grants leave to the honourable member to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Community Works Act, 2016” and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, you can proceed to arrange for the publication and then it will come for first reading. Hon. Othieno will have all the time to trash it.

Honourable members, I wanted us to receive the report of the Committee on National Economy but it is coming to 8.00 p.m. Can we give hon. Syda Bbumba first priority on Tuesday to present it before we go to any other issues? We will give you time on Tuesday.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I thought she would present and lay it on the Table and then we can discuss it later.

THE SPEAKER: We can listen; it is not very big. It is about 10 pages.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issues of the economy are very critical, following what the minister presented here last time. I think we need to receive it when we are fresh and when all Members are here for us to have a meaningful debate. We are very few here and next time, the other Members absent will come when they might not have read it. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal that you let this be the first item after your communication on Tuesday so that we give it about two hours, because these are issues that are affecting this economy and we need to have a comprehensive debate on the national economy. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that okay with you, Members? You will listen after lunch? Okay. Clerk, the first item will be hon. Syda Bbumba of the Committee on National Economy before we do other things that we have already agreed to do because they have been on the Order Paper for some time.

Honourable members, House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. I am told that the report is on your iPads; read it before she presents.

(The House rose at 8.06 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 December 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
