Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Tuesday, 3 December 2019

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You may already know that the International Anti-corruption Day is observed on 9 December every year. To commemorate this year’s day, the Inspectorate of Government has targeted young people in schools. They have partnered with the National Debate Council (NDC) with the support from GIZ to engage young people in the anti-corruption discussion through the National Schools Debate Championship.

A number of activities for this year’s Anti-Corruption Week will run from 6 to 10 December this year at Gayaza High School. The Senior Schools’ National Debate Championship grand finale will be held here in Parliament on the 9th of December this year. Honourable members, you are requested to attend and also participate. As you know, the debate is always structured around the children debating against Members of Parliament and for the last few years, I think the children have won. So, this year, we should win.

Today, we have placed two Bills on the Order Paper for First Reading - the Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019 and the Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2019. On 30 September 2019, the Clerk to Parliament wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the certificates of financial implications for the two Bills. To date, no response has been received. 

Section 76 (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that a certificate of financial implications shall be deemed to have been issued after 60 days from the date of request of the certificate. The 60 days have elapsed, as the date was 30 November. So, we shall proceed with the Bills; as the law deemed, we now have the certificate of financial implications. 

We all know why this particular provision was made. It was made to stop the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Executive from using the certificate to try and halt the process of a private Member’s Bill. The law was improved in the interest of the private Members. We shall, therefore, have these Bills read for the first time today. I hope the private Members are ready to proceed.

Honourable members, yesterday, 2 December 2019, I received a request from hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Member of Parliament for Ndorwa East County and Shadow Attorney General. His request is to gazette the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2019. Following forth from what I have just said, this particular request was signed by the Clerk on a letter dated 18 September 2019. I think it was delivered on 23 September 2019 and received by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; I see a stamp here. If you count from 23 September to date, it means the period of 60 days elapsed on 23 November. 

The Member’s request is that I should direct the Clerk to Parliament under rule 121 (1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure to publish the Bill in the Gazette to enable him present it to the House for its first reading. Clerk, you are accordingly directed to gazette this private Member’s Bill so that it can find its way for First Reading to Parliament. I think we have gone through the processes of this Bill and we know what we have been through with it. 

Honourable members, I have been notified that hon. Kasolo, the Minister of State for Microfinance, has prepared a statement that he had undertaken to present on 26 November. He is ready with it but it was not ready by yesterday when we were approving the Order Paper. We will alter the Order Paper to accommodate the statement. It is a policy statement, which attracts debate. The Order Paper is accordingly altered to accommodate hon. Kasolo. The letter for that request is also here.

Thank you, Members. There are Members who had requested for the Floor. The Member for Matheniko, would you like to take the Floor?

2.08
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Sunday, 1 December 2019, Ugandans woke up to bad news on the front page of the Sunday Vision, to the effect that Karimojong girls are being sold to Al Shabaab. It is shocking news for us that this inhuman act of selling human beings is still being practised in Uganda. This is totally unacceptable. We condemn it in the strongest terms possible.

Mr Speaker, what began as street children from Karamoja has now transcended to another form of slave trade. These children were sold in some market in Teso subregion, in an area where the perpetrators got in touch with these young girls. Some of them who are as young as 10 years have been trafficked through the ports of Mombasa, Malindi and Lamu on the Indian Ocean.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter? 

MR LOKII: May I, therefore, pray to Government through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to first of all establish whether this story in the newspaper is true. Secondly, can we know the points of exit used for these children, for purposes of ensuring that such inhuman acts do not reoccur in the future? 

Can the Government also ascertain the numbers and identities of these girls who were affected and are now in the hands of Al Shabaab? May we know the perpetrators of this act? We also pray that Government pursues this with the aim of returning these young girls back to Uganda and reintegrating them back to their communities. Mr Speaker, I pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response from the Government on this matter? Ministry of Internal Affairs has been mentioned.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, we read that story in the media and asked our people in the investigations department to find out whether it was true or not. I promise that in the course of this week, we shall have some information and we should be able to present a report next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.11
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of urgent importance that I am raising here is about Kazo. As we speak, the bridge that connects Engari and Kazo subcounties was washed away yesterday. Even if the new district would have managed to undertake repairs to provide passage for people, Kazo Subcounty has no grader. When we left Kiruhura, we did not pick even a wheelbarrow. 

The roads in Kazo have not been worked on. My prayers are that the Ministry of Works and Transport should urgently avail Kazo with a road unit to enable the people of Kazo maintain their roads.

Secondly, this should be treated as an emergency. The Ministry of Works and Transport should rush to Kazo and see whether they can organise passage for residents; otherwise, young children will perish in that river.

Lastly, I would like to request Government to avail road units to all newly created districts. I thank you very much.

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the Minister of State for Works and Transport will be attending to this issue tomorrow morning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow morning? That is good. Thank you. 

2.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to raise a matter that requires very urgent attention. 

At the end of August 2019, I raised a matter concerning the poor state of roads in Agago District and I mentioned the road from Corner Kilak to Adilang, Wiluke to Bulugi but especially from Lukee to Patongo Town Council. I also mentioned the section between Patongo and Adilang.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport, following a directive from the Speaker chairing the House then, followed up with a statement two weeks later, confirming that works would begin on those roads in the first week of October. October and also November have elapsed without any works.

This morning, as I was driving back from my home in Adilang, I could not pass through the road, especially the section around Olupe stream in Patongo Town Council and the one between Ladere and Moodege. These sections are completely closed. As I speak, over 14 business trucks are stuck on these roads and no vehicles are able to pass. For the last three days, the state of the roads that I have mentioned are in very poor condition and business people are stuck without any hope of getting their goods to their final destinations.

The section from Lukee to Patongo Town Council is also completely cut off. Patients from Kotomor Subcounty, Lira-Palwo, Omot, Arum and Adilang cannot access Kalongo Hospital, which is the only health facility that we have. In addition, there has not been any public transport for the last three days.

Mr Speaker, we require urgent attention. I would like to request that the Ministry of Works and Transport swiftly takes action before the end of tomorrow to fix that section of the road.

Two weeks ago, I also mentioned floods and water logging in Patongo Subcounty, Patongo Town Council, Omot Subcounty, Lukole Subcounty as well as parts of Laperebong, Parabong and Lira-Kato. They are in dire need of emergency support. However, since then, no action has been taken by the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness. I would like, therefore, to request that action be taken. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, this does not require a statement; it requires action. Therefore, tell us about action.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, last week we debated a statement in which the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness informed the House and the country about the situation we are in, especially brought about by the rainy season that we are in now. There are roads, which have been cut off and areas which require relief. Parliament agreed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases Shs 20 billion from the Contingency Fund to attend to these areas. Therefore, we are in the process of releasing money to the Office of the Prime Minister.

Yesterday in Cabinet, we discussed this issue and we hope that in the next week, the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness will have reached some of these areas, which require immediate attention. We will not attend to every situation because of the resources, but there are areas that need attention and one of them is the area the honourable member has just mentioned. Therefore, we will be able to attend to them once we get the resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is relief; what about the roads issue?

MR BAHATI: We agreed that we will also attend to those critical areas. There are areas, for example, where you find that a subcounty is cut off from the hospital or from other areas. We are looking at areas like those in Teso, with flooded areas which require some vessels to cross over.

We are looking at critical areas. Because of the available resources, we shall be able to attend to only critical areas as we wait for the rainy season to end. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I went to Lower Madi where there is a river called Oyo. This river has cut off a whole section of the population; they cannot move. I could not pass. We had to use a longer route to go where I was going. It should have been a 15-minute drive but we took an hour and a half.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said, the resources are limited, as you can imagine. We have only Shs 20 billion to attend to these areas. We hope that with the district road equipment, we can attend to these issues in a manner that –(Interjections)- The Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness presented a statement and highlighted all these areas that are going to be attended to. 

In the meantime, we are processing resources as quickly as possible, so that they can be attended to. We request Members to be a little bit patient as we process the areas for us to attend to.  Thank you.

Mr ssekikubo: Mr Speaker, the minister is being ambivalent. He is talking about relief yet the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness is well known for providing relief in terms of food, sheltered accommodation, blankets, jerricans, among others. However, what we are talking about is the breakdown in communication because of roads, which is different from what he is telling Parliament.

Secondly, we received meteorological reports as way back as September. Early warning systems worked this time because we saw it coming. What we are talking about are emergencies. Honourable minister, an emergency does not require you to first wait for procrastination, Cabinet sittings and the normal appropriations. This is an emergency, which must be handled as such without going through the due process. 

Can the honourable minister, therefore, tell us what emergency interventions he is taking to open up the roads in Agago and other parts of the country that are cut off from communication?

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, there are even no points of procedure in this matter now because both Cabinet and Parliament have already taken a decision on it. The minister says there is Shs 20 billion which is going to take a week to be got. There are broken bridges that have cut people off from other parts of the country and trucks that are stuck; we just need you to tell us what is going to happen as of this evening and tomorrow. 

Mr Bahati: Mr Speaker, as I said, probably the Minister of Works and Transport would be requested to come –

The deputy Speaker: Can we call the Minister of Works and Transport to come? Someone could do that.

Mr Bahati: We are going to do so.

The deputy speaker: We can have the honourable member for Pakwach while we wait for the Minister of Works and Transport to come and deal with this matter.

2.23
Ms jane avur (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance. 

The fishing communities in Pakwach District are living in a lot of distress due to the unbecoming conduct of the soldiers from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), particularly those in Dei Subcounty, Panyimur Town Council and Panyimur Subcounty. Panyimur Town Council has one of the largest markets in Pakwach District. Besides fishermen, a number of traders carry out business at that market. 

The policy on immature fish is a known policy in Uganda but the way it is being implemented is unfair to the people of Pakwach. Some time back in October, the UPDF tried to confiscate immature fish in Panyimur Market but they met resistance. However, after that, they went and waylaid people in Nyaravur Subcounty in Padyere and confiscated not only immature fish but also whatever was on that truck, which was unlawful. If it was only about confiscating, we would have expected them to take only the immature fish. 

The law says that they should either auction or donate what they confiscate. As the people of Pakwach, we are wondering where they auctioned or donated whatever they confiscated. We are losing local revenue as a district because that is our main market. Most of the people doing business are mainly women who live on borrowed capital. They live on loans and they are in a lot of distress.

Our prayer to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is that the implementation of this policy should be done in a co-ordinated manner. The district security officials should be informed and they should participate in this operation. They should also arrest the situation on the waters but not in the market or along the road.

Secondly, the President requested for land where fish farming can be done and our people have given that land in Panyimur. We are requesting the Office of the President or the Minister for the Presidency to speed up that process so that –(Member timed out.)

The deputy Speaker: Your microphone is not on.

Ms avur: I am sorry. We are requesting the Office of the President to speed up that process because land has already been offered, so that we can have an alternative way of fish farming for the people.  Thank you.
 
The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, respond to the matter of UPDF.

2.27
The minister of defence and veteran affairs (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for raising her concern. Of course, the policy and guidelines on the management of fish on the lakes and curtailing illegalities in fishing is managed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The job of the UPDF is only to support the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to enforce those guidelines.
 
My understanding, subject to what the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will say, is that once a person or group of persons are involved in illegal fishing, what is impounded is not only the immature fish but also the instruments including vehicles, nets and other things that have been used to transact the illegal fishing. However, if Members want a more elaborate statement on the guidelines of what constitutes illegal fishing and what should be impounded, the best person to answer the question is the minister in charge of fisheries.

The deputy speaker: Honourable minister, I specifically asked you to respond because the honourable member talked of the UPDF’s unbecoming behaviour on River Nile.

Mr mwesige: Well, if there is a report of UPDF’s unbecoming behaviour, let us get it. We have structures through which UPDF officers are disciplined. The structures are very elaborate. Let the Member interact with me after here, either within the precincts of Parliament or in my office, and we shall handle that case on its merits.

The deputy speaker: Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here or the Government Chief Whip?

2.29
The government chief whip (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to that information. I will quote a statutory instrument, which we use when we are carrying out law enforcement on the waters. I remember we use Statutory Instrument No. 32, which talks about impounding everything, which is being carried on the truck including ground nuts - all is indicated in that instrument. However, that very instrument gives the minister powers to pardon any culprit upon making an apology. So, the powers come from that instrument. 

Enforcement is enforcement. We talk about involving everybody - tell the police or the LC V. We, the politicians, will always talk on behalf of our voters. Therefore, when you go to carry out enforcements, sometimes you minimize information for fear of leakage because if you want to arrest somebody, he might get to know and run away –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Fish Act creates a fisheries officer who is the Commissioner of Fisheries. Under the Act, it is only the fisheries officer who is supposed to appoint people who must help in the execution of those duties.
However, what we are dealing with is the involvement of the army, yet the law makes no provision for the army being involved. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to continue justifying the excesses of the army by showing that they help in the process of identifying immature fish, yet this is a preserve of the fisheries officer? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not debate as if we have not been in this House. We have been here and debated the involvement of the UPDF in controlling the water bodies in terms of handling of fish and the issue of immature fish. I think we have had that debate. We know that there was a directive from the President - we now that as a fact. Therefore, it cannot be us again saying there is the involvement of the UPDF. 

If they have misbehaved, that is another matter. However, if they are doing it within the authority they have been given to support the fisheries officers, then I do not see a problem. We have had this debate, so let us - However, if there is misconduct, that is completely a different matter.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have staff members of Mwisi Primary School in Kabale District represented by hon. David Bahati and hon. Ndamira Catherine. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

Can we have this matter of Pakwach and the areas around there dealt with by the responsible minister urgently? It would be easier if they were here so that we sort out this matter, take action and we see where to go. The Minister of Defence says he is going to find out the other issues and then take action.

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am going to make sure that I tell the ministers in charge - the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the Minister of Internal Affairs-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is already here.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: They need to be convened by a higher authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

2.35
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. 

The heavy rains that are going on in the country have not spared the people of Mbale. Living below Mt. Elgon has now become very dangerous. Last week, we had a heavy downpour that caused a lot of havoc to the people of Mbale Municipality. It destroyed their property and crops and even killed a child.

I talked to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, who promised that he was going to come to the aid of the people of Mbale. Mr Speaker, we approved Shs 20 billion on this Floor last week. However, I was surprised when the minister said that they have not taken a decision on that money. When it is an emergency, it does not even need to go to Cabinet. An emergency is an emergency. People are suffering, sleeping outside and their houses are on the ground; they need urgent help.

Mr Speaker, we want Government or the minister to take action immediately and release the money to the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness, so that the minister comes to the aid of our people. Our people are suffering. We are waiting. We do not want you to take things lightly, honourable minister. When it is an emergency, it is an emergency and it needs immediate attention. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it looks like today you are in the dock; you are holding the money too long.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, on the issue of emergencies, I know it actually affects so many people across the country. We debated this matter last week extensively. We even listed the areas which are most affected and we repeated it in Cabinet this week.

Therefore, Mr Speaker and colleagues, we are requesting that you give us a chance to serve you. We are releasing the Shs 20 billion in very few days so that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees can start moving. There is a process that has to be undertaken and we are doing that. However, we are aware that emergencies need to be attended to urgently and that is what we are doing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the process of releasing the money ongoing?

MR BAHATI: It is ongoing, Sir. We are moving very swiftly to make sure that we attend to these emergencies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper, honourable members?

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EMPLOYMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

2.38
MR AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for making a decision that we move our Bill after 60 days. We had already tried to follow up on the certificate of financial implications and failed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the law; it is not me. However, thank you for appreciating.

MS KUNIHIRA: I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have explained the circumstances under which this is being done. Section 76(4) of the Public Finance Management Act authorizes us to proceed even in the absence of the certificate issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is how we are proceeding with this Bill.

Therefore, this matter stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. This Bill should come back - it is a small Bill - so that we can have a discussion on it and see how we can move on. Thank you.   

Honourable members, there is no secondment for Bills for First Reading. This particular motion requires no secondment, therefore no debate. You second a motion when it is going to be debated. A motion that is not debated cannot be seconded. 

Okay, to satisfy hon. Adolf Mwesige, is the motion seconded?

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Members for Butaleja, Fort Portal Municipality, Jinja Municipality East, Lira. Thank you, honourable members; it is done. I know you want it handled today but for now, let us leave it. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA RED CROSS SOCIETY BILL, 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alex Byarugaba is not here. Is there somebody who can read this Bill for the first time? There is no one. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FAILURE TO GAZETTE THE 29TH DAY OF OCTOBER AS A PUBLIC HOLIDAY IN COMMEMORATION OF THE MURDER OF BISHOP JAMES HANNINGTON

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, on 30 October 2019, in the communication from the presiding officer of the House, an explanation was sought from my ministry about the failure to implement the presidential directive declaring the 29th day of October as a public holiday in commemoration of the murder of Bishop James Hannington, which happened in Mayuge District in 1885. 

From the historical perspective, Bishop Hannington, who is regarded as the first martyr in Uganda, was killed alongside 48 of his 50 pages who were speared and stoned to death at present-day Kyando village in Mayuge District. 

Hannington joined priesthood at the age of 21 years and was ordained in 1875 as bishop at the age of 37 years. He left England in 1882, leading a party of six missionaries to East Africa. Crippled by fever and dysentery, Hannington was forced to return to England in 1883 until he recovered in 1884. In 1885, Hannington again departed for Africa and his diocese included missions of the Church Missionary Society at the coast and inland in Buganda. 

Legend has it that Buganda’s conqueror would come from the east. Therefore, against all obstacles placed in his way by King Mwanga of Buganda, Hannington’s party safely reached a spot near Victoria Nyanza on 21st of October - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a very simple question: Why have you failed to gazette it? It is that simple. 

MR KARUBANGA: Mr Speaker, in Uganda, Hannington Day is celebrated under the auspices of the Anglican Church led by Busoga Diocese. This year, the celebration was held – (Interjections) – that was the 134th anniversary since its inception. During the 133rd commemoration anniversary, which was presided over by His Excellency the President of Uganda, he welcomed the declaration of the 29th day of October as a public holiday. 

Whereas the Ministry of Public Service has the responsibility of communicating to the public the gazetted public holidays, the powers to declare and gazette a public holiday are conferred on His Excellency the President under the Public Holidays Act of 1965. 

Our ministry is following up the matter with His Excellency the President but until we get a directive, we cannot communicate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the process is on. It can only be done by the President and he has not yet done it. They are following it up. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of guild councillors from Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) Comprehensive Institute in Kawempe Division South, Kampala District. They are represented in this House by hon. Mubarak Munyagwa and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF MICROFINANCE INTERVENTION IN THE COUNTRY

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo Kyeyune): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the 9th Sitting of the 2nd Meeting of the 4th Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 26 November 2019, I undertook to present to the House a comprehensive statement on the state of microfinance interventions in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that I have prepared a statement and I shall present the state of microfinance interventions along two thematic areas: the legal and policy framework for microfinance; and the microfinance programmes and projects. 

The Legal and Policy Framework 

Government sponsored the enactment of the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) and Money Lenders Act, 2016 to improve the reputation and integrity of Uganda’s microfinance industry, which had been badly damaged by rampant fraud in Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisation (SACCOs) and unethical lending practices by some moneylenders. I am pleased to report that implementation of the law is ongoing.

The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) and Money Lenders Act, 2016 created the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority (UMRA) to license and supervise all tier 4 MFIs and money lenders. The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority was set up in November 2017. The authority received 9ll applications this year and it subsequently assessed and issued licences to 611 moneylenders and ll7 non-deposit taking MFIs. 

Government is building the capacity of UMRA with support from development partners such as the World Bank and Financial Sector Deepening Uganda, to effectively supervise licensed entities.

Government of Uganda, in consultation with other stakeholders, has also developed regulations for SACCOs. They shall be directly supervised by UMRA and Bank of Uganda, in line with clause 110 of the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act, 2016. 

The SACCOs Regulations were submitted to the First Parliamentary Counsel for legal drafting. We envisage that they will be published and gazetted before the end of this year, so that licensing of SACCOs can commence at the beginning of 2020. 

Mr Speaker, upon the coming into force of the Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2016, it allowed commercial banks to appoint agents under agent banking; allowed commercial banks to directly sell insurance; and allowed commercial banks to provide Islamic banking products and services. However, there is need to reform the legal framework for Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions (MDIs) to level the playing field in the market for commercial banks and MDIs. 

Accordingly, Government of Uganda, in collaboration with Bank of Uganda, has developed the Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2019 in line with Cabinet’s approved principles to allow MDIs to appoint agents, sell insurance as well as provide Islamic banking products and services. The Bill is currently with the First Parliamentary Counsel for legal drafting and it shall be submitted to Parliament next year.

Microfinance Programmes and Projects 

There is a new programme known as the Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation, popularly known as emyooga. After His Excellency the President's wealth creation mass mobilisation countrywide tours this year, the President came to the conclusion that previous interventions for job creation and wealth creation had not exhaustively resulted into mass employment opportunities, particularly for the youth. His Excellency the President therefore proposed the Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation to address the persisting unemployment and wealth creation challenges.

The Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation was designed to provide additional Government support to the ordinary Ugandans through the establishment of zonal artisans - the Jua kalis – parks, and specialised funds also known as emyooga. 

Under the emyooga initiative, Ugandans engaged in the following enterprises shall be mobilised to form savings groups at parish level and SACCOs at district level along their line of economic activities: boda boda cyclists, women entrepreneurs, carpenters, saloon operators, taxi operators, restaurant owners, welders, market vendors, youth leaders, people with disability, produce dealers, mechanics, tailors, journalists, and performing artists. The others include veterans, fishermen, and local leaders.

Government shall sensitise the communities, train the members in their savings groups and SACCOs, and empower each myooga specialised category with Shs 30 million as seed capital. I am pleased to report that this programme commenced with the implementation of the presidential initiative in five regional sensitisation workshops for leaders, which were held in Masaka, Mukono, Luweero, Mubende and Mpigi in November 2019.

More regional sensitisation workshops have been scheduled to be held in Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu, Ankole, Kigezi, Rwenzori, Bunyoro, West Nile, Acholi, Sebei, Teso, Karamoja, Entebbe and Kampala early next year. I would like to therefore, request colleagues to do what others have done, especially participate in these meetings.

The Microfinance Support Centre (MSC) Ltd is also another intervention. Government committed to capitalise the Microfinance Support Centre to provide affordable loans to Ugandans who are faced with a very high cost of finance. In this regard, an additional budget totalling to Shs 15 billion was disbursed to MSC last year and another Shs 40 billion was approved for capitalisation of the company.

It is against this background that Cabinet directed that beginning this financial year, MSC loans to SACCOs, village savings groups and loan associations shall be 8 per cent per annum, for onward lending to members, but not exceeding 18 per cent per annum. This is intended to reduce the high cost of money and avail cheap capital to people to start business.

Mr Speaker, last financial year, MSC disbursed a total of 609 loans, valued at Shs 62 billion, under its Islamic and conventional financing windows. The company also provided business development services to 754 client institutions, reaching out to 5,484 individual beneficiaries.

Another intervention is the Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA). Government recognised that the majority of Ugandans, and indeed the youth, live in rural areas. Government accordingly designed and launched a seven-year project called the Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas countrywide, with support from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) in 2014. 

The Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas is fostering financial empowerment of rural households through the delivery of financial literacy and business development skills’ training to members of SACCOs and Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs). 

The project is on track to achieve Government's development objective to sustainably increase access to and use of financial services by the rural population, focusing on outreach, sustainability and poverty alleviation. This is as demonstrated by the project's outreach of 865,648 households supported directly as at 30 April 2019 against a target of 750,000 households.

The Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas has two investment components, namely Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations development and the Community Savings and Credit Group (CSCG) development. Under the SACCO development component, 435 SACCOs countrywide, with 631,934 members, 27 per cent being women and 7 per cent being youth, have benefitted from direct project support; and 66 per cent of the SACCOs supported are already operationally self-sufficient. Under Community Savings and Credit Group (CSCG) development, the project established 25,236 new village savings groups with 294,666 members and strengthened an additional 3,086 mature village savings groups with 89,216 members. 

In view of the developments above, Government shall prioritise the following interventions in 2020: 

1. 	Continue to roll out the new tier 4 licensing regime, particularly to all SACCOs, to safeguard members' savings.

2. 	Submit the Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions (Amendment) Bill to Parliament.

3. 	The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority shall conduct countrywide sensitisation campaigns to educate the public about the tier 4 Act and licensing new SACCOs.

4. 	Implement the Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation countrywide.

5. 	We shall also continue with the capitalisation of the Microfinance Support Centre.

6. 	Consolidate the achievements of the Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas and conduct impact studies to inform Government interventions in the future. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this particular statement was requested for by the minister; it did not arise out of a question, so it will attract debate, which we will try to limit in light of what we have on the Order Paper, which is fairly long. Can we agree on two minutes? Thank you.

3.03
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. 

The minister has mentioned 8 per cent as being the charge for microfinance for onward lending. However, according to information available, this microfinance is lending at 13 per cent and demanding for post-dated cheques to recover all the repayments, plus security. I think the purpose for which the microfinance was created was to do away with the money lenders and stringent conditions. However, as we speak today, people are suffering and they do not see the difference between the moneylenders, commercial banks and the Microfinance Support Centre.

I witnessed a situation where a microfinance institution went for moneylending at 13 per cent two months back but there were stringent measures. Post-dated cheques to recover all repayments were issued and security was issued. When you compare this with commercial banks, which are giving loans at 17 per cent without stringent measures, it defeats the purpose as to why the Microfinance Support Centre was created.

When you look at our Parliament SACCO here, it is lending… (Member timed out)- I am still contributing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up.

3.05
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report. 

When we passed this loan request in 2014, at first there was serious resistance. I remember hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Ekanya and Members who were in the House then had refused to pass this loan request. We later agreed that we pass the loan request on condition that this money goes for lending to women. The minister then accepted that this money would be given out to rural women at a cheap cost.

I would like the minister to go back and read the Hansard because according to his statement, they are spending this money on sensitisation. Government has done a lot of interventions in as far as sensitisation is concerned. What was lacking was capital for people to do business. We agreed that this money be spent on giving out loans rather than sensitisation.  

Honourable minister, we would like you to crosscheck and maybe assure us that this money has not been spent on sensitisation but has been given out as loans. Thank you very much.

3.07
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister. The idea is good but my fear is the implementation. 

Sometime back, Government introduced the Youth Livelihood Programme and the youth were given money. Right now, I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). We have heard that the youth are running away and they are being looked for like thieves. When they received the money, they failed to remit back the funds. 

The minister is coming up with this particular programme but I would like him to be very clear on the criteria they are going to use to recover this money, especially if they are giving it out in terms of loans. Currently, in my district, Amuru, the ministry took some forms for the boda boda riders to fill and apply for some funds. I would like to find out from you, honourable minister, if that is the money you are talking about because youth are being mobilised, boda bodas are filling forms and they are so excited. However, we are scared about the refunding of this particular money. Thank you.

3.08
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report but I have two concerns. 

We have a small organisation called Mutual Trust that covers almost the whole of my constituency. They are arresting ladies. Even though someone has a balance of Shs 30,000 that person pays a fine of Shs 470,000. I secured six from Mukono Court; you can go there and find out. Who registers such microfinance companies? Even if someone says “I am bringing the money now”, they will say that this person is late by seven days, so they have to accept the charge of Shs 470,000, which is almost 10 times more than the actual balance.

Secondly, I have a concern, which I even mentioned to the minister when he came. The problem with the money that was given to the youth in 2015 is that people mistook that money to be for campaigns. Now, looking at this good programme, don’t you think people are also going to think that the money is for – (Interjection)- “cham cham” and at the end of the day they end up in prison? Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjections) - I was disorganised by the Government Chief Whip -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does the word mean anyway?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, my apologies. I was thinking in our language and in our language, cham cham means “eating eating”. I am sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which language is that? (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Luo. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I happen to speak that language and there is nothing like cham cham. (Laughter) There is only cham, which is food or cham which means eat. This “cham cham” is a concoction that is not part of our language. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: It is Luo from Kampala, Sir. (Laughter)

MR SSENYONGA: Mr Speaker, my appeal to the minister is to make sure that people are warned from day one that this money is not a gift or money for politicking. Otherwise, the programme is very good and we are really inspired. The minister should visit all areas, like I saw him in Mukono recently. I thank you.

3.11
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and most importantly, the revision of the interest rates from 13 to 8 per cent. That is very welcome.

A majority of our people survive on SACCOs. Actually, SACCOs are playing a very big role in the local population; so, the more we support these SACCOs with low interest rates, the better it will be for our local people because the bureaucracy in the commercial backs can only be met by the rich.

I think we should really revise this issue of loan sharks who target desperate citizens. They make people sign commitments without understanding them. We have seen many who are taken to the police. We even have some who were taken to Katojo Prison in Fort Portal. These market vendors sign agreements without knowing their implications. When they reach the magistrate, the law has to be followed and in the end, you cannot do much. Someone has a balance of Shs 200,000 and is asked to pay Shs 1.4 million –(Member timed out.)

3.13
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would also like to appreciate His Excellency the President for the Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation (Emyooga). 

I appreciate the minister’s statement where he said that some regions have already been trained on emyooga and others are going to be trained come 2020. He mentioned the regions of Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu, Ankole, etcetera. I do not see Lango subregion being mentioned. I do not know whether we are not part of this country. I need a statement on that.

Mr Speaker, there is this initiative called Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas. He has rightly said it is the youth that are really disadvantaged. The PROFIRA project is fostering financial empowerment and he said it is training SACCOs and village savings groups. 

We are already in the festive season. People have saved money but you do not know how many houses are being burnt; you do not know how many people are fleeing their homes because of non-payment. There is no regulation of these village savings groups and monies are being lost. People are saving for one year but they do not see the benefit. 

Where have you trained? I would love to see this data from those areas in the country. Which people have you trained so that we benefit and tell them that there is this programme? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.14
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the minister. 

Personally, I appreciate this proposal and I call upon my colleagues to seriously look into this. You can use it as a mobilisation tool because if there any people to carry out the sensitisation, it should be you, the MPs. Hon. Kasolo has this document and I have started using this information to prepare the youth, the women, the emyooga people and it is working very well. I, therefore, call upon you to take it seriously and use it because it is going to help you in this season.

However, what is lacking in the whole process is the mentorship of these groups. It is a good process that you need to mentor and monitor, step by step, so that you release these funds or the equipment as you mentor these people. It is these mentors that you are lacking in your chain. There are many retired people in this society whom you could hire at a low cost to mentor these groups. As they mentor and develop them, they can keep giving reports as they progress. 

If you could include that in your chain, it would go a long way to make this thing firm on the ground. Otherwise, the programme is very good for the country and good for you, colleagues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.16 
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the good statement that he has put forward. 

My reservation is basically about the timing of such projects. When you do not time them well, they look more political than economic. In addition, when you leave out the technical officers and the programme is executed by a politician, you cannot mobilise well.

When I talk about timing, I also refer to the time lag between when one proposes a business plan and when the money is actually reimbursed on the accounts of that person. This should also be considered. I have had groups of my constituents hiding because they submitted proposals in January, they were approved in May but the money was disbursed in July when the landlords had already evicted them. When they got the money on their accounts, the only thing they did was to solve some other personal problems. The landlords had already evicted them from the premises where they were proposing to have the businesses operate from.

Honourable minister, when it comes to urban areas like my constituency, we operate businesses in rented premises. When I submit my proposal in January and you come to assess my business, I am renting those premises. When you give me money after several months, I may have been evicted by then but I have other problems to solve, which may not be related to the business. That is my reservation. Thank you very much.

3.18
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I welcome the idea and I would like to thank the minister for presenting to this House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish you could simply go to the point quickly.

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned, for this programme to benefit our people better, we need to take the money to subcounty SACCOs. Let me give you an example. The furthest subcounty in my constituency is within 30 miles of the district headquarters. I do not expect a boda boda person to go to the district to look for this money.

Since we are under decentralisation, it would be better if we think about the subcounty SACCOs. Let us take the money to the subcounty SACCOs where our people can easily access it. If we take the money to the district headquarters, accessibility will not be easy for our people. That is my submission. Thank you.

3.19
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on the Presidential Initiative on Job and Wealth Creation. This project is already being implemented, Mr Speaker. However, as leaders we have received questions, complaints and concerns. 

I would like to understand from the minister the structure of the implementation of this project. How are the local governments involved? I am asking this because as it stands now, with the implementation taking place, there are concerns that big sums of money are being directed to beneficiaries in more or less the same areas. That is why I would like to understand the structure of the implementation of this project. Thank you.

3.20
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, when the President visited Bukedi, among the emyoogas he talked about were the traditional herbalists. (Laughter) Yes! It was very clear, but I am not seeing them in the document yet they are also members of these communities. They are serious voters and mobilisers. Religious leaders are not here - (Interjections) - They mobilise for Government –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Did you mean herbalists or those specialised in herbal medicines? I would like some clarification.

MR WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, when the President was in Bukedi, he talked about herbalists and religious leaders but I am not seeing them in this document. One cannot preach when they are poor. One cannot heal other people when they are not catered for. Therefore, honourable minister, can you tell the country where those people will get the money from? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the money was for the organised groups. Any group that is organised will access this money. Isn’t that true?

MR WALUSWAKA: It is true but these people are already organised; for example, we have seen Mama Fina already has a group. The religious leaders are already catered for –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see you are standing very strong for the herbalists. (Laughter)

3.23
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who thanked the minister. 

First of all, I would like to thank him so much because his ministry has been of great help in my region. It has supported the young people so much by sensitising them. It is not only about those in Masaka; there are even those from Nakasongola. You know I represent 25 districts.

I would also like to give the minister information. First of all, I would like you to bridge the gap between leaders at all levels and the youth. This is because the youth councillors in the districts can help us reach the local youth down in those districts.

I also request that you find a way of strengthening your manpower. Of course, the task is too big but somehow, I think you do not have enough manpower. Leaving Kiboga to go to Nakasongola or Rakai or Kalangala may take time yet when it comes to the young people, once you mobilise them and give them this kind of information, they would like to see things move so fast. That is my concern. Thank you.

3.24
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, inclusive development is very critical for national growth. As it is at the moment, there is widespread unequal access to financial services. So, bringing in the excluded population into the banking system is something commendable. 

I would like to appreciate the minister for his efforts. This is one of the very active ministers we have. He was in Amolatar for two days promoting a very robust strategy for outreach. As I speak, we have so many groups in Amolatar that have been organised only waiting for affordable credit, thanks to the minister and the NRM Government. (Applause)

Looking forward, we need to go beyond merely offering affordable credit. We need to organise our people and guide them on an appropriate livelihood opportunity. This is what the minister did when he was in Amolatar.

We need to improve the skills of these people. He has been talking about PROFIRA. We also had Enterprise Uganda and recently, we had the intervention of the Microfinance Support Centre and they mobilised our people. Our people are now ready and willing to receive credit that will come from Microfinance Support Centre. Therefore, rather than looking at affordable credit only - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have wound up this matter. Before I go back to the minister, there was one question that is pending. 

Honourable members, this is an important debate. You are talking about access to credit that the Member of Parliament for Kioga brought up. It is a debate we should have in a very comprehensive way because this is how we are going to uplift the people who do not have access to credit. 

The concept of SACCOs to an extent is misleading because SACCOs are savings and credit societies. Where is the “P” for production in it? The “P” is lacking in this framework. When I was growing up, we used to have something called crop finance. This was an advance given to farmers to buy implements, seeds and all the things that go with farming. When the farmers harvested and they were at the point of sale, this money was recoverable. It was deductible from the payments that were due to a particular farmer and it worked extremely well. Many of you, including me, went to school through this mechanism. So, without supporting the “P”, the available credit will go for consumption. 

That means enterprise identification is critical. That also means that you just do not make credit available to those who do not need it. It is those who have something to do and they are visibly doing it but lack the money to grow their capacity that should be supported. (Applause) Otherwise, if you just make money available, they will take the money and marry second wives. They will spend the money in one way or the other until it is done. You then start chasing them around as though they were criminals yet it was you who did not tell them why they were getting the money. We might need to restructure the whole thing.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo Kyeyune): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the colleagues who have made tremendous contributions towards this programme. 

To begin with your concern, this new arrangement popularly known as emyooga answers that concern because we are zeroing in on the already organised groups that are into specialised enterprises; for example, boda boda riders, carpenters and hairdressers are doing something. This is a new initiative that must be supported by all colleagues if we must help Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, hon. Mbabaali raised a concern that the Microfinance Support Centre is not lending at eight per cent and that instead, it is lending at 13 per cent. I said that beginning this financial year, from 1 July, the Microfinance Support Centre began lending at eight per cent. We are instructing SACCOs which are getting the money at eight per cent to only lend to their members at a rate not exceeding 18 per cent. Honourable colleagues, please take this information and follow it up.

Hon. Mawanda, yes it is this House which approved the PROFIRA loan and the Hansard –(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I had restrained myself from asking questions because I know possibly I will be misunderstood. Has the minister said that the Microfinance Support Centre lends at 8 per cent and SACCOs lend at 18 or 8 per cent? –(Interjections)- Eighteen is a commercial rate!

MR HARUNA KASOLO: Yes, I have said that the Microfinance Support Centre lends at 8 per cent and SACCOs are supposed to lend at a rate not exceeding 18 per cent. When I say but not exceeding 18 per cent, they are at liberty to lend below that, because SACCOs are managed by the members.

Mr Speaker, I was answering hon. Mawanda’s concern. This Parliament passed the PROFIRA loan in the Ninth Parliament and the Hansard is very clear. This loan was to do capacity building and the Hansard is very clear on that, hon. Mawanda. There is no way we can divert that project because it is supposed to do the capacity building -  training. It has done wonders in terms of financial literacy, enterprise selection and other related interventions.

Hon. Muyanja Johnson and hon. Kasibante were wondering about the timing. Honourable colleagues, we were voted into offices for a period of five years. Therefore, we are supposed to begin serving this country on the first day we are sworn in up to the last day. Therefore, we are working until we are voted out. (Applause) 

Hon. Ruhunda, yes people are signing agreements without knowing the repercussions and details of those agreements. I do not want to think that even us here do so –(Interjections)-Some do; okay. You see, it is because these people who are doing it are financially illiterate. They go for loans and ask three questions -  when am I getting the money? Where do I append my signature? How much is the money? Therefore, we need to do a lot of training. That is why you must encourage PROFIRA to do a lot of training. It is part of capacity building. 

Hon. Joy Atim said that Lango is left out. This new arrangement will leave no stone unturned. We are going to cover the entire country. Please, Lango get prepared because we are coming soon.

About the herbalists and religious leaders, I would like to say that we do not need to scatter our resources. This is a new arrangement. Let us begin with the 17 groups and if the results are okay, we shall bring on board other categories. However, for religious leaders, these are men and women of God and we do not have to corrupt them. They are serving God and if they are organised into groups, then the Microfinance Support Centre can extend cheap credit to them.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I request all Members to join me in mobilising people to save. If you do not do so, you will continue saving for them because any money you get will go to them. Therefore, encourage them to save because they are also earning something. They have great appetite that whatever they earn is what they spend. Please, join me in mobilising people to embrace a saving culture. If you do not do so, you will continue saving for them. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is what I am thinking - This matter of microfinance and access to credit is an important debate. This is a ministerial statement which under the circumstances we could not exhaustively debate and we cannot even take a decision on it. 

I would like to propose that we take this statement and send it to the committee of Parliament. They can have an interaction with the agencies that are doing microfinance and then they come back to us and we have a debate where we can take a decision. (Applause) 

If that is agreeable, then this particular statement of the minister is noted, with fairly a good debate, and stands referred to the Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development. They will look at it again and engage with the stakeholders, even some of the people who have received the money, and see how they are performing. Their experiences should enable the committee to come with some recommendations to us on how we can move on the way forward. It is a very important matter for our people.

MR LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that you give them timelines, considering the importance of the matter and the roadmap they have already established?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I was just going to say that but you picked it out of my mouth. They need a timeline; normally it is 45 days but that is too long. The interaction has to take place fairly rapidly. Is the chairperson of the Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development here? I will need you to look at this. How long do you think it will take you to come back to the House?

3.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From reading your mind, you need an in-depth scrutiny of the microfinance sector, so we are asking for one month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One month is reasonable, given also the period we are in. When we resume, we will be dealing with the Budget Framework Paper issues and we could accommodate that report and debate and deal with it. Let us give them one month in the circumstances.

Honourable members, we have in the VIP gallery this afternoon a delegation of Members of Parliament from Namibia on the National Council Standing Committee on Audit. They Include hon. Lebbius Tobias, hon. Nguzu Maharukua, hon. John Sikondo, hon. Bernard Sibalatani and Ms Amalia Lita, the clerk.

Honourable members, they have a very difficult protocol; the Deputy Speaker has come with the delegation and is a member of the committee. Therefore, he has come under the chairmanship of the chairperson of the committee –(Laughter)- who is also the Chief Whip of the Government. When they met me, I had a very difficult protocol to manage because I had a Deputy Speaker but the leader of the delegation is a chairperson of a committee and the Chief Whip of the Government.

For us, it would present a very difficult situation because at least with us, the presiding officers do not belong to any operational committee except administrative committees. I am told they are moving a review to make me a member of the Committee on Budget or something like that. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I also made a communication earlier about the International Anti-Corruption Day, which is always commemorated on 9 December. The commemoration takes six days from 6th to 10th December and I now have a detailed communication about the events of tomorrow.

Tomorrow, 4 December 2019, His Excellency the President of Uganda will officiate as the Chief Walker at the Anti-Corruption Walk starting at 8.00 a.m. from the Constitutional Square and will, thereafter, address the nation at Kololo Independence Grounds.

The theme of the Anti-Corruption Walk is “Renewing the Fight Against Corruption: A Corruption Free Uganda Starts with Me.”

Honourable members, we are all invited – are you objecting that it should not start with you? (Laughter) We are all invited to participate in the walk. Please pick your t-shirt and a cap from the lobby so that you can be smart for tomorrow’s purposes. This particular communication attracts no debate. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FY 2018/2019

3.42
The Minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

The Deputy Speaker: Let the records capture that and let the minister proceed in that order.

Mr Bahati: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019 and the Supplementary Schedule 1 for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

The Deputy Speaker: Let the records capture that. The Supplementary Schedule 1 for the Financial Year 2019/2020 stands referred to the Committee on Budget. The first two stand referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES UNDER ARTICLE 179(1) (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF UGANDA AND DECLARATION OF CITIES UNDER SECTION 7 (2A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT CAP 243

3.43
The Minister of Local Government (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

“WHEREAS Article 179 (1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of districts;

AND WHEREAS Section 7 (2A) of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, empowers the Minister of Local Government, with the approval of Parliament, to declare an urban area a city;

NOTING THAT under Section 4 (a) of the Local Governments Act Cap 243, a city is equivalent to a district and a city council exercises all functions and powers conferred upon a district within its area of jurisdiction;

FURTHER NOTING THAT Section 7 (2) of the Local Government Act Cap 243 allows alteration of boundaries of a district unit in accordance with Article 179 of the Constitution;

AWARE THAT Article 179 (2) of the Constitution requires any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district to be supported by a majority of all members of Parliament;

FURTHER AWARE THAT for effective administration and the need to bring urban services closer to the people, the Local Government Councils of Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, Hoima, Lira, Entebbe, Soroti, Nakasongola, Kabale, Moroto and Wakiso have expressed the wishes of the people for declaration of the cities of Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, Hoima, Lira, Entebbe, Soroti, Nakasongola, Kabale, Moroto and Wakiso respectively;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the following urban areas are approved and declared cities.

DECLARATION OF CITIES:

    1. Arua City comprising Arua Central and Ayivu divisions;
    2. Gulu City comprising Laroo-Pece and Bardege-Layibi divisions;
    3. Jinja City comprising Jinja North and Jinja South divisions;
    4. Mbarara City comprising Mbarara North and Mbarara South divisions;
    5.  Fort Portal City comprising Fort Portal Central and Fort Portal North divisions;
    6. Mbale City comprising Industrial and Northern divisions;
    7. Masaka City comprising Kimanya-Kabonera and Nyendo-Mukungwe divisions;
    8.  Hoima City comprising Hoima East and Hoima West divisions;
    9. Entebbe City comprising Entebbe Central and Entebbe North divisions;
    10.  Lira City comprising Lira West and Lira East divisions;
    11. Moroto City comprising Moroto North and Moroto South divisions;
    12. Nakasongola City comprising Nakasongola East and Nakasongola West divisions;
    13. Soroti City comprising Soroti West and Soroti East divisions;
    14. Kabale City comprising Kabale North and Kabale South divisions;
    15. Wakiso City comprising Busiro and Kyadondo divisions.

Effective Dates for the Operationalisation of the New Cities

The cities that take effect on 1 July 2020, that is, Arua, Gulu, Jinja, Mbarara, Fort portal, Mbale, Masaka and Hoima City will be effective on 01 July 2021.

The cities to take effect on 01 July 2022 are Entebbe and Lira while those to take effect on 01 July 2023 are Moroto, Nakasongola, Soroti, Kabale and Wakiso. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Members for Jinja Municipality West, Bukoto South, Mbale Municipality, Fort Portal Municipality, Mbarara Municipality, Youth Central and Kotido.

The motion has been moved and seconded. Would you like to speak to it? However, before that, let us have a point of procedure from hon. Niwagaba.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, all of us do support urbanisation. The only procedural issue I want to raise, in order for us to deal with this matter without violating the provisions of Article 63 of the Constitution, is: can the minister give us, in detail, the boundaries and the parishes forming the divisions and the constituencies that follow within each of the cities he has mentioned?

This is important to know because should we find that some of the areas maybe encroach on counties that are not in a specific city, then we would be doing something unconstitutional. Therefore, can he become elaborate, first by telling us that in this particular city, the division has the following parishes and the constituencies forming this particular city are these, for us to be unambiguous?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first wait please. I do not like us debating by procedure; it does not help. Honourable members, this motion makes two propositions for the alteration of districts.

The first proposition in altering districts is that he is creating cities, which gain district status themselves and so, their boundaries have to be defined.

The second proposition for alteration of boundaries is that some districts, acting in support of the supplement of the city, had to cede their own territory to give it to the city so that the city becomes a city. Now such districts are ceding territory and therefore, altering their own boundaries. Having their own boundaries as districts alters.

Therefore, there are two aspects of alterations here, where the city is going to be created and where the districts are going to either become smaller or bigger. I will give an example of Omoro District, which will lose some territory to Gulu City and so, in effect, it will be having its own boundaries also altered.

Now the issue of counties would not, therefore, arise because counties are in districts and counties do not take decisions. There is no administrative unit known as a county. The administrative unit that has territorial sovereignty over that unit is the district, which takes decisions through its councils by resolution.

Therefore, if a particular district has acted, let me use an example of Omoro District, to take part of Koro Sub-county, which is in Tochi County, represented by hon. Peter Okot and the other part, which is represented by somebody else, to become part of the city, the county is bound by the decision of the council of the district. It not being an administrative unit except an electoral area.

Therefore, I think the objection raised by the honourable member, in terms of counties, cannot stand but in terms of actually knowing the actual boundaries and how it will affect the districts surrounding the cities, it is critical that the details are known.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your guidance. In a particular instance of Wakiso, two things arise. Before Wakiso cedes ground or territory, a resolution from Wakiso was to declare the entire Wakiso a city.

Now out of Wakiso District, you have created two cities - Entebbe and Wakiso City. The trouble with that - and that is where I thought we would actually need more time to engage - is that, first as the honourable minister - grateful of course - observed that he is responding to the aspiration of the people. Now, the aspirations of the people of Wakiso were not to slice their district into smaller administrative units creating more administrative costs and trouble.

The second is that you have created a city after slicing it. You have denied it revenue - because you are talking about money you are going to send from the centre. How about the money Wakiso was collecting originally even as a district? Therefore, you are to starve them. 

I think we need more time to engage. If the minister had involved us, we would perhaps have engaged and persuaded him - (Interjection) - yes, I think we need to look at this as leaders.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the other issue is about counties turning into divisions. We are going to have problems with redefining constituencies in form of divisions because Busiro, for example, which has three members of Parliament and you are turning it into a division, whereupon Kyadondo, with two members of Parliament as a county, will become one division. I think we need to discuss all those parameters purely as leaders. That is where the minister needed to consult the leaders in those districts before presenting a resolution that is different from their aspiration.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, the motion has not been spoken to. Therefore, we do not know all the details. The minister has not yet spoken to his motion. Therefore, can we allow the minister to speak to his motion and then we do the normal things we always do?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, Uganda’s Vision 2040 envisions an urbanised Uganda. It is an ambitious plan that seeks to elevate it to middle income status. There is no doubt that the future of Uganda’s growth will continue to lie in the new cities, which will be strategic and regional. 

Kampala was declared a city in 1962 at independence with a population of seven million people compared to 42 million people in Uganda today. 

On 20 May 2019, Cabinet approved the phased operationalisation of 15 cities. The details, as presented in the motion before this House, have already been given out. Uganda has experienced a high rate of urbanisation. Urbanisation in Uganda and the world over is the engine that drives economic growth. 

The cities will increase urban infrastructure services, local revenue, government fiscal transfers and employment opportunities. 

There is a lot of pressure on Kampala in terms of infrastructure and services and this has caused mushrooming of slums with associated problems. 

Creation of cities will address the emerging urbanisation challenges. 

Other countries in East Africa have more than one city each and yet the rates of economic development and urbanisation in those cities are not different from those of Uganda. 

The growth of municipal councils has taken place without corresponding physical and social economic infrastructure in the neighbourhoods. During the process, a number of local governments approved an extension of the peri-urban areas to the towns identified for declaration as cities. 

The cities will bring services closer to the people. The municipal council human resources structure funding levels and planning capacity of municipal councils do not allow for effective urbanisation. 

Growth and provision of services necessitating upgrading to the city status

Investment in cities is critical for investment at equitable growth and poverty eradication. Well planned cities attract investment and provide organised settlements for residents. 

With a new local government sector that took effect on 01 July 2019, the cities will attract investment and external funding for infrastructure development, physical planning, greening, urban governance, solid waste management, ICT and others to address the strategic urban agenda objectives. 

The cities will attract uniform harmonised growth and development to avoid organic growth of towns. 

This move to create cities is part of Government’s plan to implement vision 2040 by addressing the rapid urbanising rate issue that requires serious attention and management. 

Wide consultations were conducted with the respective local governments and central government agencies namely; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the National Planning Authority. 

The Ministry of Public Service will develop appropriate human resource structures to operationalise the cities that are set to begin in a phased manner. 

All the proposed cities involve direct elevation of the existing towns. However, in line with the National Urban Planning Policy, it necessitated an extension of some neighbouring parishes or sub counties that are urbanised in order to form the required minimum area size and minimum population density. 

The ministry has proposed and created cities with divisions. Each division will be equivalent to a municipality. A city will politically be headed by a city mayor. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has issued certificates of financial clearance for creation and operationalisation of the cities. They are signed and they are here. (Applause)

Preparation

Mr Speaker, intensive preparations have started. The ministry is currently addressing the different thematic areas in the operationalisation of the cities like working out the human resources structure with the Ministry of Public Service, harmonising the effects of the extensions made to the current municipalities with the Electoral Commission, working out the modalities of the interim political leadership for the period of operationalisation and up to the time of elections. 

In line with the Physical Planning Act, 2010 that declared the whole country the planning area and Vision 2040 that provides for establishment of regional and strategic cities, the ministry has deemed it right to implement these well thought out plans in line with the strategic development goals of Uganda. 

Once creation of these cities has been approved by this august House, the Minister of Local Government, in collaboration with other line ministries, will inspect, mentor, supervise and monitor the operations of the new cities as urban local governments.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a seconder of this motion? Who is going to speak to the motion? 

4.08
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You guided earlier – for which I thank you – that after the minister speaks to his motion, then perhaps my concerns will be raised. 

I am particularly concerned about the minister not properly addressing his mind to the provisions of Article 63 of the Constitution – with respect to some of the cities he has created. 

Of course it is exciting to me to move from a rural district and it becomes a city, for example Wakiso. However, of necessity, when you create a city out of a district, especially if you are not declaring the entire district a city, you alter boundaries of the existing constituencies. 

Under article 63(1) and (2), the mandate of creating constituencies is for the Electoral Commission not the ministry. The minister has particularly told us, this afternoon, that after the approval of Parliament, they will liaise with the sister agencies, which should have come first. 

Like I said earlier, a division is created - if you create the entire county and make it a division, in terms of representation, unless and until the Electoral Commission has gazetted or demarcated the boundaries that such a division will have the following constituencies, a division is the equivalent of a county. That means, therefore, that in Wakiso, for example, you would have one Member of Parliament for Kyadondo.

When you read –(Interjection)- I wish my brother, hon. Waluswaka, would understand before commenting. Article 63(6) says, “Where the boundary of a constituency established under this Article is altered as a result of a review, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament.”

Mr Speaker, Entebbe City is to be created in 2022 and Wakiso in 2023. I would like to humbly appeal that whereas it is exciting to have these cities and I must say, I am excited and I thank the minister, I think there is need to really look at this matter. The minister should present a motion that is fully baked. When he talks about consultations for example, the consultations in Wakiso were to the effect that the entire Wakiso be made one city.

When there was a change of mind on the part of Cabinet - I would like to take the minister on face value that this was approved by the Cabinet - they never reverted to us in Wakiso. As such, who did he consult, if I was not consulted?

I am not only a Member of Parliament but I am a councillor in that district, by law. I am not aware and we have never discussed this as a district. Therefore, in utmost good faith, may I appeal that we refer this matter, even if it means by a week? Let us not pass a resolution that is half baked. I beg to submit.

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable member from the opposite side is saying that I should remove Wakiso from this debate. Is that what you are saying?

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I have resolutions –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: No, I am only saying, let us be more organised.

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I can assure you that we are organised. (Applause) (Mr Niwagaba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you rising on the status of organisation? Otherwise, that is all he has said.

4.13
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): I would like us to do things in a proper manner. I have had a discussion with you and for me to give my ‘no objection’ was based on the discussion. I must first seek clarification on Kabale city. 

Honourable minister, you have created Kabale city and given it two divisions; North and South. Could you give me the boundaries of what comprises Kabale City North and Kabale City South? The minister should give us what comprises all the cities so that we know what we are passing.

4.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While there are complaints about some of the cities being created, I think some of the proposed cities are clear. There are some cities, which have been discussed for more than four or five years. I would like to give an example of Gulu City whose boundaries are very clear. 

Therefore, may I request that we treat this issue case by case so that where consultations were not made properly, we stay the decision? For those cities whose boundaries are crystal clear, we should go ahead; otherwise, people will slaughter us. This is what I can say. Maybe for the constitutional matter, where they say divisions, we should make them constituencies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will be divisions. ‘Constituency’ is an Electoral Commission definition but they remain administrative units called divisions.

MS AOL: Yes, maybe municipalities so that we are clear. Mr Speaker, my humble appeal is that we should handle this case by case. Thank you.

4.15
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am naturally a supporter of cities and I would like to thank you for allowing us to process a motion together with hon. Atiku, hon. Mwiru, hon. Lufafa, hon. Connie Galiwango, hon. Lyandro Komakech and others, in this respect.

Mr Speaker, there are three technical issues that I would like to seek your guidance on. Article 178 of the Constitution, in the wisdom of the Seventh Parliament - I am privileged to understand under your Chair - provided for the regional Tier Government. The independence consensus of this country was about these regional governments. I can mention Toro, Lango, Acholi, and Bugisu. 

Whereas I am a supporter of the cities, to bring them unconstitutionally without operationalising the regional government would be unconstitutional. Therefore, my first procedural concern is that the wisdom of the Seventh Parliament must be operationalised. I can see very few Members from that Parliament.

My second concern, which is of a legal nature is that in 2010, in the wisdom of the Eighth Parliament where I was a Member, when the Kampala City law came here, we found a lacuna because the Kampala City law did not provide for the Metropolitan including Wakiso, Mukono and the neighbourhood of Bombo and Mpigi, and we were told that at the next available time, we were going to have a law, which considers not only the greater Kampala metropolitan conurbation city but also the other cities’ law as it is provided for in other jurisdictions.

It is this other cities’ law, which was provided for in the vision 2040; the strategic cities like the one of Hoima and the mineral city of Karamoja, were anticipated. That is the second clarification.

The third and final procedural clarification for your guidance, Mr Speaker, is about the national physical development plan, which the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has been keeping for the last I do not know how many years. It should have come with the land policy because the spirit of organised urbanisation is also in the spirit of land consolidation. 

As an economist, cities should not just be for political reasons; they are economic zones. They must come with industrial parks, economic clusters, nucleus industries and agriculture production zones.

Can we have this third element, which is held at Cabinet, give us the much wanted national physical development plan - the reason some of us had opposed the physical planning board. Mr Speaker, with these three inputs the country would be moving in steady progress. Thank you, so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I deal with one procedural point at a time otherwise you will end up making me not know and I do not like being in that state; the honourable members of Buliisa raised some fundamental points. The only problem with it is that it does not deal with the subject we are dealing with now.

He raised the issue of regional Governments under Article 178, which is a valid point; we have a motion pending debate and has nothing to do with cities.

We all recall that in 2005, we amended the Constitution in Article 178 and created regional governments. Also by this Parliament declaring specific regions that had agreed to become regions, are operations of the Constitution and it had nothing to do with cities.

We did not even have discussions about where the headquarters of the regional government would be; we did not go that far. We also recall that in respect of regional Governments, a Bill was brought to this Parliament. Discussions were held but one key player objected to the creation of regional Governments and that is why it stalled to date.

The motion that we have now is for the creation of new cities. The point that you could make that could stick is that maybe there is no law to regulate them. Anyhow, the motion is here; it can be determined on its merit and if there is need, the legislation to regulate can come.

There will still be no contradiction because people want cities and they wanted them yesterday and the minister has responded to that call.

The issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition is that can we desegregate the issues and handle them case by case? There are two things we need to consider here.  First, are we agreeable to the principle of creating new cities in this country? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And do we agree that this country needs new cities? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we agreeable to the list that has been presented by the Minister of Local Government? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we agreeable to some part of the list that has been presented? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I see in this is a matter of the details not being clear. Our biggest weakness now is that the details have not been given to us. So, can I ask the minister to outline for us the details of what he is talking about and we see if we can make progress.

Honourable members, I am following this debate. Can we listen to the details on the boundaries or whatever the minister is going to give us so that we at least understand that bit?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Here are the details: Arua City will comprise Arua Central Division, Arua-Ayivu Division, Arua Hill Division, River Oli Division and Arua Municipality. 

Ayivu Division will comprise the sub counties of Pajulu Adumi Oluko, Tadam, Aroi, Manibe and Ayivuni, which is the current Ayivu County.

Gulu City

Laroo will comprise of Pece Division, Laroo Municipal Division, Pece Municipal Division, Layibi Parish of Bungatira Sub county, Unyama Parish, Pakwero Parish of Unyama Sub county, all in Gulu District and Pageakal Acoyo Parish of Koro Sub County in Omoro District.

Hoima City will comprise Hoima Division East covering Kyentale Ward, Nyakambugu Ward, Kishwamba Ward, Buikya Ward, Southern Ward, Northern, Central Ward of Hoima Municipality.

Hoima Division West will cover Kihomboza, Kyesiga, Karongo, Bujura, Western Ward, Kazimba Ward, Kihukya, Kibingo Ward and Kiduma Ward of Hoima Municipality.

Mbale City will comprise Industrial Division covering Bukasakya Sub County, Nawuyo Bugema Town Council, Bungokho-Mutoto Sub County and Wanaale Municipal Division.

Northern Division will cover areas of Nakaloke Sub County, Nakaloke Town Council, Namanyonyi Sub County and Namabasa Sub County.

Lira City will comprise Lira West Division covering the areas of Adiel Municipal Division, Ojwina Municipal Division, Lira Sub County. Lira East Division will cover areas of Central Municipal Division, Railway Municipal Division, Adekokwok Sub-County, Ngeta Sub-County and Iwari Sub-County.

Jinja North Division will comprise Bugembe Town Council, Mafubira Sub-County and Budondo Sub-County.

Jinja South Division will comprise Mpumudde Municipal Division, Walukuba Municipal Division, Masese Municipal Division; this is in the current Jinja Municipality.

Mbarara North Division will have Kakiika Municipal Division, Kamukuzi Municipal Division, Biharwe Municipal Division, and the villages of Rwenturagara, Kafunjo in Bubare Sub-County.

Mbarara South will comprise Kakoba Municipal Division, Nyamitanga Municipal Division and Nyakayojo Municipal Division.

Fort Portal North Division will comprise Karambi Sub-County, Bukuku Sub-County and Karago Town Council. 

Fort Portal Central Division will have West Municipal Division, East Municipal Division, South Municipal Division and Ibaale Parish.

Entebbe Central Division has Entebbe A Municipal Division, Entebbe B Municipal Division, the current Entebbe Municipality, Katabi Town Council and Bussi Sub-County. 

Entebbe North Division will comprise Kajjansi Town Council and
Kasanje Town Council.

Masaka will have Kimanya-Kabonera Division, Kyabakuza Municipal Division, Kabonera Sub-County, all of Masaka District, Senya and Kiteredde Parishes and Kingo Sub-County in Lwengo District.  

Nyendo-Mukungwe Division will have Nyendo-Ssenyange Municipal Division, Katwe-Butego Municipal Division, Mukungwe Sub-County and parishes of Kitengesa, Bulando in Buwunga Sub-County, all in Masaka District and the parishes of Kasange and Kibisi of Kalungu Sub-County in Kalungu District.

Moroto City will have Moroto North and Moroto South, to be determined after further consultations.

Nakasongola will comprise Nakasongola East and Nakasongola West, to be determined after further consultations.

Soroti will have Soroti East and Soroti West, to be determined after further consultations.

Kabale will have Kabale North and Kabale South, to be determined after further consultations.

Wakiso-Kyadondo-Busiro, to be determined after further consultations. 

The nitty-gritty boundaries are to be determined after further consultations but we first declare them. Therefore, today’s purpose is to declare them. The nitty-gritty villages and cells will be done after consultations so that we can all go.

I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please!

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I would also like to say that a city division can have more than one Member of Parliament, like Kawempe, Rubaga Division, Rubaga North, Rubaga South, Makindye and Nakawa. All those are in the city. 

Therefore, a city division can have more than one Member of Parliament. This will depend on the Electoral Commission, using their parameters for creating constituencies. I have no constitutional power to create a constituency. Constituencies are created by the Electoral Commission. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the past, we used to receive these motions, debate them and pass them. Along the way, it changed. We would receive them, send them to committees and then the committee comes back with a more purified and detailed analysis of the situation.

The situation we have - as of now on December 2019 - poses a completely new challenge and I am sure we all understand the challenge I am talking about. We might face difficulties if we over rush or over delay. Either way, we may not achieve good things. We need a balance and this is a difficult balance but it might work.

At the tail end of the motion, as I understand it, by the time Parliament is declaring something, it must declare its full details to avoid changes that we cannot explain as Parliament. For example, we take a decision that this particular area should be this but then there are no details. 

I have heard the minister say that this will await further consultation. That means Parliament cannot take a decision on that until that consultation is done and the boundaries are made known; then Parliament can take that decision. I think that would be the correct procedure.

So, where we are not ready to proceed with the declaration, we should separate the issues. However, where you are ready to proceed and the issues are clear, you might want to consider dealing with them because they are clear.

Where there might be issues of situations that were never considered but now that the opportunity has come, must be considered. I have just received a proposal from Kasese. I heard somebody talk about Mukono. You might want to have another process that can deal with these other processes, putting them all together can complicate the whole thing.

Therefore, honourable minister, are you prepared to make some sensitisation on how you would like to proceed with these? Where you are fully ready, you can say so. Where you need further consultation, you can say so. However, we cannot approve something whose boundaries we do not know yet.

Ordinarily, your motion should have contained all those details and they should have been laid on the Table on the Floor of Parliament, so it is extracted for our own purposes; that this is what we approved. These are the boundaries we approved so that we are clear. Honourable minister, please help us.

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you need time, we can come back to this tomorrow afternoon. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: For today, Mr Speaker, I take your guidance that I am ready for Arua, Gulu – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, guide us procedurally. We have one motion and a motion on the Floor of the House is not severable. I thought my honourable -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see some children who are leaving. Let me recognise them. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Voices of Love Nursery and Primary School from Mityana District. They are represented by hon. Henry Makumbi and hon. Judith Nabakooba. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the indulgence and I seek the indulgence of all colleagues. We seem to have unanimity in principle that we want these cities. All we need is to do this in an orderly manner. A motion on the Floor of the House is not severable, especially where there is consensus on the content but not the details. May I seek your indulgence, and of course the minister’s, not to over rush and also not to over delay. 

My view is that this matter –(Interjections)– You see, we cannot be ready until we are ready. Give us two days to assist the minister. For example, when he talks about creating Entebbe Municipality, he has effectively abolished Busiro South County represented by hon. Peter Sematimba with all the sub-counties taken into the municipality. 

Some of us are born in these areas and we know them. We can help the minister to come up with a motion that is neater because we are all interested –(Interruption)– Order from -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen any violation of any order here.   

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, to be brief, we would ask for two days to confer with the minister and come up with a neater motion, which we will all support. (Applause)

4.42
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect to my brother, hon. Sseggona, a motion before the House is severable for good reasons. This is not the first time that a motion to create local governments is being moved before the House. Many have been created before and I recall, many years ago, that we moved a motion for creation of new districts. Some of them were very clear and Parliament pronounced itself on them. Others were not clear on details including boundaries, headquarters and even names. This Parliament, in its wisdom, deferred them.

I would like to inform this House that even up to now, motions for some districts, which were moved more than 10 years, like Tororo, have never been passed by this House. Therefore, this is possible in the wisdom of this House where some parts of the minister’s motion are clear. 

I agree with the House that the minister should present details where he has them and the House looks at those cities on their merits and either passes, defers or rejects them. That is within the power of this House. 

You cannot say that because just one district is not clear on its contents, the entire basket should not be allowed. (Applause) I recommend, Mr Speaker, like you rightly guided – the minister’s motion is very clear; all we have to do is to look at each city, get the details we need, examine it and pass it. Those where we are not clear, like Wakiso, can be deferred. The minister can go back and consult. When he is ready, he can come back and inform this House. (Applause)

4.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Sseggona asked for those details in two days. Even for Gulu City, which I said is very clear, the East Division of Laroo and Pece have up to 15 parishes but you did not mention them all. The West Division also has 15 parishes. We need this to be very clear.

One day is enough for us to consult and make sure that we get these boundaries very clear. We in Acholi say, “One day cannot spoil the food” - “Dye wor acel pe kwoko dek.” Let us have one day and debate this matter on Thursday. Thank you.

4.46
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing the motion. Honourable colleagues, I wish we could listen to one another. 

I think what the honourable member from Busiro is asking is in the spirit of moving together. Some of us have been relegated to 2023 and if we allow some cities to pass, we may never get our cities. The same way that my colleagues from Masaka would like Masaka to become a city yesterday is the same was that the people of Teso would also want Soroti to be a city.

Therefore, I appeal to my honourable colleagues that we move together. This divide and rule will not help us. This morning when I walked into this Parliament, I looked at the emblems of the kingdoms and the districts of Uganda on our gate. We have those kingdoms and districts in the order of: Buganda, Bunyoro, Toro, West Nile, Karamoja, Acholi, Sebei, Busoga, Bugisu, Ankole, Kigezi, Madi, Lango, Teso and Bukedi. I had wished to see these cities tagged to these regions as they appear there.

It is surprising and disturbing that we do not see a city for Sebei and Bukedi because I thought that that would have been the criteria of –(Interjection)– please; we would have been able to follow that. My colleague from Bukedi region here will agree with me.

Mr Speaker, having said that, the minister has gone ahead to state that Soroti concerns require further consultations but for God’s sake, Soroti is one of the oldest towns. That is why our forefathers, during the independence, even set up a flying school there.

It is one of the few regions with an operating airport in addition to Arua and Kasese. How come you put us to 2023 and more so you are even saying that you are going to defer it because you have not concluded consultations? I thought that by the time you bring these matters here, enough consultations could have been done.

I am not surprised that the honourable minister and hon. Adolf Mwesige are comfortable. I understand where they are coming from. However, I do not want us to agree to upgrade Fort Portal to a city status - and I would be the last person to oppose Fort Portal’s city status – but I would like us to go together in the spirit of togetherness; that is my appeal.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to the House to agree to defer this matter so that the minister can come back after two days with a list and details of all the boundaries to help us move together. 

I appeal to you, honourable minister and my Old Boy; 2023 is very far for Soroti to become a city. We want it in 2021. I pledge my support to you and if there is any institutional issue you need, we must put it there. This is an old city with an operating airport.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I pray that the minister goes back and returns with details after those adjustments have been taken care of in regard to the mother regions. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to appreciate the appeal, which has been made. The spirit of discussion is good because then we know where the problems are. It was presumed that the minister, before coming to the Floor of Parliament, had done enough consultations and that the information would be available at the ministry.

Anyhow, I would like to inform the minister that when you come back, please make available evidence of consent by the various authorities concerning the boundaries so that you do not put us back again. Come with evidence of the various authorities that are supposed to define the boundaries.

I would like you to come holistically by bringing something that takes care of all our concerns so that we do not have to delay any further. You can see that we are all in hurry. You do not know - you men do not give birth to children but we, women who give birth to children, when the child is about to come out, you cannot delay it even by one second.

Therefore, we want to deliver but you must make sure that you have made all the preparations. Assure us that you have done all the consultations so that we can deliver well. Come to us with the consent of the various authorities concerning the definition of the boundaries. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had enough procedural matters, preliminary matters but also a premature debate. Although a question has not been proposed, I have heard Members already conducting very serious debates on this matter especially the honourable colleagues from the other side.

However, honourable members, we are all agreeable and I do not see any exception apart from the honourable member from Mityana who opposed. Honourable member, did you say you were opposed? – Oh, you now agree. We also have the honourable member for Kasese who would like to propose an amendment and hon. Nsereko who also would like to propose an amendment. You know the procedure of doing those amendments.

Let us see this because we are not making any headway at the moment. Two proposals have been made and they are not contradictory. One is that we give ourselves up to Thursday and in doing that, we come back with clarity on details of what we are going to decide on.

The honourable member for Gulu has also stated what was very clear about Gulu and that now two parishes have been left out. Now, that means that there might not be clarity on so many of these issues. It may make sense that we pose this matter to enable the honourable minister - as I said earlier, those details have got to be laid on the Floor of Parliament; the boundaries must be laid on the Floor of Parliament so that Parliament pronounces itself on the details.

The second aspect of this was raised by hon. Seggona that this particular kind of motion is not favourable. However, as hon. Adolf Mwesige correctly pointed out, there is no motion that cannot be amended. By amendment, it means severability because you can amend by reducing or adding. If you amended by reducing, taking part of it, you have severed the motion.

Therefore, your point was different from that because you wanted things to be considered together. That is what you are urging the House to do saying let us handle this matter together and let them pass as one not because we cannot stay there.

However, the other proposal is that when we come on Thursday, we will go through the motion and proposals, one by one. Okay? We will go through them, one at a time. We might decide to start with Arua and then go to Gulu, Jinja; we will go on systematically. In case a few outstanding issues emerge, we will defer for may be a few minutes for further consultation and come back.

In case new proposals emerge - and I propose that those new proposals should be sent there because when they come from the honourable minister, they become easier than when they come from a private member.  

I am telling you this because I know that it might be easier and neater if you use these issues; go through this other process so that they come together. You have a valid point but you might be shot down on technicalities. I do not want that to happen because I know you have a valid issue to raise. Therefore, when we come on Thursday, we will handle issues one by one and see how far we can go with this matter. Is that agreed?

That means when we defer this matter today, we want to achieve one goal; a complete list of the cities with their complete boundary demarcations and of course the resolutions that accompany them will also be the documents laid on the Table for further update. That for this particular district, a resolution was passed in favour of this. 

I hope that the Minister of Local Government is listening. The district resolutions must also be laid on the Floor of Parliament.

Even for those Members bringing amendments, they must be supported by resolutions from those districts so that we are clear with the procedures. Is it clear now?

Hon. members: Yes.

The deputy speaker: Honourable members, for clarity on what we are going to do, in the next one day when we resume on Thursday, the decision we are going to take is as I have just stated - Hon. Mwiru, we are now on the next item. Honourable members, let us maintain order in the House because we might change our minds and take decisions today. (Laughter)

Mr mwiru: Procedure.

The deputy speaker: Procedure on what matter? Is it on something that we have already passed?

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

The deputy speaker: On what matter are you raising the point of procedure?

Mr mwiru: Mr Speaker, it is a procedural matter on the same subject. You did not capture –

The deputy speaker: It cannot be; I have ruled that you take that and consult with these people. Take that matter through the consultation process that hon. Sseggona will be handling. Take your matter there such that when we come back on Thursday, we examine them. There is nothing I am going to rule that can guide better than what I have said. 

Mr mwiru: Mr Speaker, you have rested this to only boundaries –

The deputy speaker: Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 51 OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT ACT, 2019, ACT NO.5 OF 2019 TO APPROVE THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT (DECLARATION OF KALAGALA – ITANDA FALLS SPECIAL CONSERVATION AREA) ORDER, 2019

5.00
The Minister of State for Water AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mr Ronald Kibuule):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament, under Section 51 of the National Environment Act, 2019, Act No.5 of 2019, to approve the National Environment (Declaration of Kalagala – Itanda Falls Special Conservation Area) Order, 2019. 

“WHEREAS section 51 of the National Environment Act, 2019 empowers the Minister of Water and Environment on the advice of the National Environment Management Authority and with the approval of Parliament to declare an area as a Special Conservation Area to promote conservation of ecosystems, biodiversity and natural habitat;

AND WHEREAS it has become necessary to declare the area constituting the three central forest reserves of Kalagala, Namavundu Nile Bank and the 100-metre protection zone on either side of River Nile, falling between Bujagali Hydropower Plant and Isimba Hydropower Plant, as a Special Conservation Area to be known as Kalagala-Itanda Falls Special Conservation Area for the protection of ecological zones along the banks of River Nile, sustainable ecological services, conservation of the ecosystem, biodiversity and natural habitat and for the preservation of cultural heritage sites, assets and spiritual values within the Kalagala-Itanda Falls Special Conservation Area;

AND WHEREAS section 5l of the National Environment Act, 2019, requires that an Instrument declaring a special conservation area to be made by the Minister of Water and Environment on the advice of the Board of the National Environment Management Authority and with the approval of Parliament;

NOTING THAT the Minister of Water and Environment, on the advice of the Board of the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and after consulting the various stakeholders including the district technical and political leadership, the local councils and the communities in whose areas the proposed special conservation area is to be located has caused to be prepared the National Environment (Declaration of Kalagala-Itanda Falls Special Conservation Area) Instrument, 2019 attached to this motion as Appendix 2;

FURTHER NOTING that the Cabinet of Uganda, sitting in Entebbe on 28 October 2019 under Minute No. 426 (CT 2019) approved the declaration of the Kalagala-Itanda Falls as a Special Conservation Area to promote conservation of ecosystems, biodiversity and natural habitat, and allowed the minister responsible for the environment to seek the authority of Parliament in line with section 51(i) of the National Environment Act, 2019;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
That in accordance with section 51(l) of the National Environment Act, 2019, Parliament approves that the Minister of Water and Environment makes the National Environment (Declaration of Kalagala-Itanda Falls Special Conservation Area) Instrument, 2019 attached to this Resolution as Appendix 2.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

The deputy speaker: Is this motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Fort Portal Municipality, Member of Parliament for Butemba Constituency, Member of Parliament for Kinkizi West – I am not going to allow ministers to second this motion.

The motion is seconded. Would you like to speak to your motion?

Mr kibuule: Mr Speaker, I can give the justification. My senior minister wanted to second and I think it is procedurally right for him to do so. He can second on behalf of other seconders.

The deputy speaker: Honourable member, have you already justified the motion?

Mr kibuule: Mr Speaker, Bujagali refinancing was a condition by the World Bank. It is on that ground that we thought it was wise to have the conservation area in fulfilling the condition of World Bank.

Secondly, if we do the conservation, our dams will be able to maintain the water levels because the catchment area will be protected and this will generate constant power.

The other reason is that since we are going to have the refinancing, the lower electricity tariff will be achieved.

It will also attract more funding for infrastructure projects because we shall be doing what the conditions of the World Bank direct us to. The conditions were met and I believe that they were all fulfilled as required by law. 

Some of the conditions were the NEMA Board recommendations; the mapping out and demarcating of extended Kalagala-Itanda off set area and the gazettement notice through the New Vision to invite the public to participate was done. 

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Certificate was acquired, consultations made and a sustainable management plan is in place to be managed by the ministry. I believe that by Parliament approving this conservation area, we shall be in line with our NEMA Act.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am in receipt of a letter this afternoon signed by one Romina Wilkey Koller and Mwesigwa Isharaza. I do not know whether you have a copy of this letter.

The summary of this letter is that they saw that this matter was coming up on the Order Paper today and they have had three meetings so far with the technical people who are doing the consultation on this process.

The latest meeting was held yesterday morning, 2 December 2019, with an official from one of the relevant ministries. During that meeting, it was agreed that further meetings with the National Environment Management Authority and the Government surveyors be held and the same have been scheduled for later this week.

In addition, we are among the affected persons that have not been given sufficient time to review and make comments on the special conservation area management plan … It goes on.

In their view, “Since the matter has now been presented to Parliament, we seek your intervention to allow the likely affected persons to be adequately consulted and their views be considered in the process of establishing a fair and equitable conservation area. Otherwise, the members may suffer reparable loss and damage to their respective livelihoods and investments.

For the record, we fully support the declaration of the special conservation area. We are also aware of and sensitive to the timelines and deadlines required of the Government to declare the special conservation area. 

Our quest for consultation, in compliance with the law, will be done in such a way as to permit Government to still meet the deadlines.” Have you seen this letter?

MR KIBUULE: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are saying that they are conscious of the timelines that you need to meet but you have not consulted them. About 100 people have not been talked to.

Therefore, please schedule a meeting with them urgently so that they can resolve these matters and then come back so that we can pass this motion. That is the only concern I have received from there. Honourable member for Kagoma, do you have a matter on this issue?

5.11
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the motion. However, there is one problem. The minister is considering Itanda-Kalagala falls. Itanda is in my constituency and Kalagala is on the other part of Kayunga meaning that these two conservations areas are different.

Therefore, when you consider them, it is as if you are combining Itanda, which falls in Jinja and Kalagala, which is in Kayunga. I think we need to separate the two. We need to be open and specific that the conservation area for Itanda is on this side and the conservation area for Kalagala is on the other side. Saying that we want to have a conservation area for Itanda- Kalagala is a bit confusing because Kalagala -(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I have a bit of knowledge on conservation. Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. 

Mr Speaker, conservation areas do not follow administrative boundaries. A conservation area can straddle two or more administrative units, depending on the ecosystem and the people that have determined that it is suitable for conservation. 

I will give you an example of the Matheniko-Bokora corridor, which covers a wide area. It goes up to Kotido, Napak and Moroto districts but it is a conservation area under one ecosystem. Therefore, it does not have to follow administrative boundaries. Thank you.

MR WALYOMU: The reason I am raising this is because this is not the first time that the Ministry of Water and Environment is coming to Jinja. They wanted to do this in 2014 and they moved Kayunga Local Government to the Jinja side without informing the local leaders, Jinja District and more so, Butagaya sub-county where Itanda falls, that they are going to open up a conservation area.

I am not against the conservation area. We welcome it but my problem is that the National Forestry Authority contracted a company called Adrift and they have a tender in Kalagala. However, they cross and collect revenue on the Jinja side and give that revenue to Kayunga District instead of Butagaya sub-county and Jinja District. That is my worry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is administrative. The key issue here is - if I understand this matter correctly - when they built Bujagali, there were concerns about disruption of the ecosystem and there was need to compensate that destruction by creating a new conservation area that would handle the effects of what happened in Bujagali hence the birth of this new conservation area of Kalagala and Itanda; two areas.

Therefore, the financiers of Bujagali; World Bank, gave a condition that for this to work, you need to offset the effects of Bujagali Dam on the environment by creating a new conservation area and that is the new conservation area they are talking about - Kalagala and Itanda. Therefore, it has no background of all those things. How they administer it is a different matter but the motion seeks for the declaration of the conservation area.

What is raised in this letter is that the people who are already there have not been consulted adequately. The special conservation area management plan has not been given to them so that they understand what their rights will be as they co-exist there because they have investments in that area; they have been living there. They want to know what they can do and what they cannot do before Parliament takes a decision on this matter. They want to know that when Parliament takes a decision on this matter, we cannot do this, we can do this, we cannot build this but build this, we cannot plant this but plant this - That is all they are asking in this letter. They are not objecting. 

In addition, they are saying that they are agreeable because they also know that Government has a timeline with the World Bank to fulfil this obligation but they need to be consulted so that they know where their rights are on this matter. I think that is the background. Now, what is the problem?

MR WALYOMU: Mr Speaker, as you have stated, some of my people that I represent in this Parliament were not consulted. As you saw in that letter, the problem is that they do not know whether they will be compensated or not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or whether they will be asked to move or not. (Laughter) 

MR WALYOMU: This is where I would like to get clarification. 

5.18
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no need for the minister to hurry. As you have said, wider consultations are required. I have listened to the minister but I am not convinced with the justification. 

For the people that used to go through Jinja some years back, you will recall that we used to have falls that were visible; the Owen Falls. We would come from schools to tour and look at those falls. 

Like the project from World Bank, there came a project that came to create another dam. Even a lay person knows that once you create a dam, you are weakening the water falls; the falls will not be there. That is what happened because the falls disappeared. That is in Busoga and so, we do not want to suffer the same. These projects come with technical terms and by the time you realise, the natural resources are gone. As Busoga region, we lost those falls. 

That is the reason I am requesting the minister not to hurry. Let the ministry do wider consultations with all the stakeholders. They should tell them what the project intends to do so that people appreciate before they go ahead. We do not want to suffer the same fate we had when we lost Owen Falls.

MR KIBUULE: On the issue raised by the honourable who represents Itanda area, I think the complaint is majorly about compensation, which the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is doing. They have a consultant on the ground handling compensation. I think that is what the letter seeks to address. 

The consultations by NEMA were made and your office received copies with names confirming that consultations were made.

On the issue raised by hon. Majegere, I cannot say that the falls were taken. These are technical – when we say catchment area, it is between Isimba and Bujagali. It does not add up to have a dam that loses its meaning during the dry season. We are seeking to conserve this area to sustainably maintain the operations of the dams, both Isimba and Bujagali. That is what we need to cure. It is only about that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clear, honourable members? 

5.21
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Attached to the statement is an appendix of the report on the consultations. It says that the consultations were made between July and October this year and that they covered 330 people. 

The complaint on lack of consultations, unless we do not rely on this report, seems to indicate that either some stakeholders are being left out or the issues they raised are not being attended to. 

I have looked at that report and noticed there are certain issues, which the minister needs to give some clarification on. On the issue of compensation, it seems there are some people with some economic activities within the 100 metres and they are asking for compensation. Honourable minister, how have you addressed this issue? 

There is the issue of socio-cultural activities, including the pot makers within the 100 metres - I have ever visited the Itanda area. There are some cultural activities going on there and they need to be assured of protection of their socio-economic cultural activities in that area. 

On the issue of sharing of benefits of their natural resource, under the law of royalties, the local communities and the local governments are entitled to sharing the royalties from that natural resource. They want to be clear on what lies in store for them. I do not hear the minister answering these issues regarding the community. 

Finally, there is the issue of safe water. It appears that some of the trees to be planted may dry up some of their water sources. They were asking the ministry to assist by giving them boreholes and other safe water sources. 

Honourable minister, could you help us know whether you actually reacted and clarified on the issues raised by the community during the consultations? Thank you. 

5.24
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The issue on table requires a thorough understanding by the stakeholders. Everyone here, including me, support the gazetting of that area for environmental protection purposes. 

However, the issues being raised require the minister to bring a report that is consistent with the people’s needs. Otherwise, the moment we rush into passing the gazetting, it may cause another alarm. 

Mr Speaker, you have guided, using that letter, that there are issues underlying this matter on the table. I was one of the seconders of the motion. I request that the minister goes back and ascertains and convinces us that those underlying issues have been addressed such that we can move together. Thank you. 

5.25
MR PETER ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Kotido Municipality, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Issues of conservation are important but I thought the procedure has been that the subject of conservation needs to be accompanied by a Bill, which should be able to state the rights of use. 

I want to imagine that people who are saying that they have not been consulted are not hearing what role they have to play when this area is declared a conservation area. What are the dos and don’ts? I have not heard them in the submission of the minister. 

In those circumstances, wouldn’t it be a good idea to refer this matter to the relevant committee so that these people who have not been consulted can be heard and then the committee can advise the House accordingly? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish the minister was clear about what he wants this House to do. This is the fact of the matter, which the minister for some reason has refused to tell the House. They are going for a review meeting with the World Bank and this is a condition that should have been met before that meeting. You should come out clearly so that you can be assisted.

5.27
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unlike what that letter is saying, we consulted widely. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they came to see me and brought this letter. Let us talk about the conditions that you face with the World Bank and how you can help with the process of talking to these people and still beat the deadline of the World Bank. 

MR CHEPTORIS: Mr Speaker, we were given the deadline of 31st December but if it is the feeling of the House that we go and consult again, we can do that as long as this declaration is made before the 31st. Otherwise, if it is not done by that date, it will have very serious consequences on the refinancing of Bujagali dam.

Government wants to make power cheaper. Therefore, if we get money from World Bank to refinance Bujagali, then power to our people will be cheaper. Otherwise, the World Bank has given us up to 31st.

I have no objection to consult further as long as this matter is disposed of before 31st. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that gives the actual picture. Honourable members, when these people came to meet me, I noted that they are an organised group of people. They have invested in the area and done a lot of things. They actually even have the local communities including the local councils and they are in one group. I think even in one day you can consult them. They even said that they are aware about this deadline of the World Bank but that they needed to know their rights.  

Honourable minister, the document you submitted to my office was incomplete. When I read the Special Conservation Area Management Plan, it had annexes but they were only blank papers. So, the document is not complete.

Honourable members, what does this say? Those are the things, which govern those people and yet, you have not written them. How can you say you consulted them when the document on which they should agree to be governed by is not in place?  

Honourable minister, I have a copy of that document in the office and it is incomplete. You cannot, therefore, say that you consulted widely when the framework for the understanding is not agreed upon. That is why they came running this morning. Therefore, I think it is fair to accommodate them so that they know what their rights will be, when this matter is declared. Otherwise, they have no objection at all. In fact, they even said, “we know Government has a timeline to meet and we want to support so that Government can meet its obligation.” 

Honourable minister, all we need to know is where we stand on this matter. That is all. Please, leave this issue of saying you completed consultation and yet, there might be aspects that you need to finish so that you move in harmony with the ordinary people of Kagoma and others such that you do not have issues but have support from the communities as well. Is that okay?

Honourable minister, how much time do you need to do this? Otherwise, when they came, they said one day is enough for them to do consultation.

MR KIBUULE: Mr Speaker, we need one week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you come back on Tuesday next week?

MR KIBUULE: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, finish and let everyone be happy so that they support Government projects. Thank you. Honourable members, this matter is deferred for conclusion on Tuesday. If it is agreeable, then we do not have to send it to a committee. Ordinarily, we would have sent it to committee but I have just explained to you the circumstances under which we are operating at the moment. Otherwise, it might take longer in the committee and the deadline of 31st December might be met.

Honourable minister, on Tuesday next week, finalise your consultations so that we can finalise this matter. Thank you, next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ARISING OUT OF THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF OVER 300 FAMILIES IN KYABISAGAZI VILLAGE, KIGOROBYA SUB COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

5.33
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, the report I am supposed to present before this august House was uploaded on our system two weeks back. I presume everyone has got a copy of it on the iPad.

Before I commence – (Interruption)

MR KARUBANGA: Mr Speaker, I cannot see any copy of the report. Indeed, since the investigations were carried out, I have not seen anything. I do not know whether it is possible for the Chairperson to avail with a copy of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have your iPad? I think it might be there.

MR KARUBANGA: It is not there.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, we have had this document for the last two weeks. It is, therefore, imperative and incumbent upon the honourable minister to ably check his system.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is, is it there? Was this report uploaded? Since the report was uploaded, can we receive it? Otherwise, it could be a technical hitch. Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

MR MUGOYA:  Is it 10 minutes strictly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much for giving me the 10 minutes. I will endeavour to summarise this report to this August House. 

On 21 February 2019, hon. Muheirwe, Member of Parliament for Buhaguzi County raised a concern over the humanitarian crisis arising out of evictions and displacement in Kyabisagazi County, Kigorobya sub-county, Hoima District. Consequently, the Speaker constituted a Select Committee where in, I was appointed the chairperson. 

I will not get into the methodology. I am now on page three of the report, which is background about Bunyoro such that we can proceed to the gist of the matter.

Bunyoro sub region is one of the cosmopolitan areas in Uganda. It is inhabited by indigenous people who comprise of the Bunyoro, Baruuli, Bagungu and a big percentage of non-indigenous people who include; Lugbara, Alur, Lendu, Acholi, Langi, Banyarwanda –(Interruption)

MR KARUBANGA: Mr Speaker, I think I know how to get documents on the iPad. We would not be proceeding rightly, if we do not get this document. Otherwise, property was lost. It was actually a brutal eviction. Therefore, proceeding without anything on record would not be good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, can we handle this tomorrow when we are sure of what we are doing?

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us handle this tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Next item. 

MR MUGOYA: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, make sure that this document is uploaded now so that Members can read it overnight and morning of tomorrow such that this report is presented and debated tomorrow afternoon. 

RESPONSES TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE RELUCTANCE BY THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH TO RENEW THE REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH VOUCHER PROJECT IMPLEMENTED BY MARIE STOPES UGANDA.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these were urgent matters and we are going to deal with them as such. They are responses to urgent matters. Honourable minister, you will be handling them in five minutes each.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 13 November, hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa raised a concern over the reluctance by the Ministry of Health to renew the Reproductive Health Voucher Project implemented by Marie Stopes Uganda.

Just to give you a background on that project, on 18 December 2014, the Government of Uganda signed a grant agreement with the World Bank for the Reproductive Health Voucher Project. The implementation started in September 2015 and the project will close on 30 December 2019. 

The original grant amount was $ 13.3 million from the Government of Sweden through the World Bank. UNFPA later contributed $ 1 million and the Government of Uganda contributed an additional $ 3 million bringing the total financing amount to $ 17.3 million.

The objective of the project was to increase access to skilled care among poor women living in rural and disadvantaged areas during pregnancy and delivery. The project was being implemented in 25 districts and I have listed them below; 12 from south western Uganda while 13 were from eastern Uganda. 214 health facilities were contracted. Of these, 44 were private for profit facilities, 20 were private not for profit and 37 were public health facilities. I have given a breakdown of the districts and the facilities on page 3 and page 4 of the report respectively.

Vouchers that we are discussing utilise a demand driven results financing mechanism where target beneficiaries purchase vouchers, which they use to access and redeem at an agreed range of services. Under the project, a voucher costing Shs 4,000 is sold to the mother by a community based distributor or a village health team member and the voucher entitles her to the following services: four antenatal care visits, a normal or complicated delivery including caesarean section, referral transport and post-natal care, including post-natal family planning. 

The project indeed targeted poor mothers who were identified using a standard poverty assessment criteria developed by Marie Stopes. According to their report, 89.5 per cent of the beneficiaries under the project were poor mothers, seven were on a marginal scale and 3.5 were well to do mothers or mothers who could afford. Generally, the project achieved the targets, as I have highlighted. 

The project is due to close on 30 December 2019 and its funding has been fully spent. There were discussions on the possibility of restructuring and getting some money from the Uganda Reproductive Maternal Child Health Services Improvement Project, the bulk of whose financing is a loan provided by this Parliament from the World Bank.

The objective of the loan was to improve utilisation of essential health services with a focus on reproductive maternal, new born child and adolescent health services in target districts and to scale up birth and registration services.

The total budget for the project is $ 165 million of which $ 110 million is a loan from the International Development Association of the World Bank, $ 30 million is a grant from the Global Financing Facility in support of every woman, every child and $ 25 million is a grant from the Swedish Government. Of this, $ 78 million has been earmarked for results based financing. 

Results based financing, under which we applied for this loan, is a smart financing mechanism where providers of health services are paid upon achieving predefined outputs that have been verified and proven to be of the right quality as per the national treatment standards. Under results based financing, health facilities at health centres IV, III and hospitals are reimbursed for the following outputs:

New outpatient visits for children under five years of age, antenatal care; first and fourth visit, prevention of malaria in pregnancy, normal and caesarean sections, referrals for emergency obstetric and neonatal care conditions, post-natal care, provision of family planning and full immunisation for children under one year. Hospitals are reimbursed for ambulance services provided, all maternal and perinatal death reviews conducted and addressed and the quality of healthcare improved. Among the many interventions under arm chip is the nationwide scale out of results based financing mechanism.

The implementation of the voucher project provided valuable lessons that enabled the design of a more robust and cost effective Results Based Financing mechanism.

The RBF programme is currently supporting 727 health facilities in 79 districts and 70 hospitals, including Kawempe National Referral.

By January 2020, an additional 570 health facilities and 43 hospitals will be supported in 50 districts bringing the total number of health facilities supported to 1,297 health facilities and 113 hospitals in 129 districts.

Mr Speaker, allow me to share with you the reasons why my ministry took a decision to transit from the voucher system, which will eventually be phased out into the National Health Insurance Scheme once this Parliament has considered it.

    (i) The cost 

Vouchers are distributed to poor women. However, huge costs are incurred in identifying and accessing their eligibility. For example, of the original project cost of $ 12.7 million, nearly 40 per cent that is $ 4.8 million was used for identifying and confirming the poor for eligibility while only $ 7.9 million went into reimbursements for the actual services provided.

Secondly, the ministry had to hire a firm, that is Marie Stopes Uganda, to manage the voucher distribution, verification and reimbursement of services to the health facilities. These expenses of Marie Stopes cost over 20 per cent of the entire grant as it had to recruit full time staff to oversee, verify and pay claims.

Under Results Based Financing, the programme is implemented by health workers thereby ensuring that most of the funds allocated go directly into service delivery.

    (ii) Knowledge and experience 

Management of the vouchers was delegated to Marie Stopes Uganda as a third party agent to do the work on behalf of the Government of Uganda.

Whereas vouchers supported poor mothers, we observed that the programme is coming to an end with no capacity built in the public healthcare delivery system to continue such mechanisms.

We, therefore, decided to be very intentional and deliberate when designing the arm chip project to ensure that our health workers learn results based payment mechanism in preparation for the National Health Insurance Scheme.

RBF is being implemented by our health workers at the national and district health level facilities following Government procedures and financing principles. 

This motivates the health workers to understand the direct relationship between hard work and additional resources to their health facilities and the need to maintain accurate records and focus on the quality of the treatment outcomes.

    (iii) Motivation of health workers 

An initial seed disbursement is provided to kick start the process of results based financing in a facility. 

Subsequently, funds are provided, based on the results of services provided in terms of numbers and quality. The more the patients attended to with a good outcome, the more the funds.

The funds provided have clear guidelines on use, where 40 per cent is for health worker motivation while 60 per cent goes to supplement the primary health care grants. It can be used to purchase medicines and health supplies or carry out repairs on buildings.

Visibility of Government

The voucher project is not known among the communities as a Government project intended to improve service delivery. Both the health workers and the communities call it the Marie Stopes Project.

The Ministry of Health involvement has been minimal and hardly known in the project implementation. Marie Stopes itself, in their report, cited the non-involvement of the District Health Management Teams and the Health Unit Management Committees as a major challenge to the implementation.

Ownership

We have engaged district health officers and health workers, both at district and national levels. From our consultation, most of them objected to the continuation of the voucher project, in favour of results-based financing, which will be rolled out countrywide.

Under results-based financing, the Ministry of Health signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the district leadership. The outputs from the health facilities are verified by the District Health Management Team and the invoices coming to the Ministry of Health are signed off by the Chief Administrative Officer.

The districts take direct responsibility for the performance of the programme in support of the decentralisation policy. Results are also verified by the programme teams before payments can be made. However, important to note is that involvement of the District Health Management Team helps to ensure that the communities own the programme as well.

Mr Speaker, in the midst of scarce resources and in a bid to enable all health facilities benefit and improve their services without marginalising any region, my ministry is rolling out a cost-effective supply side of the results-based financing, under the arm chip project, as the loan clearly specified.

As the voucher project closes out, all the facilities that were benefitting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have taken ten minutes.

DR ACENG: I am concluding, Mr Speaker.  All the facilities that were benefitting from the voucher system are being rolled into results-based financing. No interested facility will be left behind and results-based financing will be rolled out nationwide, funded by the Government of Uganda.

I appeal to honourable members to take keen interest in implementation of this programme, as it is intended to transform reproductive maternal, child health and adolescent service delivery and improvement of maternal child health indicators. I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was an urgent question. The response should have been specific to the question asked. However, the minister has taken advantage and even outlined her policy on results-based financing, which was not part of the question but which we have gladly received.

It now puts us in a difficult situation because it was a specific question. If you were here, you would not have taken ten minutes answering it. You would have taken two minutes responding to it but because you were not here, that is why.

When such questions come as urgent matters, we expect short responses. That is why the time allotted was five minutes and not 15. So, for the next question, you are going to help us with that.
 
The person who asked the question, hon. Mbwatekamwa, is not here but because we wanted to handle the issues of questions raised, it is the reason I accommodated it. He is not here to ask supplementary questions. We will proceed to the next question. 

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA ON THE DEFECTIVE LIFEGUARD CONDOMS THAT HAVE PROLIFERATED THE UGANDAN MARKET

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Briefly, honourable minister. 

5.52
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, on 20 November 2019, hon. Mbwatekamwa raised an issue regarding four million faulty condoms that had been imported and distributed by Marie Stopes Uganda and recalled by National Drug Authority.

Condoms are subjected to mandatory analysis before being released to the market by the National Drug Authority. The analysis is carried out at the NDA Quality Control Laboratory, which is a World Health Organisation pre-qualified and accredited laboratory with a certification agency from USA.

NDA, during routine surveillance on the market, detected two unauthorised batches and they have given the batch numbers, which had been released to the market. A recall was initiated and as of 21 November 2019, 80.5 per cent of the consignment had been recovered. To date, 95 per cent have been recovered. We have failed to recover five per cent and NDA inspectors and importers are still in the field to do this.

The earlier retrieved stock of 46 per cent was destroyed at Luweero Industries Limited, Nakasongola and the additional quantities retrieved are under quarantine, awaiting destruction as soon as we complete. Mr Speaker, I have provided a table of the recovered stocks and their batch numbers.

Preliminary investigations indicate that the pharmacist of Marie Stopes, a one Mr Kahora Ojambo Godfrey, wrote an internal memo in November to the management of Marie Stopes, to release the condoms, on the pretext that NDA had cleared them, whereas not. Mr Kahora and the Director, Corporate Affairs, Mr Fred Barongo, who is his immediate supervisor, have since been suspended. Investigations regarding unauthorised release of the failed Life Guard condoms onto the market are ongoing and those at fault shall face the law under the provisions of the NDA Act.

The NDA team, working with Marie Stopes, is conducting surveillance to retrieve the rest of the condoms that are in the market. 

The public has been informed to be vigilant while the drug shop owners and pharmacists have been requested to return any such condoms, should they be found. National Drug Authority will continue conducting routine post-market surveillance to protect the population from sub-standard, counterfeit and non-registered medicines and unsafe condoms.

Since this new Financial Year 2019/2020 started, there are ongoing operations across the country to protect the public from unqualified operators of drug outlets and unscrupulous dealers in medicine. National Drug Authority is committed to ensuring access to safe, efficacious and quality medicines and health care products on the market. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable member not being here, can we deal with the next one?

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO ON THE STATUS OF THE CT SCAN MACHINE AT MULAGO NATIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL AND WHETHER THERE IS INDEED A PRIVATELY OPERATED CT SCAN MACHINE WITHIN THE HOSPITAL

5.55
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko raised concern over the status of the CT scan machine at Mulago National Referral Hospital and whether there is indeed a privately operated CT scan machine within the hospital.

Mulago National Referral Hospital acquired a CT scan: 32 slice, through a cost-replacement contract. This was installed at casualty - that is the accident and emergency section of Lower Mulago that is currently under renovation, to provide diagnostic services to patients in urgent need, especially accident victims.

Under this contract, the hospital procures all consumables while the company supports the hospital with additional staff, supervised by the staff and management of Mulago, as the hospital builds its capacity of human resources to manage this machine. This machine was installed in February 2019 on completion of Block G of Lower Mulago. It is not a privately operated CT scan machine. 

In order to acquire the necessary consumables and meet the maintenance costs of the machine, patients pay a fee of Shs 150,000. However, for all patients unable to pay, the fees are waived off by the Executive Director. Under the ADB project, the hospital acquired and installed another CT scan 128 Slice, which will work on patients from the entire hospital and this is in Block F. The block is yet to be handed over by the contractor. 

Due to the high maintenance cost of the CT scan, patients will also be required to pay a subsidised cost for this service. 

Mr Speaker, with the two machines installed, CT scan services will be provided to all patients who need it including patients from Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I do not see the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities here. Can we go to Local Government?

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JOVAH KAMATEEKA ON THE ISSUE OF THE INAPPROPRIATE WASTE DISPOSAL IN THE VARIOUS URBAN CENTRES AND THE NEED FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE CLEAN AND HABITABLE ENVIRONMENTS

5.58
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a response to an urgent question on the issue of inappropriate waste disposal in various urban centres raised by hon. Jovah Kamateeka.

Honourable colleagues, at the 42nd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 3rd October 2019, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, the Woman Representative for Mitooma District, raised the concern over the inappropriate waste disposal in the various urban centres and the need for local governments to ensure clean and habitable environment. Consequently, the Speaker directed the Ministry of Local Government to respond to this matter in Parliament. 

Solid waste management is a function of an urban local government as stipulated in the Local Government Act, Chapter 243. Liquid waste management is primarily a function of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, save for the storm water that preoccupies the local governments. While medical waste is managed by the respective health facilities. Industrial waste is managed by the respective generators in accordance with the mitigation actions approved by NEMA while e-waste is managed in accordance with e-waste management policy, which aims at mobilising and sensitising the communities and establishing incentives for investors to establish e-waste facilities among others.

For the purpose of this response, I just want to focus on solid waste management. In Uganda, 40 to 85 per cent of the waste generated is not collected. As a result, the uncollected waste is dumped indiscriminately on the streets and in drains, contributing to flooding leading to spread of diseases such as cholera. 

Of the collected waste, biodegradable materials range from 70 to 90 per cent. In fact, that a higher proportion of the waste is biodegradable cast hope that it could be left at the rural household level for manure.

In 2013, the Government of Uganda provided 22 special motor vehicles for solid waste management plus 106 dump trucks and 168 tractors with trailers to municipalities and town councils to facilitate these functions. The dump trucks were planned to be multi-purpose as they would be used for road works as well. 

Government has approved human resource structures that create health and environmental management functions in urban local governments to enable urban councils to deliver this function. 

In some cases, urban local governments have engaged contractual workers or outsourced firms to handle this function. NEMA supported Arua, Fort Portal, Jinja, Mbarara, Kasese, Kabarole, Mukono, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Gulu, Masindi and Hoima Municipal Councils with garbage recycling plants. 

Through their umbrella organisation, Urban Authority Association of Uganda, the Uganda Local Government has resolved to declare one day every month as “Keep our Town Clean Day”. 

Solid waste management strategies have been developed for 22 Uganda Support to Municipalities Infrastructure Development (USMID) municipalities to raise solid waste collection rate to 70 per cent. The strategies include integration of physical planning and involvement of the key stakeholders in the solid waste management among others. 

Continuous Sensitisation by urban local governments on mind-set change; for example, sorting of solid waste at source, innovative engagement with potential investors that will turn solid waste into a resource like manure, energy and etcetera. Once again, Entebbe Municipal Council has signed an MoU with an investor in this regard. 

Construction of roads under USMID project to improve on drainage in 22 municipalities and construction  -

Mr Speaker, the ways forward:

    1. The ministry is preparing a proposal for solid waste management and physical management planning function to be funded from Central Government’s transfers. 
    2. Continuous sensitisation of the masses to apply best practices of waste reduction, waste reuse and recycling.
    3. Expansion of local revenue base through sensitisation and mobilisation of local revenue and collections.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. The Member who asked the question is not here to ask a supplementary question.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LILY ADONG ON THE FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO CARRY OUT ADEQUATE ORIENTATION OF ELECTED LOCAL COUNCILS I AND II, WHICH HAS RESULTED INTO THE VIOLATION OF SOME LAWS BY COUNCILLORS

6.06
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to this question as follows: 

Honourable members, you are aware that Government conducted elections for village and parish councils in July 2018. They are also aware that Government through the Ministry of Local Government successfully conducted induction of local government councils from sub-county up to the district level throughout the entire country.

This exercise was successfully concluded in June this year. My ministry has issued a number of guidelines on roles and responsibilities of village and parish councils and their committees while executing their various mandates.

However, despite issuing these guidelines, there is need for an in-depth induction for village and parish councils and their committees. This will be achieved as soon as funds are available. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE DELAYED DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT STATUS TO SIGULU ISLANDS IN DISREGARD OF THE 2008 MEMORANDUM RAISED BY HON. GEORGE ABOTT OUMA, BUKOOLI ISLANDS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is here. He will be entitled to a supplementary question.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Mr Speaker, from the records of Parliament and those of the ministry, Sigulu Islands district has never been created by Parliament. In view of the aforementioned, there is no way the Ministry of Local Government would designate district status to Sigulu Islands before Parliament pronounces itself on the matter.

When the process of creating Sigulu Islands district is concluded, with the approval of this august House, my ministry will be happy to designate the district status of Sigulu Islands. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ouma, your supplementary question? Not a speech.

6.08
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Mr Speaker, I have visited the minister since 2016 and given him all the documents. Madam Speaker, who was chairing this House then, directed the Minister of State for Local Government on the issue of Sigulu Islands and the minister said that they have all the information. He even told the Speaker that when they are bringing issues of other districts, they will include Sigulu district.

Therefore, this is what I wanted the minister to clarify on. He has all the documents on Sigulu and even -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When are you bringing the district? That is the supplementary question.

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I had a very diplomatic discussion with the honourable member this evening and I told him that I had consulted the appointing authority. Once I am given a go ahead - Sigulu being one of those places requesting to be given the district status - I will come to Parliament together with other requests and move this House to create them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I do not see the Attorney-General or the Minister of Foreign Affairs but the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban development is here. Let us deal with his ministry.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. FRED TURYAMUHWEZA TUMUHAIRWE ON THE DELAYED COMPENSATION OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE RUKUNGIRI-KANUNGU ROAD PROJECT AND THEIR INTENTION TO DISRUPT THE PROJECT AND UNDERSTAFFING AT THE RUKUNGIRI ZONAL OFFICE OF THE MINISTRY OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT 

6.10
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to that question raised by the Member of Parliament for Rujumbura County in Rukungiri. Yes, Government is constructing a road from Rukungiri to Kanungu, which is 78.5 kilometres. 

According to the records available from UNRA, which handles compensation, up to 82.26 per cent of the project affected persons have received their compensations. Only 427 individuals have not been compensated and for those who have not received their compensation, it is because either there are disputes on the properties to be compensated or there are conflicts or their documentation is not complete.

However, those whose properties and land have been accessed and verified and they have no issues have been compensated. Also, the construction has begun from the area where people have been compensated that is Kihihi-Kanungu section. The areas with people who have not received compensation are mainly in the other segments where construction has not begun.

The undertaking by Government is that all those affected will have to be compensated before the actual construction of the road is done. Uganda National Roads Authority assures us that the resources are available and as long as the conflicts and the issues regarding those particular individuals are sorted out, they will be given their compensation.

The second part of the question was the understaffing at our ministry zonal office in Rukungiri. This office is newly established and as honourable members are aware, we have decentralised the service of land transactions by constructing 22 ministry zonal offices in the different parts of the country and one is in Rukungiri.

The Rukungiri office is a newly established office and it began functioning mid this year. We have recruited staff to the level of 60 per cent. We still have a staffing gap of 40 per cent and we are now engaging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to increase our wage component so that we can complete the recruitment.

However, the assurance I would like to give the honourable member and the House is that the critical offices that are necessary for the functioning of that office are there. For instance, we have recruited a senior land management officer, the Government valuer, the Cartographer, an ICT officer, a Physical planner, a staff surveyor, a registrar of titles, a records officer, an assistant ICT officer, three data entry clerks and an office attendant. Those are critical offices, which are necessary for the functioning of the office.

Some of the positions, which are still un-filled include driver, askari and the dispatch clerk. We shall fill them but the office can still function with those key critical positions. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the response. I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development now. Can we go the item concerning Internal Affairs?

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. CAROLYN NANYONDO BIRUNGI ON THE IMMENSE SUFFERING OF FISHING COMMUNITIES IN KALANGALA DISTRICT DUE TO CONFISCATION OF FISH STOCKS AND EXTORTION OF MONEY BY THE MARINE POLICE UNIT

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Police are no longer in charge of manning the lakes and we do not have a marine unit in charge. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. JAMES WALUSWAKA ON THE DANGEROUS MECHANICAL CONDITION OF SOME VEHICLES OF THE UGANDA POLICE FORCE AND THE ATTENDANT RISKS POSED BY SUCH VEHICLES

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): We are still assessing the stock of our vehicles to know those which are in very dangerous condition. At the right time, we will table the list for the Members to assess. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you just have to fix them. We do not need to know. You just have to fix them if you find them.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Yes. Thank you very much. We are doing work on that.

The deputy speaker: You do not have to come back with the list here. Once you have fixed them, we will be happy.

Mr OBIGA kania: Most obliged. 

RESPONSE to a question raised by Hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju on The alleged assault of a woman by the Deputy Resident District Commissioner-Hoima, Mr Richard Tabaro during the by-election for the Hoima District Woman Representative

6.17
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, this matter was raised by hon. Adeke. We have a briefly written report on the network and it can be accessed through the iPads. The summary of the report is as follows:

During the by-election in Hoima held on 26 September 2019, at a place called Kapapi Trading Centre in Kapapi sub-county in Hoima District, Mr Jackson Mulindambura Mugenyi, a district councillor from Hoima, while on official duty as a National Resistance Movement (NRM) Supervisor in that area during the elections at polling stations, spotted a vehicle registration number UBB 482. It was a Toyota Spacio, Grey in colour with four occupants parked near the polling station.

Mr Mugenyi became suspicious that these were people who were trying to rig the election. He pursued them up to a place called Siba Polling Station where he met the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Hoima. 

The Deputy RDC approached both parties and a quarrel ensued between him and the occupants of the grey vehicle who were with Ms Elizabeth Katungi. In the process, Ms Katungi, according to a report in the complaint file by the RDC at the police station, pushed the RDC. A fight ensued between them.

In the process, the said Ms Katungi got a stick and hit Mr Mugenyi, the councillor accusing him of alleged voter bribery. The Deputy RDC intervened and grabbed the stick from Ms Katungi. He initially kept it in his car but she became violent and attacked the RDC prompting the latter to retrieve the stick to defend himself by beating her with it.

In the process, a scuffle ensued. There was a fight and the RDC and the lady were separated. The RDC entered his vehicle, went to Kigorobya Police Station where he reported an attack on him. The lady also followed to the police station, found when the RDC had already made the statement. She was arrested, detained and later transferred to Hoima Police Station.

She was later released on police bond. The police requested the lady to make a statement but she has not done so up to now. Investigations continue.  Thank you.

RESPONSE TO a QUESTION RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA ON THE MURDER OF A ONE SAMUEL OPIO IN NGORA BY UNKNOWN ASSAILANTS

6.21
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): On 12 September 2019 at around 8.15 p.m., the body of an adult identified as Samuel Opio, 23 years, was found by the roadside in a eucalyptus tree garden of hon. Abala in a pool of blood with a deep cut on the neck. He was suspected to have been murdered on 12 September at an unknown time in Ngora sub-county.

On 11 September, the day before, Opio was alleged to have been drinking at his aunt’s place in Agirigiroi sub-county in Ngora District until his body was found. 

The matter is being investigated and it is being handled as a murder case. Some suspects have been arrested and are now facing the due process of the law.  Thank you.

The deputy speaker: There is no supplementary question from hon. David Abala.

response to a question raised by Hon. Waira Majegere on The need for THE Uganda Police Force to ensure that police vehicles are adequately fuelled to run their operations

6.23
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): We are trying to do this as much as we can with the available money that you have allocated to us.  Thank you.

Response to a question raised by Hon. Hassan Fungaroo on The threats to his life by unknown persons and the procrastination in response by relevant security agencies

6.24
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I do not know how to proceed with this matter. We do have a statement to upload. Investigations are continuing in this matter but my colleague, hon. Fungaroo had approached us at the ministry saying that before we upload this statement, he would like to make further consultations with us. 

Therefore, I plead that since he is the one who raised the matter, his request be respected until he tells us about the consultations he would like to make with us. Otherwise, we have the statement.

The deputy speaker: Do we take it that you will raise the matter once he has finished the consultations? I do not want things that are not necessary appearing on the Order Paper.

Mr OBIGA kania: My view is that he does not want the matter to continue on the Floor of Parliament. However, since he is not here, I cannot speak for him.

The deputy speaker: Okay, we will keep it now until we get clarification from hon. Fungaroo, if he is still interested in this matter.
 
Response to a question raised by Hon. Waira Majegere on The need for sniffer dogs in Mayuge District

6.26
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): We are making arrangements to deliver units of sniffer dogs in the various 18 regional police areas and that will cover Mayuge. Thank you.

Response to a question raised by Hon. Lilly Adong on The relationship between the mandate of Local Councils I and II and the work of the Police Force

6.26
The Minister of state for Internal Affairs (Mr Obiga Kania): As we all know, the LCI and LC III structures are elective positions. The police are civil servants and collaborate very well in the administration of law which is the area of the police.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. SIMEO NSUBUGA ON PREVENTIVE MEASURES BY GOVERNMENT TO AVERT FATAL ACCIDENTS AT MYANZI TRADING CENTRE IN KASSANDA DISTRICT

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): We have increased our deployment of traffic police in Kassanda and that area. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries. Can we deal with Defence?

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ANTHONY OKELLO ON WHEN GOVERNMENT INTENDS TO OPEN UP LAKE KYOGA AND KWANIA FOR THE FISHING ACTIVITIES FOLLOWING THE THEIR CLOSURE

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Sam Engola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Defence work on the lakes does not involve opening or closing the lakes. We went there to enforce the stopping of bad fishing. 

When it comes to re-opening the lakes, it is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who should get the technicality of the fish in the lake, see the size and then advise us to withdraw from the lake. Therefore, we are still waiting for that advice and we will withdraw the troops.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question?

6.29
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I greatly regret the response from the honourable minister. Defence and Agriculture belong to the same Government. People want to know - this lake is a very important natural resource and the economic activity, the life of the local people depends on this lake for poverty alleviation and food security. When are you opening the lake for fishing activities for the local people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when are you opening the lakes? I thought you answered it.

MR ENGOLA: Mr Speaker, we are waiting for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to make assessments of the lake and the fish, which is in the lake and the boats which should be used in the lakes and then we withdraw the troops. It is that ministry to open it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the Minister for Security here? Honourable members, we will pass this question to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

I think there is a clash of mandate here. The honourable Minister of Defence is saying that for them, they do not close or open. It is the Agriculture that does that; for them they just give support to the Agriculture. So, they also await instructions from the Agriculture that once they give them, they leave. Government Chief Whip, do you want to say something on this?

6.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, much as hon. Okello addressed his question to a wrong address, he is raising a genuine point. The Minister in charge of Defence is not the competent authority to close or open fishing facilities. What he is saying is true.

Therefore, what we have to do as Government is to make sure that the two meet, do evaluation and then, the competent authority, the Commissioner Fisheries moves ahead to declare that now free fishing is authorised. Otherwise, hon. Okello is raising a genuine point but the honourable Minister of State for Defence really cannot stand here and say we are opening, yet, they are not the ones who closed in the first place. This is the clarification I wanted to give.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Madam Chief Whip for giving way. This matter of fishing and involving of soldiers has been here for some time. Many times, the Minister of Defence has defended the soldiers being on the lakes.

Mr Speaker, one time, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries clarified on the Floor that it is not them that deployed the soldiers on lakes. Madam Chief Whip, how come this question has been here and you have heard the Minister of Defence defending the soldiers and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries denying having deployed them - how do you synchronise both to satisfy the people such that we have harmony and we know who exactly is responsible? This is a ping-pong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was another clarification; do you want to take it first?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, let me handle one by one. Mr Speaker, the lakes in Uganda kept on being depleted for more than 15 or so years. You cannot expect the enforcement to just take one year; this is the fact I am stating before this august House. 

It involves finding an alternative livelihood for the people who have been surviving on fishing. In addition, because they have been desperate and been fishing anyhow using any kind of gear, I witnessed this as a Minister of State for Fisheries.

Therefore, I am pleading that let us do the assessment. In any case, some fishing communities are now helping the enforcement officers because they have realised that when they deplete the lake, they will have no alternative. What we have focused on is the indiscipline of the enforcement officers so that we deal with them. Secondly, the impounded vehicles and motorcycles need to be sorted out. If the minister decides to auction them, let them be auctioned and the owners know that they have auctioned their property.

However, to leave them lie in Nakasongola keeps on tormenting the people who have been deprived of their so called right to go fishing

Therefore, let us focus –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. People living along the water bodies have been fishing since time immemorial. Before we were born, fishing activities were going on up to now. 

Is the Government Chief Whip in order to insinuate that the fish species may get finished yet we were born, we found them and I do not think that fish will ever get finished from the lake? Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, by the time your father was born, there were very few people accessing the lake and using the resources from the lake. By the time you were born, there were a little more people. As of now, there are very many people. There is population pressure on the lakes that needs to be managed. I think that is the point they are making. Therefore, they are very much in order. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I have two procedural concerns that I would like to raise. When this matter came on the Floor, the senior Minister of Defence was in the House and in his response – it is on record – he stated that he would report back to the House the following week on Tuesday after consulting his colleague in the Ministry of Agriculture. 

Mr Speaker, don’t you think that was in a better spirit when the senior Minister of Defence stated that he would report back after consulting his colleague? We are in the same Government. 

Secondly, in the temperate climate, it takes four to five months for fish to reach a marketable size. Lake Kyoga has now taken over eight months from the time it was closed. This means that fish are now dying of old age. (Laughter) This has been the source of livelihood for our people. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure you attended the burial of a few of them. (Laughter) 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I think we would proceed well if Government could have a human face on the fishing community. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries dealing with this matter tomorrow? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, even when hon. Mwesige raised this matter, he pointed out that he is not the competent authority over it but he said he was going to work with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The question was still on the Order Paper.  (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter that has made me rise at this moment is that I have been wondering whether we are dealing with a failed Government. I know the role of the Minister of Defence; he is supposed to defend the lives of the people in situations of threat to life and destruction of property. 

I am now wondering what role the Minister of Defence would be carrying out for the police to seal off fishing sites when people are dying and forests are being depleted. 

If you are guiding the future, why don’t you protect the forests, which are being cut? That would show us that you are concerned about our future. What would a Minister of Defence be doing with fishing? 

Since I am being threatened by Generals, why can’t you concentrate on defending my life and properties instead of defending fish, which are now growing old? 

I am really concerned about the manner in which the Ministry of Defence has abandoned its core role of defending the lives and property of people and is now involved in beating up fishermen and confiscating their vehicles. 

Many of these people are from Amolatar and Dokolo and they have their vehicles, which have been impounded; yet, the banks are on their necks. Can the ministry tell us whether they will now pay for our vehicles? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural point.

MS OGWAL: I was seeking the procedure of how Government is being run at the moment. I would like to be guided on how Government is being run where Defence is now in fisheries. Maybe next time I will find the Judiciary in another place. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure whether I can speak on behalf of the President as I have not consulted him. I do not know how the Government is being run in that aspect. Therefore, I cannot rule. 

The point is this; we have had these debates of how the UPDF got involved in this water bodies’ protection thing. I said it earlier and I will repeat it that we should not pretend that we do not know because we know. 

I also think that protecting life might also extend to protecting livelihoods because if they protect you and there is nothing to eat, you might still die anyway. Protecting livelihoods might also be an extended responsibility of the UPDF if you want a comprehensive protection of people’s lives and their livelihoods. 

It is a discussion we have had but I also note that there has been a long lull without explanation. What has the progress been? The impact? Have there been any changes on the lake? You can just tell us that there have been some changes and in a few weeks or a few months, we will open the lakes for fishing but we will now regulate the sizes and there will be more vigilance in terms of monitoring what size of fish people are taking out of the lake. I think that would help us better. 

Honourable members, tomorrow is the Anti-corruption march and we are expected at the Constitutional Square. I urge you to participate because the fight starts with you. I will be there; please, join me. Let me not be there alone as this Arm of Government. Let us be there in large numbers and support the walk. We are expected there at about 7.35 a.m. Let us be there and encourage our people that we are all committed in the fight against corruption. It will send a strong signal. 

Young people are already resident in Gayaza and they are doing what they can. Let us also do our bit because the struggle after all, starts with us. 

The House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 December 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)
