Tuesday, 4 December 2012

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have three issues to communicate. The first one is that 224 Members have still not registered for the medical service providers. I am not saying something will happen to you, but I think it is in your interest to get a service provider. Anything can happen at any time; it may be an accident or it may be sickness. So, please, can you enrol before the end of this week.

Secondly, I would like to inform you, with regret, that we have lost a distinguished Ugandan in the person of the late hon. Deo Zabasaija, former Member of the National Resistance Council. His body will lie in state here tomorrow and so, we shall have a special sitting in his honour. Therefore, I urge you to come and attend so that we can send him off with the dignity he deserves. 

I also want to announce that on Thursday, His Excellency the President will come to address Parliament. The actual time will be communicated to you. He is coming to speak to us and to the country on Thursday. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.40
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the Government of Uganda fully recognises the role of ICT in fostering socio-economic transformation and development as reflected in the National Development Plan and the national vision. E-government is aimed at demystifying the role of Government to simplify procedure, enhancing transparency and accountability as well as making credible timely information available to all citizens who are at the same time providing all services in an efficient and cost effective manner. 

It is for this reason that Government, in consultation with stakeholders, has developed the National E-governance Policy Framework. The document highlights the role of the national e-government programme, spells out its core pillars and highlights the strategies to achieve the goal. It also spells out principal success factors and implementation road maps, which will be adopted by stakeholders. Finally, I appeal to you and encourage all Government agencies to use this policy framework to further focus and guide their e-government strategic plans as one of the faucets to transform our country into a knowledge-based economy.

Madam Speaker, it is now my great pleasure to lay the E-Government Policy Framework on the Table for Members to scrutinise and overwhelmingly support. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 400 copies have been made available, so every Member will have their copy to study and make use of.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, it is my pleasure to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow US$ 27 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the scaling up and replication of the Millennium Villages Project (MVP) in Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the ministry brief to Parliament is brought to the House, it comes accompanied by copies for all the Members of Parliament, and I have a copy as Chairman of the Committee on National Economy. However, it is becoming a habit that when these loan requests are committed to the committee, Members do not get their copies. Recently, I found a heap of briefs to Parliament going to waste. Can I request that every time this item is being brought to Parliament, every Member gets a copy because I know the 350 copies were actually supplied?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that they are brought here and not distributed or they are not brought?

MR MUKITALE: They are brought but as per the letter addressed to Clerk’s office, I get a copy and others but, unfortunately, Members do not. They should either be put on the table where we register, or the best way would be for Members to receive them right now so that every Member can start perusing through the document.

THE SPEAKER: I think there should be no problem. If there are enough copies, they should just go to the pigeon holes. Every Member has a pigeon hole.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, that would be appropriate but it is not being done.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if it is my office which is not handling that, we shall sort it out with the Clerk.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline was assigned by the Speaker on 28 November 2012 to investigate the circumstances that led to the disruption of parliamentary proceedings on 27 November 2012. (Mr magyezi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem, hon. Magyezi?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report that is about to be presented to us is very important. Isn’t it procedurally right for us to have copies of this report?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what he is going to say. Please, proceed. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The terms of reference framed by the Speaker and intended to guide the committee in its investigations were:

1. 	Identify the Members who attempted to grab the mace from the Sergeant-at-Arms.

2. 	Identify the Members who could have exhibited gross disorderly behaviour, for instance, rude conduct, heckling, etc. 

3. 	Cause the affected Members to appear before the committee to defend themselves; and

4. 	To make such recommendations as the committee may consider appropriate and report back to the House by Monday, 3 December 2012.

Pursuant to the terms of reference, the committee framed the following broad issues for consideration:
1. 	Whether there was an attempt to grab the mace and if so, by who?
2. 	Was there a breach of the Rules of Procedure; if so, by whom?
3. 	Whether there are any sanctions that can be imposed on those who are found in breach of the rules; and 
4. 	Whether there are any recommendations that the committee can make to this august House.

The committee has scrutinised the video recordings of the proceedings of that day and has identified over 200 Members of Parliament as potential witnesses. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, to be exact, the number is 239 Members of Parliament as potential witnesses. 

The committee has also identified the various rules that were breached on that day and these include rule 61(1),(4),(5) and (6); rule 63; rule 69; rule 71 (a),(b),(c),(d) and (h); rule 75; rule 76 together with Appendix F, paragraphs (3),(5),(12); and rule 77. This list is not exhaustive. 

The committee has so far interviewed a total of 16 witnesses and recorded their evidence, submissions and recommendations. Owing to the magnitude of the work still pending, it is the humble prayer of the committee that this House be pleased to grant an extension of time of an additional 10 working days to enable us to interview the remaining 221 Members of Parliament. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, we so pray. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a committee is entitled to come and seek for an extension if they report that they have not completed their work.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the rules committee for the brief report that he has made here. Arising from that report where he said the committee has identified about 239 Members of Parliament as potential witnesses, and given the kind of issues that they framed for consideration, I got worried. If any action is to be taken on all of them, I do not know whether you will have House to preside over. 

I am inclined to propose that you invoke some other powers of general amnesty, so that you just pass a word of caution to all the Members because the action was more or less spontaneous. All those 239 Members did not conspire to do something; it was really a spontaneous act. You may need to consider general amnesty and we see how to proceed with the work of Parliament. I beg to propose.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on whether it could be possible that those 239 Members of Parliament could include Members of the investigating committee. (Laughter) Secondly, what appropriate remedies they intend to apply to safeguard against that situation in case it has arisen.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The 239 Members of Parliament certainly include members of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. (Laughter) I think the qualifying word is, “some” members of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Our rules provide very succinctly what is done in circumstances such as that. We report that as of yesterday, we had started interviewing some members of the committee as witnesses. They disqualified themselves and appeared before the committee as witnesses. Their names will be disclosed when we make our final report to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think they are only asking for an extension of time but we have not heard the report. Let us get the report. We shall listen to your recommendations, including amnesty, if it is one of the recommendations. So, permission is granted for you to work for the next 10 working days.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: May I take this opportunity to first of all welcome back the Leader of the Opposition who has been deepening democracy in the countryside. (Applause)

2.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much for welcoming me back to the House. As you are aware, honourable members, I have been in and out of the House. We have been, as the Speaker rightly said, deepening democracy in Uganda. I was one of the participants in that process. We voted on 22nd November and I lost the election as party President of FDC. However, I am still available here in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for the opportunity you have given me. I believe NRM will also be deepening democracy soon, by holding elections like we did. We look forward to that in NRM. 

Madam Speaker, you mentioned item No. 5 – (Interjections) – Yes, it was called. Item No. 5 was read, but as you are aware, item No.5 is hinged on item No.4, that is, the issue of members being taken to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I would be happy if item No.4 is disposed of first before we can deal with item No.5. The same habit can easily re-occur and what would you do in that case? Are you going to create another committee on rules, privileges and discipline to deal with the same item? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable Leader of the Opposition, those items are independent of each other. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, item No.4 was caused by item No.5, and item No.5 can only be disposed after dealing with item No.4. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the Minister of Energy and a number of the Members have been working on a consensus strategy and they would want us to get a briefing. So they have asked me to suspend for 15 minutes so that they can inform their members about the strategy. Is that okay, Minister?  (Interjections) Okay, honourable members, let me suspend for 15 minutes and hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Niwagaba, the minister and hon. Otto can arm the Members with information before we go to the next stage.

(The House was suspended at 3.03 p.m.) 

 (On resumption at 3.24 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had already taken the vote on re-committal. What was remaining was the reinstatement of clause 9. That is what we are required to vote on today, and we shall go to the division lobbies. Honourable members, please go to the division lobbies. Those “for”, go to my right and those “against” go to my left; abstentions will find their level. 

(Members voted by division lobby.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite the Minister of Energy to come and report about the discussions on the harmonisation. (Applause) Please, call the minister. Minister of Energy, please, come and report on the harmonisation. Members, can you sit down and let me invite the minister. Minister of Energy, please, come and report on the harmonisation. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no. Please, Minister, can you report. I invited the Minister of Energy. Leader of the Opposition, please wait. I want the minister. Please, Minister of Energy.  

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Chairperson and honourable members, you recall the last time we were here trying to conclude the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012, I recommitted clause 9, which is about the functions of the minister. My request was that the clause remains as submitted in the Bill before. What was remaining was voting because the recommittal was agreed upon. 

Chairperson, as we have been waiting for this day to vote on the clause – (Interjections) - Yes, we are waiting and we have been waiting to vote because that is the stage where we had reached. As we were waiting, Members still desired to try and understand what the contentious issues were on the key two sub clauses which give the minister powers to grant and revoke licences and also negotiate and endorse petroleum agreements. The various engagements, which have been going on, were to clarify to Members so that they have a better understanding of what is involved in the licensing process and where the Authority plays a role. 

Colleagues, the clarification that I have given to the various Members who desired to understand what the role of the Authority would be in this whole process is that when it gets to negotiating the petroleum agreements, the minister indeed liaises with the Authority. Secondly, before endorsing the petroleum agreements and granting the licences, they had to be approved by Cabinet. Thirdly, when it comes to revoking the licences, the Authority plays a role because it is the one which supervises, monitors, and enforces compliance by the licensees and administers the agreements. (Interjections) It recommends, before the minister can again seek approval from Cabinet before the licences are revoked. 

Those were the two issues which had generated a lot of debate and that is the explanation which has been given, discussed and I hope the Members have understood and appreciate the role which the Authority plays.  Chairperson, I beg to report.

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, there is a point of procedure here. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! 

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, there is an issue on procedure here because this morning, you constituted the House as a Speaker and we dealt with other business and this business of the Bill came up. Therefore, the committee was constituted. While in the Chair as Chairperson of the Committee, you advised that we vote and those against would go this side – (Interjections) - and some of the Members have voted. (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members!

MR SSEKANDI: When you say “no”, that will not impress me. The fact is, some people have voted. The clerk here– (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! Order! Order!

MR SSEKANDI: I am reporting what I saw. The clerk on this side got a sheet of paper – (Interjections) -  The point of procedure is this: It is on record - (Interjections) - It is on record - 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Allow the Vice-President to speak, please.

MR SSEKANDI: It is on record that we had two debates in the past. One was to pray that we recommit clause 9. When that was carried, we started debating clause 9 in the committee and debate on that clause was closed –(Interjections)- It was. That is the record. We then adjourned to come on an appropriate day to vote-(Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members!

MR SSEKANDI: I am used to that kind of behaviour. (Interjections) - So, today - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please.

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Chairperson, it appears some people want you to reconstitute another rules committee to investigate today’s conduct. (Interjections) What happened is that we sat here and were directed that those in favour should go this side and those against that side, and we did. The clerk responsible for this side–(Interjections) - I am explaining; I think I have the right - 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please respect each other. Allow the Vice-President to speak. 

MR SSEKANDI: I have been permitted to stand here and I will hold the ground. (Interjections) The position is clear, and there is evidence. There is evidence that people started voting because they were directed this side and that side. Making that kind of noise will not mean that that is a vote. It is not a vote. We are here to persuade each side but the procedure must be followed. Procedure must be followed. In the middle of voting and then you say “we open debate”! - (Interjections) – No! 

I must say that maybe yesterday or the other day there were some unofficial talks with the minister about this issue, which may be good, but if it is good, I feel we need to follow the procedure in effecting it. Maybe the right procedure is not now to bring in an amendment when actually the debate was closed. The best amendment could come after the Bill has been passed–(Interjections) - Nobody will stop you from bringing an amendment then, but let us follow the procedure. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the procedure we are about to adopt is unprecedented in the rules of this House. A motion to recommit clause 9 was moved, it was argued and adopted by this House. Accordingly, clause 9 stands recommitted to the Committee of the whole House. 

Today you turned up, Madam Chairperson, pursuant to the proceedings you had started, namely to vote on clause 9, and you ruled, and the ruling is already in the Hansard, that we vote by division lobby. Members have accordingly proceeded to the divisions to vote. That procedure, as far as I am concerned, is now irreversible. (Interjections) I pray that we go back to the division lobbies and proceed with the voting - (Applause) - and the votes will be counted in full view of everybody. That is the way to go; there is no other way.

MR DDOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. At the time I came in, the Minister for Energy was making a statement on the Floor, and this House is fully constituted. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Energy on the issues she was raising at the time when I came in. 

Madam Chair, we have informed positions on what we want to do, especially on clause 9 which was recommitted to this House and was carried. I even wrote to the Vice-President last week seeking the same clarification. We are talking about changing clause 9, to which we agree, but no one is raising the consequential amendments on this Floor. It seems we want to pass a blanket cover of consequential amendments without Hansard capturing the details of the consequential amendments. My worry is, and I want to seek clarification on this: in the event of litigation, when the Hansard has not captured the intention to pass that, what will our fall-back position be? That is what I want the Minister for Energy to help me clarify.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, with a heavy heart, I stand to raise a few concerns. When we are elected leaders of the people, we need to act honestly – (Interjections) – I say this because since yesterday, I was one of the people who were invited by the line minister, the owner of this Bill, hon. Irene Muloni. We sat with her, her permanent secretary and her technical staff up to around midnight yesterday. 

This morning, we did resume that meeting, and that meeting involved her ministry, and I imagine the Executive, and the leadership of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. (Interjections) – Colleagues who were not party to this meeting, I wish you could just listen. I was elected to come here and discuss, not to shout at people. 

When we left that ministry this afternoon, there was some middle position we were trying to come and market to both sides. This document I am holding was even typed by the Ministry of Energy. I feel so bad because the honourable minister has kept quiet about that consultation and the Vice-President is looking at it as a casual consultation – (Interjections) – We can shout at each other and vote, but this issue will actually remain; no amount of shouting will take away this issue. 

The rules of procedure being referred to by H.E the Vice-President and my brother the Minister of Local Government are meant to achieve justice. Rules of procedure are not meant to defeat justice. Do not rely  on technicalities. Rules of Procedure are handmaids of justice. We are saying, can we move together as a Parliament. We should have a negotiated position, which we must sell to the general membership of the House so that we can move together. 

There is a section of honourable members in this House which is crying “we vote, we vote”. Fine, go ahead and vote, but this issue is going to remain. This form of behaviour is unprecedented because this sector is a sensitive one. We either get it right from the beginning or we end up having a curse. 

I really regret why I spent nights trying to reach a harmonised position and then be denied by H.E the Vice-President so openly. Why were we invited? Was the Executive inviting us yet they were busy doing the opposite? Were you fooling us? How can a Government indulge in foolery? How can a Government be dishonest to its own Members of Parliament? 

Madam Chair, I want to say that even when we were meeting, we were informed that there were consultations going in to the highest level. The talks were blessed by H.E the President and now you are denying them; where is the good faith? We have walked all the way to create consensus; we have done the unprecedented. If some anarchists want to take over, so be it. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Chairperson. Colleagues, the efforts of engaging my fellow MPs was to build consensus and to have a clearer understanding of the issues. So, the essence of engaging a smaller community which was strongly opposed to those two sub clauses was to make them understand the position – (Interruptions) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I have told this House that by the time we left that meeting this afternoon, the ministry had drafted a different position which we felt would be towards a win-win situation. In fact, some of us were already agreeable to a greater extent to this win-win situation. 

This paper I am holding is from the Ministry, and I beg to lay this on the Table. [HON. MEMBERS: “Read it”.] I think for the benefit of our colleagues, let me even read it. This is the position that we were given by the ministry after the discussion. When we left the ministry boardroom, this proposal was supposed to be read by the minister and it says: “I would propose to separate the granting from the revocation of licences in clause 9 and provide for both of them separately. In so doing, I would also propose to merge granting of licences together with negotiating of agreements and come up with the following amendment: “Substitute the current clause 9 with the following...” This is the one people are voting on or attempting to vote on; the minister had already proposed to substitute it with what I am going to read – (Interjections) – “The minister shall be responsible for –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Listen.

MR KATUNTU: “The minister shall be responsible for -
(a) Negotiating petroleum agreements in liaison with the Authority; 

(b) endorsing petroleum agreements and granting licences with the approval of Cabinet; revoking licences on recommendation of the Authority...” 
The rest are technical. This is where the contention was. So, the role of negotiating this agreement would now be a shared responsibility, and we had agreed. (Applause)

This is the position we wanted to sell to the members of the Parliament Forum on Oil and Gas. We had also, after discussing with her technical people, agreed that since the Authority is the one responsible for monitoring the sector and it sees the oil companies faulting on their obligation, they can recommend to the minister to revoke the licence with approval of Cabinet. It is a win-win situation. What we are having now are people –

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is information from the Leader of Government Business.

MR KATUNTU: Okay, I will give way.

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: I thank you. Madam Chair, I want to inform the House that this document is not binding – (Interjections) - Let me explain. Much as it was discussed by the minister, who is part of the Executive, it is not binding because the minister has not completed the procedure of committing Cabinet. This document that has been arrived at should have come back to Cabinet and Cabinet should adopt it - (Interjections) - This is the information that I want to give.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: It is not binding at all. You can talk until morning without anyone being bound. This is a document which we are not going to – (Interjections) - We should go back to voting, Madam Chairperson.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, and I thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. Honourable ladies and gentlemen – (Interjections) - Honourable ladies and gentlemen and Members of Parliament, lend me your ears. (Laughter) I was not present last Tuesday but I have been present and listening to witnesses in the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I beseech you to listen to each other like honourable Members of Parliament. When someone is speaking, let others give him or her opportunity.

Secondly, this matter, no doubt, is of national importance. I came here, and I will be honest with you I had discussions with His Excellency the President of Uganda – (Interjections)-  Listen to me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please listen. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: We have to respect each other and guide this country. There is no other House except this one that can help Uganda. I came here and I had my New Vision, from which I read and reread the minister’s statement, and I made up my mind on where to vote, and if there is voting I will vote. 

However, I am speaking as a revolutionary person; if we can get consensus, it is the best position. So, when I heard the words of the minister and when I heard that she had consultations, whether formally or informally, it is great news. It is better for this country if we can resolve this matter amicably, and I think that we can, from the way I see things going. I, therefore, discourage sticking to technicalities. Let us examine what is being proposed and legislate for this country. I thank you. (Applause) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I have stayed on the microphone too long and I would like to retire. I would propose, hearing from Gen. Moses Ali, that if Cabinet has not yet had the opportunity to look at what the minister had consulted on and discussed, it would have been reason to say that we stand over this matter for a few hours, one day, and Cabinet can even sit this evening and look through the proposals. Even us who are leaders of the forum have to sell this position to our colleagues. 

So, we would seek for one day, Madam Chairperson, and both sides of the argument – it is not both sides of the House but both sides of the argument – would have time to consult and we come up with a consensus. I really plead with you, honourable colleagues, can we sleep over this and have consensus. Cabinet should meet, the forum should meet and we come tomorrow or the other day and we sort out this matter. That is what I pray, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Werikhe.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I have been listening to the honourable members who have been contributing but nowhere have I actually heard the position of the Committee on Natural Resources being mentioned. (Applause) It is the committee that brought the report to the House on which the debate and the discussions were premised. Now I hear different proposals coming forward without actually having the parent committee, which caused this debate on the Floor of the House, brought into the picture.

If it is the desire of the House, we need to get back to the Committee on Natural Resources. It is the Committee on Natural Resources that will come to the Floor of the House and report. There is no way you can harmonise without the committee of the House which was mandated to do this. Madam Chairperson, this is irregular. Any consensus will only be developed through the natural resources committee. I beg to submit. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Chair, the matter we are dealing with, as a Parliament and as a country, is very important and very emotive. It is very ugly for the government side to appear to have to have a contradicting position on the Floor. It is not in our interest and it is not good for posterity. 

I want to seek guidance from the honourable minister whether it would not be prudent now to move a motion for the House to resume so that we go back and come back when everybody is ready. I want to seek the guidance of the minister if that cannot be helpful.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chair, when we come to the House, we have a Leader of Government Business. I have heard claims, “I talked to the President”, “I talked to so and so”. I can only take those as claims. We have a Leader of Government Business and I believe that if government had taken a different position, the Leader of Government Business should have communicated this to this House. 

I pray that we ignore these claims that, “I have talked to the President” and we listen - (Interjections) - Madam Chair, I think the government position should be communicated by the Leader of Government Business.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members -

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Chair, – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order. You were guiding the House and we must treat your Chair with decorum and respect. Is the honourable Third Deputy Prime Minister, General (Rtd), Counsel and Deputy Leader of Government Business, in order to jump from his seat, almost over the Speaker, and interfere with proceedings when the Speaker is speaking. (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, he walks in a very interesting manner; so, you may not know whether he is walking or sitting. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Chair, I always admire you for your wise ruling. This document from the minister did not follow procedure. The procedure is, after discussing she should have reported back to Cabinet. Cabinet would then own it or disown it. As of now, if you ask us to own this document, we cannot. The Minister might have got clearance from one or two positions but the Cabinet is the collective position. Therefore, Madam Chair, I want to request that the House adjourns until tomorrow. Tomorrow we will have a Cabinet meeting and we shall discuss this paper and then come back with our position. (Applause) Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for that magnanimity because we are legislating for the whole country. It is okay to vote and defeat a side, but you leave people unhappy. If there is an opportunity for consensus, let us go back to Cabinet tomorrow, then back to the committee. If there is a chance for consensus, I think we should use it. Minister, move the motion.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.20
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, The Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.20
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill, 2012” and has stood over clause 9. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.21
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Report adopted.)

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. While we were at the Committee Stage, the chairperson of the natural resources committee raised a concern. He said that as the committee which is in charge of this sector, they have no input on what we are proceeding with. The chairperson actually literally indicated that we needed to build consensus. The guidance I am seeking is: wouldn’t it be prudent that this issue be referred to the responsible committee from where consensus can be built before we come to discuss it in this House? I seek your guidance.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to seek guidance on an issue that is related to what hon. Beatrice Anywar has just said. If we all know that clause 9 has got consequential amendments to other clauses, I would like to also propose that we refer this issue back to the responsible committee to study those consequential amendments and report back. That will help us when deliberating on it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the Committee of Natural Resources, I would like to say that since Parliament is in session, you can sit at 5 O’clock today, look at that proposal and report to us tomorrow in the afternoon session.

On the areas affected by clause 9, since it has not been passed, there is nothing affected at the moment. Also, if consensus is sought and accepted, then the amendment may probably not affect those other clauses that hon. Wilfred Niwagaba enumerated. So, let us first get the feedback from Cabinet. I think, Attorney-General, you said you were going to look at the 23 clauses which might have been affected if clause 9 had remained as it is –

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, we looked at the entire Bill in relation to the proposed amendment. We have a list of clauses that would be affected by the recommittal of clause 9. However, they are merely consequential – (Interjections) – No, they are not substantial. I even have them here.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please circulate the proposal from the minister. The committee can sit today and report tomorrow at lunch time.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for guiding the House to that decision. This is a very important Bill not only to us Members of Parliament but also to the entire country. As Cabinet sits tomorrow and the Committee of Natural Resources meet, we had some communication from the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda and it is my wish and prayer – (Interjections) - These are our religious leaders and our Motto is, “For God and my Country.” You also know that sittings of the House cannot commence before we say a prayer.

Madam Speaker, I request, as the Imam –(Interjections) We cannot receive this communication from the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda, which brings together all religions, without asking Cabinet and all those who are concerned to give serious consideration to those views

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have settled the issue. Cabinet is going to look at these issues tomorrow and they will come back to us. The Committee on Natural Resources, also sit and consider those proposals and give us a report – (Interjections) - No, there is no other position. Let us go to the next item.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Go to the Accountants’ Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACCOUNTANTS’ BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance; the Accountants’ Bill.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, I beg to move that the Accountants’ Bill, 2011 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the object of the Accountants’ Bill, 2011 is to: amend; replace; consolidate the laws relating to accountants; to provide for the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda; to provide for the council of the institute and the functions of the council; to provide for the Public Accountants Examination Board and its membership and functions; to provide for the secretary, registrar of accountants, and staff of the institute; to provide for the enrolment of members of the institute and registration of practicing accountants and accounting firms; to provide for the code of ethics and disciplinary proceedings; to provide for the fees payable under the Act; to repeal the Accountants’ Act, Cap 266; and for connected purposes. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the Chairperson of the Finance Committee.

MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you can see how the ministers are exiting Parliament as if the Bill being presented is not important. Why are these ministers giving us a bad image? Why do they behave like voting machines? Cabinet ministers!

Anyway, the point of procedure I am raising, Madam Speaker – 
(Interruptions)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, if I can recall what hon. Jim Muhwezi said here, everybody here, no matter whether you sit on the front or the back bench was elected. We are elected Members of Parliament –(Interjections)– majority are elected. At least I know that I am a minister, but as an elected Member of this House.

The majority of the Members here were elected –(Interjections)– I am building my point of order. Can you please listen to me –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the honourable member is in order to refer to the ministers as voting machines as if we are not elected Members of Parliament like them. Is he in order to belittle the powerful members of the Cabinet here, calling them voting machines? Is he in order? And yet the use of unparliamentary language is provided for in our Rules of Procedure. Is he in order to use offensive, abusive, insulting and unbecoming language? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, early this afternoon there was a plea that when Members misconducted themselves last time, they were asking for amnesty meaning that they have repented in their conduct. So, I do not expect the use of unparliamentary language in this House anymore. There are no voting machines here; there are Members duly elected and performing their work, but probably just gone to wash their hands.  (Laughter)  

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

Madam Speaker, the Bill that the minister has just presented to Parliament is a Cabinet Bill. The reason I am raising a point of procedure is that immediately this House deferred the Bill on Petroleum, the ministers almost stampeded as they were moving out. 

So, the procedural point I am raising - because you can see the drama that we have had; today you have some ministers, tomorrow you have another set and then we start afresh each time. So, the procedural point I am raising is whether it is right for Parliament to proceed when the movers of the Bill are abandoning the process?    

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can see the Vice President, the deputy prime ministers and other members of the Cabinet here. Let us proceed. 

4.35 
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with an apology. We have a few copies which have been printed from our printery. 

Secondly, the member of the committee who was asked to steer this Bill, hon. Musasizi, has exams, but the chairman must always be ready to proceed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

The Accountants Bill, 2011 was read for the first time on 7th February, 2012 and was referred to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings. I am not going to read the methodology.

The object of the Bill is to amend, replace and consolidate the law relating to accountants; to provide for the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda; to provide the Council of the Institute and the functions of the Council; to provide for the Public Accountants Examination Board; to provide for the code of ethics and disciplinary proceedings; and for related matters. 

I won’t read the salient features of the Bill. I will go straight to page 12.

Observations 

The committee made the following observations:

(1)	Membership of the Institute

The committee notes that the Bill in clause 5(1)(d) seeks to give the minister powers to determine the membership of the institute. 

The committee observes that categorisation of members of the institute should not be a policy issue to be determined by the minister and, therefore, recommends that the issues of membership should be determined by the professionals themselves, who are well represented in the governing structure of the institute. 

(2)	Admission of Chartered Secretaries and Associate Accountants 

The committee notes that clause 5(5) seeks to admit current associate members of the institute as associate members under the proposed Act.

(b) ICSA

The committee notes that under the Accountants Act Cap. 266, Chartered Secretaries and Associate Accountants were admitted as associate members of the institute. The committee observes that since their categorisation as such under Cap. 266 was transitional, and that the profession in Uganda has since grown, the contribution of associate members is well known and recognised. The committee, therefore, proposes to amend the provision to admit current associate members under Cap. 266 as full members under the law. 

The committee further proposes that the members of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries should not be members of the Institute of Chartered Public Accountants. A separate governing body should be established to regulate the Chartered Secretaries as is the case in other countries, for example, United Kingdom, Zambia and South Africa. 

(3) Practicing Certificate for accounting firms

Clause 32 provides that accounting firms would have to be registered by the institute and be issued with an annual practicing certificate. The committee, however, observed that:

(a) 	Practicing accountancy is done by an individual in a firm and not the accounting firm. The regulation of the individual is more important because liability rests solely upon the individual partner. 

(b) 	The institute cannot register the firms since they are already registered under other laws especially the Partnership Act. 

(c) 	The issuance of practicing certificates to accounting firms also presents practical challenges, especially where the firm has a valid practicing certificate and the individual partners do not. This is equated to issuing a driving permit to a car and not the driver. 

The committee recommends that clause 32 be amended to mandate the institute to inspect and approve firms as well as issuing annual licenses to accounting firms. 

The committee further recommends that the provision should be explicit to ensure that partners in the firm cannot be issued with practicing certificates unless the firms to which they belong have been approved by the institute. 

(4) The committee observed that the import of clause 35(2) is to exclude accountants employed in the Public Service from the application of this Act. The committee, however, notes that this would exempt all accountants in Government, including senior officials like the Auditor-General and the Accountant-General, from being regulated on professional conduct thus undermining best practices in public finance management. 

The committee notes that Article 163 of the Constitution provides that the Auditor-General shall be a qualified accountant. The proposal, therefore, would be contrary to the spirit of the Constitution, which envisages qualified accountants working for Government.

The committee, therefore, proposes that clause 35(2) be amended to allow public officers to be members of the professional body. However, they would not be deemed to be practising accountancy as provided under clause 35(1) because practising accountancy requires annual payments made to the institute for practising certificates. Accountants working with Public Service do not require practising certificates because the Public Service Standing Orders bar them from practising.

The committee is convinced that since more than double of the entire membership of the Institute is composed of accountants employed in Public Service, it would be unfair to exclude them from membership of the institute. In any case, the Public Service Standing Orders for accountants’ cadres requires all accountants at the level of senior accountant at U3 level and above to be members of the professional body.

(5). Certification of Financial Statements. 

The committee observed that currently there is no regulation of persons attesting to financial statements. This situation has been exploited by several persons who falsely certify to the truthfulness of such accounts since there is no liability placed on such unregulated persons.

The committee recommends that owing to the vast amounts of money lost due to falsification of financial statements, legislation on public finance should clearly provide that certification of financial statements for the consumption of the public entity should only be done by a qualified accountant. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your committee. The report has been signed by at least one third of the members, you are free to debate.

4.44
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is so sad that much as the Members of Parliament have the capacity to listen carefully, only around 30 copies were distributed. In fact, we are just maintaining diplomacy, but we would have followed our friends who moved out because honestly, all sides of the backbench did not have copies. We do not know how we can proceed in such a situation. Thank you.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a 20-page document and most of the Members, including myself, do not have copies. I think I have raised this matter with you before, that photocopying is done on a single page. If we had both pages copied, maybe we would have had more copies in this House, if it is a problem of shortage of paper. I am just raising a matter that should also be taken into consideration, because instead of ten pages being given to a Member, these are 20 pages that are being given yet two Members would have got a copy each. 

So, Madam Speaker, I am proposing that in order not to have wastage, those in charge of photocopying should photocopy on both sides of a paper so that all Members can have copies.

4.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much, and I want to thank the committee. I implore Members that this is a very important law that all of you should take interest in, and I am talking from a professional point of view. In addition to Members not having copies, they do not even have the Bill, which we are going to discuss. This is a Bill, which is important in plugging loopholes like stealing public money, dealing with quack auditors and those who issue false statements.

The only other point, which I wanted to plead on, is that the whole of this report should be captured in the Hansard for posterity. As much as the chairperson has summarised, it would be very important for the entire report to be captured in the Hansard. Members should also be given copies, and at the time when we are going to discuss it, everybody should come with their copy so that we discuss it objectively. The Prime Minister should not say we need the Cabinet to discuss it as this is very important.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that we are not in a position to have the debate as Members do not have copies of the report and the text of the law. I think we will have to adjourn - Are they available? Okay, we defer debate on the Accountant’s Bill, we shall set a date for it.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT BY THE AD HOC COMMITTEE INVESTIGATING THE ENERGY SECTOR

4.48
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the report of the Accountants’ Bill was being read, the chairperson walked out to try and get the report. Unfortunately, copies of the report are also not ready. It is a report of 106 pages; so it will be very difficult to present it now, let alone the fact that we have not managed to do this because of copies. Probably it should also be deferred.

THE SPEAKER: Can you at least lay it on Table?

4.49
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Copies of the report are now being distributed by the Sergeant-at-Arms. I have already got a copy.

4.50
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I can recall, this ad hoc committee was meant to present this report a long time ago; it has actually been appearing on the Order Paper but was not being presented. It is saddening that at this point in time, they are actually going out to see whether the report is ready. We needed to be guided by you, Madam Speaker whether this is the way we are going to proceed as a Parliament. It is becoming a habit that we come here to do serious business and someone tells you the report is not ready and they are going to see whether it can be ready. We need to be guided, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: My understanding was that the report was ready about a fortnight ago and at least I have my copy. Copies should be available. Chairperson, come to the podium. I think it is a report of the committee; I don’t think there is a minority report here. Come and present the report.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the copies are being distributed, I beg that we start. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on table the report of the Ad hoc Committee on Energy, on the performance of the electricity sub-sector in Uganda, September 2011 to October 2012. On behalf of the Ad hoc Committee on Energy, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to present and then we can debate later.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am hesitant to disrupt hon. Baryayanga, but I do not think it would be procedurally right for the chairperson to go out of Parliament to organise a report, only to see on the TVs in the corridors that the presentation has started.

THE SPEAKER: I can see copies arriving; I think he went to organise them. Hon. Aja, please proceed.

MR BARYAYANGA: The report is very big, containing 160 pages. So, I beg to read the executive summary.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Ad hoc Committee on Energy extends its thanks to the Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of the Ninth Parliament, and the Clerk for the financial and technical support rendered to it during the investigation. The committee also recognises the contribution of the support staff during this investigation.

When we were carrying out this investigation, we got a lot of problems; we were being scared on how to move forward with the report. (Interjection) I am on the executive summary; I am not reading everything. (Laughter) While we were making this investigation, some of the witnesses we met were not friendly and it was sometimes difficult to get the real documents in time and that is one of the reasons it delayed. But I want to assure you that we did not leave any stone unturned, and the report we have here is indeed worthy to be read to the Committee of the Whole House.

The committee was composed of eight members –(Interjection)- I am on page 15. Our chairman is hon. Jacob Oboth, who told me that he has to go and pick his children from school -(Laughter)– and asked me to stand in for him. Other members of the committee are: hon. Simon Mulongo, hon. Ajedra, hon. Lubega Medard Sseggona, hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa, hon. Okupa, hon. Aja Baryayanga and hon. Betty Amongi. All the Members on this committee were very committed during this investigation. 

The scope of the investigation covers the period of 1999 to May 2012 in the following areas in the sector:

(a)	The performance of the sector;
(b)	The power sector restructuring and reform process;
(c)	Agreements between Government of Uganda and electricity producers and suppliers;
(d)	Power losses, tariffs, subsidies, rebates, investments and power generation in general;
(e)	Procurement and construction of hydro and thermal power generators; and
(f)	The policy, legal and institutional frameworks. 

The method of work used

The committee designed and agreed on a systematic method of work that enabled it to collect, triangulate and analyse information collected from diverse sources on the performance of the electricity sub-sector. The committee reviewed pertinent literature and generated specific questions that steered the investigation.

The committee held a series of meetings with Government officials, the private sector operators, consultants and experts in the electricity sub-sector. 

We have appendices we have attached to this very report; this one is attached as Appendix II. 

The committee carried out field or site visits to the electricity infrastructure projects, and undertook benchmarks and visited the Republic of Kenya and the Republic of Ghana to acquaint itself with the development and performance of the electricity sector in these jurisdictions.

Due to the volume of the report I will straightaway go to the executive summary and then Members will adopt the report and read through, and maybe –(Laughter)- Yes, you need to read through on your own such that we do not take a lot of time reading through the entire report.

THE SPEAKER: Read only the executive summary.

MR BARYAYANGA: On 24 August 2011, the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda appointed eight members of the ad hoc committee to investigate the electricity crisis in the country, which was characterised, among others by persistent power outages and load shedding. This came at a time when stakeholders had raised concerns about high electricity tariffs, faulty billing systems, astronomical subsidies by the government towards thermal power generation as well as poor quality of service by Umeme Ltd. 

In order to effectively understand the irregularities in the electricity sub-sector, and to comprehensively address its terms of reference, the committee as a matter of necessity had to review the restructuring and reform process in the sector that dates back as far as 1999. 

The committee established that the reform process in the sub-sector that led to the unbundling of UEB into successor companies – UEGCL, UETCL and UEDCL – had good and well-intentioned objectives which included:

(a)	Securing sustained, efficient and affordable electric power for domestic, commercial and industrial and other uses;

(b)	Attracting significant private sector participation or investment in the sector; 

(c)	Removing real or perceived monopolistic structures in the sector and thereby create market conditions that would make for competition for services; and

(d)	Achieving transparency in the regulation of power utilities.

The committee, however, noted that the power sector restructuring process which involved the unbundling of UEB into successor companies was marred by irregularity. 

The power distribution concession agreements signed between Government of Uganda and Umeme Ltd have a number of unfavourable clauses to Government and the citizenry. 

The role played by Paul Mare in the unbundling of UEB was highly suspect given his employment record with Eskom Enterprises South Africa, a shareholder of Umeme Ltd in 2004, and later Eskom Uganda and Umeme. He later on became a director with Eskom Uganda and Umeme during the unbundling process.

It is no doubt that Paul Mare came as a fore-runner for his parent company, Eskom Enterprises South Africa, which together with Umeme Limited are running key segments in the electricity sector chain, that is generation and distribution respectively.

Unfortunately, it was on the strength of the biased doctored information provided by Paul Mare as a billing expert with UEB, about the level of losses and dilapidation of electricity network, that Government based its decision to privatise and sign the power distribution concession with Umeme Limited in 2004. 

More than 10 years after the reforms in the power sector were carried out, the generation capacity output in the main Kiira-Nalubaale Hydro Power Plant dropped from a high of 270 megawatts when Eskom took over, to a low generation output of 140 megawatts, while the distribution segment is still characterised by dilapidated infrastructure in most areas (despite a claim by Umeme Limited to have invested $130 million in the network), high energy losses, high levels of Government subsidies (until February 2012), and poor quality of supply and energy utilisation efficiency have been the order of the day in the energy sector. 

Uganda continues to charge one of the highest electricity end-user tariffs in the region and globally, despite the high Government subsidy. Notwithstanding Government’s efforts to expand power connectivity through the Rural Electrification Agency, only 10-12 percent of the country’s total population uses power. 

The coming on board of 250 megawatts from the Bujaggali Hydro Power Plant has done little in boosting the national electricity coverage save for temporarily stabilising the power supply. Admittedly, this is, according to President Museveni, likely to tame the power outages and load shedding for only two years. Unless the intention of developing Karuma and other hydropower stations is implemented per plan, the demand for power in Uganda will increasingly outstrip supply, undermining targeted socio-economic growth rates and exacerbating environmental degradation. 

In addition to the reform of the sector, Government, through the energy ministry, has demonstrated some efforts aimed at addressing the challenges in the sector particularly the high power tariffs, power distribution losses and poor service delivery. In 2009 the then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Hillary Onek constituted a Committee for Interim Review of Electricity Tariffs chaired by Gen. Salim Saleh. 

The committee made key findings and recommendations as contained in its report on Electricity Tariff Reduction. While initially efforts were made to have this report considered by Cabinet, the Minister of Energy realised that since this was a tariff matter and, therefore, under the purview of the sector regulator he sent the report to Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) Board, for scrutiny and eventual implementation. However, save for the basic implementation done by ERA, the critical recommendations in this report such as a forensic audit into the Umeme Investments and level of losses have not been addressed.

The inherently poor performance of the power generation and distribution segments of the Uganda electricity sector is attributable to mismanagement of the reform process by the Privatisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the inefficiency of the Electricity Regulatory Authority; the inefficiencies of UEDCL; and the failure by both Eskom and Umeme Limited to manage those assets as was intended. For the electricity sector to succeed it is mandatory to have a technically astute and experienced regulator, asset owner and asset manager. 

Of great concern to the committee was the manner in which the power distribution concessionaire was procured, and the outrageous terms and conditions of the agreement signed between Government of Uganda and Umeme Limited, the soft target set for Umeme Limited notwithstanding. 

The committee found out that because of the peripheral role played by the Attorney-General in drafting of the power concession agreement, their terms and conditions were skewed in favour of Umeme at the expense of Government and the people of Uganda as evidenced by scandalous provisions like those of sovereign immunity over national assets, termination, abnormal buyout amounts, working capital allowances/days lag and compensation of Umeme for making losses.  

The committee also identified critical, institutional and policy deficiencies whose correction is fundamental to the smooth-running of the sub-sector. For instance, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continues to directly control and superintend over the management of UETCL, UEDCL, and UEGCL yet the operations and functions of these agencies fall under the purview of the Ministry of Energy. 

This overlap in political supervision affects the performance of the sector institutions and must be urgently addressed. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should immediately relinquish its control of the UEB successor companies to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

Considering the central role electricity plays in the industrialisation and social economic development of a country, it is, therefore, apparent that Government takes the necessary deliberate action to resolve the sector structural, institutional and legal challenges whose long-term impact will continue to undermine the country’s long-term development goals as outlined in the National Development Plan and Vision 2040. 

To strengthen the sub-sector further, the current structural arrangement should be modified by introduction of an overarching corporate body, the Energy Regulatory Commission, to replace the current Electricity Regulatory Authority with UEGCL, UETCL and UEDCL under it. While the Rural Electrification Agency is to be elevated to an Authority given its paramount role of extending electricity throughout the country.  

The power distribution segment should be managed under a public-private partnership framework with Government having at least a 51 percent shareholding. It should be further broken up into various zonal areas that will attract competitive participation and involvement of mainly home-grown solutions just as is the case in countries like Kenya and Ghana. These challenges should be aimed at responding to the strategic and operational interests of Uganda.  I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask one of the members to give a back-up? Hon. Amongi.

5.11
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am proposing that it would be important to read the last chapter 7 - Way Forward - so that it is captured in the Hansard. That is my proposal. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.  Which page?

MS AMONGI: It is from Page 149. Madam Speaker, Chapter 7 is on the Way forward.

Salient issues worth noting

From the foregoing, it is evidently clear that the restructuring and reform process in Uganda’s electricity sub-sector was mismanaged despite the well-intentioned objectives. 

The PERD Statute which was meant to provide a legal framework for the privatisation of the sector did not empower the sector institutions to make crucial decisions, especially in circumstances where their technical expertise was critically needed. Subsequently, some ill-intentioned technocrats and political leaders in the Ministry of Finance and the Privatisation Unit manipulated the process for selfish ends. 

To date, the Ministry of Finance and the Privatisation Unit continue to exert their hegemony over the UEB successor companies as evidenced by the 100 percent shareholding and appointment of board and management of UETCL, UEGCL and UEDCL.   
   
More than 10 years after the reforms in the power sector were carried out, the generation capacity/output at the main Kiira-Nalubaale hydro-power dropped from a high 270MW when Eskom took over, to a low generation output of 140MW, while the power distribution segment is still characterised by dilapidated infrastructure in most areas despite a claim by UMEME Limited to have invested $130 million in the network, high energy losses, high tariffs, high levels of government subsidies until February 2010, poor quality of supply and energy utilisation inefficiencies.

The inherently poor performance of the power generation and distribution segments of Uganda’s electricity sector is attributable to mismanagement of the reform process by the Privatisation Unit -Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the inefficiency of ERA which is a regulatory body, the ineffectiveness of UEDCL and the failure by both Eskom and UMEME Limited to manage those assets as was intended. For the electricity sector to succeed, it is mandatory to have a technically astute and experienced regulator, asset owner and asset manager.

There is urgent need for well thought out reforms with the focus on addressing the inherent legal, institutional and policy deficiencies such as streamlining political supervision of the sector, enhancing the technical competence of the regulator, and engaging the private sector players on terms and conditions which do not compromise national interests, among others. A comprehensive national energy plan which addresses the critical short, medium and long-term energy and development needs of the country needs to be put in place.  This will ultimately make the industry more competitive with reduced energy losses and much more affordable electricity tariffs.    

The Umeme power distribution concession

The committee having satisfied itself with the manner in which the UEB was unbundled and having reviewed the resultant procurement and signing of the Umeme power distribution concession agreements and the provisions of these agreements, it is hereby recommended that Umeme Limited’s power distribution concession be terminated. The recommendation is premised on the following grounds:

(a)The Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda did not perform the Constitutional duty required of him under Article 119(2), specifically, that of drawing and perusing through all the agreements signed between Government of Uganda and Umeme Limited regarding the power distribution concession. This Constitutional obligation was hijacked and, therefore, abused by the Privatisation Unit who hired transaction advisors. These people were actually not even Ugandans, they were based in the UK, who did not transact in the best interest of Government and the people of Uganda.

(b)	Lopsided agreements

It is the committee’s firm conviction that if the learned Attorney General had carried out his/her Constitutional duty as noted above, there is no way he/she could have committed Government and people of Uganda to such a raw deal. All the three agreements signed between Government of Uganda and Umeme Limited regarding the power distribution concession were skewed in favour of the company to the detriment of the Ugandan citizenry. The common denominator across these agreements are the scandalous provisions like the abnormal buy-out amounts, generous working capital allowances and compensation of Umeme Limited for making losses among others.

(c)	Exaggerated level of losses

Even with the investments made by the government in the electricity sector before and after the Umeme concession, Umeme Limited has for the last seven years continued to post the highest level of energy losses between 35 and 38 percent until 2010, following the Salim Saleh inquiry when they brought losses down to 28 percent and I will interest Members to read the Salim Saleh Report. It is the highlight in one of the chapters. This level of losses still remains the highest in the region and far below acceptable industry levels.

(d)	Exaggerated level of investment

The claim by Umeme Limited to have invested $130 million in the network between 2005 and 2012 is unfounded. Such a massive level of investment would have turned around the sector and resulted into distribution network efficiency, substantial reduction in losses and more new connections to the grid. Suffice to note, this exaggerated level of investment is aimed at upping Umeme’s buy-out amount in case of early or natural termination of the concession.

(e)Over seven years into the power distribution concession, Umeme Limited and the regulator ERA have deliberately refused to put in place a restoration and reinforcement plan which is a requirement in the contract to guide investors in the distribution network. This is a plan which would have clearly defined the critical areas of investment, the required resources, expected output and performance standards. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the beginning, I thought it was agreed that the whole report would be included in the Hansard. So, I was wondering whether it was procedurally right for us to continue reading the whole report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Aja presented the executive summary; hon. Amongi is addressing the way forward. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you. This is a plan which would have clearly defined the critical areas of investment, the required resources, expected outputs and performance standards. Without it, UMEME continues to dictate where and how to invest. No wonder it invests in non-critical areas like peripherals, office furniture and fittings and recoups a return on such investments. As a country, we cannot allow this to continue.

(f)  Generous working capital allowance/days lag

According to the Umeme contract with Government of Uganda, the government is under obligation to pay Umeme Limited an amount of money equivalent to the uncollected Umeme bills from power consumers after 40 days. The committee finds this arrangement unprecedented in the business or commercial world since nowhere in the world can a company/individual be paid for their inefficiency. 
What other incentive did Umeme have to reduce the energy losses and even improve its collection rate – indeed this was a well-orchestrated scheme to benefit UMEME and the bureaucrats in the Ministry of Energy and Finance who crafted this contract. 

It is imperative that Government immediately initiates the termination arrangement since it is evident from the onset that further significant costs will be incurred with the continuation of current power distribution concession agreements. 

Government should, therefore, consider sourcing for other companies with the capacity and technical capability to manage the power distribution business after UMEME Ltd concession has been terminated. Preference should be given to local companies with the experience, capacity and expertise to take over the management of electricity distribution business in the country. 

Further to the above, the committee also recommends the following in respect of the UMEME distribution concession:

1.	All transactions on the ESCROW account must stop immediately until an audit into its management has been carried out. 

2.	The Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit to ascertain the level of investment made by UMEME in the network since 2005, and another forensic audit to ascertain the actual amount paid to UMEME Ltd in form of customer deposits since 2004. 
3.	The Inspector General of Government and the Auditor-General interest themselves in the management of the ESCROW account with a view of unearthing any possible abuse. Particular interest should be taken in respect of possible double-budgeting, specifically by UPDF, Uganda Police, Uganda Prisons and UBC; this is where the bills have been exaggerated– when they brought most of the bills we suspected double payment. 

4.	The generous capital allowances that Government has been paying UMEME Ltd must be scrapped and neither should they be extended to any other future power distribution company. 

5.	ERA should ensure that the power distribution loss target in the next five years be put at 18 percent, which is the acceptable industry level. 

6.	There must be a clear split between technical and commercial losses.

7.	Government through the regulator should put in place clear key power sector performance indicators and standards.
8.	The generous capital allowances that Government has been paying UMEME Ltd must be immediately scrapped and neither should they be extended to any other future power distribution company.

9.	Mr David Ssebabi, in his capacity as Director Privatisation Unit, head of technical committee and leader of the Government of Uganda Negotiation Team hijacked the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General by recruiting a Transaction Advisor, Hutton and Williamson, on whose purported legal and expertise he based to entrench the unfavourable provisions in the UMEME contract. The committee, therefore, finds him culpable of consciously misguiding and committing Government and the people of Uganda to a bad contract with UMEME. This without doubt was a well-orchestrated ploy to fleece the citizenry. 

10.	Accordingly, Mr David Ssebabi, Director Privatisation Unit as head of Government of Uganda UMEME concession negotiation team should be relieved of his duties and be prosecuted for abuse of office; causing financial loss and colluding with CDC, Globeleq and Eskom Enterprises through UMEME Ltd, to defraud Government and the people of Uganda. 

11.	Members of the divestiture and the reform implementation committee should also be held culpable for abuse of office by approving the execution of bad agreements with UMEME Ltd and for conveniently keeping the Attorney-General out of the drafting and perusal of this agreement well-knowing that this is a constitutional duty that cannot be delegated. The members in question are hon. General Sendawula, former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and Hon. Syda Bbumba, former Minister of Energy. 

The Eskom Power Generation Concession

The concessioning of the Kiira-Nalubaale Hydro Power Generation Plant to Eskom Uganda was misconceived. It was irregular for Government to concession the two power plants yet they were reported to have been operating at the highest efficiency levels in the East African Region. The committee accordingly recommends the immediate termination of the Eskom Power Generation Concession on the following grounds: 

Despite the reported level of investment by Eskom (U) Ltd in the Kiira-Nalubaale Hydro Power Plants, the generation capacity of the two plants has continued to deteriorate at the time of the takeover by Eskom (U) Ltd in 2002; the two plants were generating 280 Mega Watts. But since then, the generation capacity has significantly reduced to 140 Mega Watts. 

The committee established that world over, the management of hydropower plants and generation is either under direct Government control or under a public-private partnership arrangement with Government still retaining majority shareholding.  It is, therefore, inconceivable how Government chose to abdicate its sovereign responsibility to a foreign state-owned but locally registered private company. 

While Government continues to pay Eskom (U) Ltd huge sums of money for the operation and maintenance of the two plants at the same time, Government incurs huge financial expenses by way of funding the operations and programs of a statutory body called UEDCL that should have been doing the work. 

The Ugandan tax payer cannot afford to continue paying colossal sums of money to the two institutions, Eskom and UEDCL, which carryout similar functions and activities; it is not sustainable. 

The double-funding notably, the exorbitant wage bill, of Eskom (U) Ltd, a South African Government Company, and UEGCL, a Uganda Government Company, is an unavoidable expense which adversely impacts on the end-user tariff. 

It is the committee’s strong conviction that UEDCL has the technical expertise to run and manage the generation of power more efficiently. In view of the aforementioned, it is imperative that Government immediately initiates the termination arrangement since it is also evident that further unnecessary costs will be incurred with the continuation of Eskom power generation concession. 

Other recommendations

1.	The committee recommends that once the UMEME Ltd distribution concession is terminated, the power distribution segment should be managed under a public-private partnership framework with Government having at least 51 percent shareholding. 

2.	Government should prioritise further exploration and development of a wide range of available energy resources in the country. These include hydro; geo-thermo; solar biomass, peat, oil and gas, and nuclear. 

3.	In a bid to meet the growing demand for electricity and increased access to electricity, Government should urgently amend the Electricity Act, 1999 and upgrade the Rural Electrification Agency to an Authority with the full mandate to independently manage and coordinate the rural electrification component of the national electrification scheme. This amendment should also streamline the management of the rural electrification fund. 

4.	The committee recommends that the Electricity Act be amended to provide for harsh penalties for those involved in power theft and vandalism of electrical equipment. Such a piece of legislation and other stringent measures once put in place should make the vice some kind of economic crime.

5.	To ensure that the rural settlements have access to power and address the ever increasing demand for electricity, Government should develop multi-faceted delivery mechanisms using grid extension where possible; isolated grids; and install institutional/home solar photo voltaic systems.

6.	The committee recommends that in addition to creating internal financing for power projects, Government should urgently take practical steps to diversify our energy mix using indigenous energy resources. The Energy Fund and Rural Electrification Fund notwithstanding, more prudent and transparent efforts should be made to optimally harness Uganda’s oil and gas resources through power generation and supply.

7.	In order to prudently manage the comparatively high tariffs that are a major hindrance to increased connectivity and regional competitiveness in general, the Energy Fund should be significantly resourced to cushion the expensive capital required to realise the much desired investments (normally requiring significant returns) this is a smarter and more sustainable way of subsidising the sector.
8.	The electricity distribution segment should be opened up to the other players in order to remove the monopoly by one company, which was one of the key objectives of the power sector reform process. This will ultimately bring about competition and the resultant efficiency in service delivery and lowering of end-user tariffs. 

9.	The relevance and significance of an independent Electricity Regulatory Authority should be harnessed through an institutional and legal framework. The Board of ERA should, therefore, be reviewed by the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to ensure that the desired skills mix is adequately catered for. Specifically, the electrical engineering representation must be given the desired due significance.

10.	ERA should, in conjunction with relevant players, develop a Power Loss Reduction Strategy to bring down the distribution losses to 18 percent in the next five years, and eventually to match the regional distribution losses average of 15 percent which is in Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania. 

11.	As a matter of urgency, the pre-paid metering system should be installed all over the country. This is one of the key measures that will substantially reduce distribution losses and end-user tariffs.
12.	URA should take up the matter of evasion of payment of Capital Gains Tax by Eskom Enterprises when it sold its shares to Globeleq and ensure recovery of the said tax. It should also recover all the taxes Umeme has evaded by declaration of depreciation from UEDCL assets. 
13.	The National Bureau of Standards should in collaboration with ERA develop and establish minimum energy efficiency standards and levels for energy consuming appliances imported or manufactured in Uganda. These include electricity metres, air conditioners, refrigerators and deep freezers, industrial electric monitors, etcetera.
14.	The committee recommends that owing to the strategic importance of electricity projects to the country, the Prime Minister through the responsible sector minister should institute a water-tight supervisory and monitoring mechanism to oversee the said projects and file quarterly reports to Parliament on the status of the electricity sub-sector.
15.	The committee recommends that the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development should present to Parliament, within 12 months after the adoption of this report, the Electricity Amendment Bill to provide for among others, the following:
i.	Repeal of the PERD Statute by transferring the ownership, management and supervision of UETCL, UEDCL and UEGCL to the Ministry of Energy.
ii.	Expansion and enhancement of the legal and institutional mandate of ERA by transforming it into the Energy Commission of Uganda with UETCL, UEDCL and UEGCL being among its key departments.
iii.	Elevation of the Rural Electrification Agency to an Authority with a much more distinct mandate and autonomy, other than its current status where the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Energy is the Chairman and Accounting Officer.  

16.	Government should support promotion and development of sustainable management of the country’s natural forests and woodlands for sustainable supply of wood including wood fuels.
17.	Government should establish an institutional framework to enhance and coordinate wood fuel related activities as an integral part of the national energy development strategy.
18.	Government should support capacity building programmes for the regulatory and the utility agencies.
19.	Government through the ERA should develop the necessary Renewable Energy Technology Regulatory Framework.
20.	Government should support promotion and development of biomass for electricity generation from municipal garbage, logging and wood processing residues and agro fuels, as well as plantations.
21.	Government should support and help local agencies tap the numerous available worldwide funding from international donor facilities known as green credits such as the Global Environment Facility and the Clean Development Mechanism.
22.	Government should explore various options including decentralised and mini-grid systems for reducing the cost of supplying utility power to the rural communities.
23.	Government should support Rural Electrification Agency/Authority and ERA to set up local energy advisory units in the district councils to advise consumers on energy efficient technologies and practices.
24.	It is recommended that Government urgently develops an integrated and harmonised planning framework that will deal with least-cost generation planning to forestall the possibility of commissioning costly energy sources in the supply mix.
25.	Further investment in the rehabilitation of the power distribution network should be prioritised in a bid to reduce energy losses, considering that energy losses have a significant bearing in the computation of the retail electricity tariffs. 
Madam Speaker, honourable members, I beg to lay the recommendation and way forward of the committee. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, the ad hoc committee. Honourable members, you have heard the Executive Summary and you have also heard the way forward and recommendations. You may want to look at the body of the report so that you can get more details. 

So, I am proposing that we defer debate on this, unless there are Members who are ready. So, let us receive the report; please go and study it and we set time for the debate. I thank you. 

The other report is not ready, and so, I adjourn the House to – yes, hon. Mwiru.
  
5.40
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I rise to rise on a matter of procedure. Our Rules of Procedure provide for Questions for Oral Answer to ministers, and as a matter of improving Parliamentary debate, we have been trying to raise questions for oral answers to ministers. We receive responses, but it becomes very difficult for them to be put on the Order Paper; and as Members of Parliament, we have found it very difficult to keep on rushing to your office and we are told to come another day; then we have to rush to the Clerk. 

I think that is a matter where we should at least have those questions that have been raised and answered at least to be given space on the Order Paper like on Thursday, so that we have them – personally I have two questions for which I even received answers, but I have no space on the Order Paper, despite having tried to follow up with your office, and also with the Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: Can I direct the Clerk to identify all the pending outstanding questions so that they can be placed on the Order Paper for response before we go for recess. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow; but as I indicated, we are receiving the body of the late Hon. Zabasaija at 10 o’clock in the morning. So, let us come and support the family. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 December 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

